Monday, 23 April 2007

(Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am happy to welcome you and thank you for sparing your time.  You very well know that Monday is not normally a sitting day, so, I am happy that you have been able to honour my request and attend this sitting. 

Honourable members, the reason why we have to meet today is that we have urgent business to handle. As you are aware, it is during this time that we have to inject our input into the budget before it is actually read out.  

At the beginning of this month the Ministry of Finance brought the relevant documents, which we have to handle and submit to the President by 15th May. The purpose of sending the report and your comments to the President by 15th May is to enable our views be taken into account before the budget is read out.  If we delay, the comments we might have made may not be integrated into the budget because we shall be late.  So, it is necessary to do it now in order to give the relevant committee and other sessional committees sufficient time to look at matters affecting their sectors so that a proper report is made by due date. 

This morning I had some discussions with the Chairman of the Committee on Budget. During the discussion, he suggested to me that we suspend the plenary to allow committees sit both in the morning and afternoon to be able to do a good job.  I expect the committees to plan for interviews with their technocrats. This will enable them to indicate the purpose of inviting these technocrats, rather than drawing the purpose while in the interview room, which wastes a lot of time. 

It was also necessary to sit today in order for us to deal with the issue of the Supplementary Budget. I want to inform you that when I spoke to the Minister of Finance today, he indicated to me that this is an urgent matter that needs to be dealt with as quickly as possible. Therefore, it is prudent that we clear it first, before we can maybe release the committees. 

I want to take this opportunity to comment on what has been going on since last week. They were, and are not pleasant, especially given the fact that even members of Parliament were involved.  I had the benefit of discussing these issues with some of the leaders. From that discussion, I developed the view to the effect that maybe what is happening is a result of a misunderstanding among stakeholders.  

Therefore, I think that it is necessary for us as Parliament to organise a meeting between the various leaders of Parliament from the Opposition and the government side, and other stakeholders namely, the Minister of Internal Affairs, the Police and so forth. I am convinced that this meeting will enable us to have a dialogue on how Members of Parliament can conduct business without necessarily experiencing what has happened in the past.  

I intend to personally pursue this by contacting the authorities concerned, so that a meeting of say 25 or so members of Parliament, ministry officials and others from the office of the Inspector General of Police can take place. I believe that this will enable us thrash out the differences that maybe existing, so that we can be allowed to conduct our business without incidents such as those we have witnessed in the past. I welcome you.  (Applause)

2.39
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, I raised an issue regarding an organisation, which was collecting money from people. This organisation is called COWE. It collected money in billions from the Wanainchi, yet I remember in 2002 we passed the Micro Deposit Taking Act. 

I think this organisation collected money from people almost in the whole country though mostly from areas of Kabale, Kisoro, Kanungu and Rukungiri, in billions, with the knowledge of Government because up to now, Mr Speaker, Government has not said anything about this issue.  

I, therefore, seek your guidance as to how we are going to handle this issue because the outcry from people in our constituencies is so much hence the need for them to know how Government is handling this matter. Some of the people from this organization who were arrested were later released before the affected people knew the fate of their money. Mr Speaker, these people need to know what the government is doing about this issue. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, thank you very much, honourable member.  Fortunately, before I came in this afternoon, I was contacted by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Matia Kasaija, to accommodate him on the Order Paper for tomorrow to make a statement on this very subject. However, I advised him that maybe, it would not be possible because of the budget process.  I indicated to him that we may not be able to sit tomorrow because of the urge to release the Budget Committee to sit.  Otherwise, here is the statement and I wish hon. Matia Kasaija was here in time to present it though he wanted to make a comprehensive statement on this subject tomorrow.

2.41
MR JOHN KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take note of the comment you have made about what is happening in the country and the meeting, which you want us to have with the various stakeholders. However, there is a matter, which I think, should not wait: the question of a Member of Parliament wanting to hold a meeting in his constituency. It looks like there is a development, which is coming up that such a member has to seek permission from the Police to hold a meeting in his constituency. 

This has not been the practice. Members of Parliament have been free to hold meetings in their constituencies by giving a notification but not seeking permission from the Police.  Mister Speaker, I want to be sure on this, so that I know how to move tomorrow when I go to meet people in my constituency.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is one of the issues that will form the subject of the meeting; when should a member require permission or notification, to hold a rally. Is it necessary anyway? I think it is one of the issues to be covered. Otherwise, we may say, “You need not,” but other people may say, “No, you need.” These are issues that we are going to iron out in that meeting, in case it materialises. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week, on Thursday, I presented a petition for the law students of Islamic University in Uganda and the Deputy Attorney- General promised to make a statement today, Monday, but he is not on the Order Paper. I would like to know how we should proceed.

THE SPEAKER: You presented a petition by law students from Mbale. Was there a committee set up to look into this? Because normally when a petition of that nature is presented, the Speaker should set up a committee or direct it to a relevant committee to study it and report back. This time it was to the Attorney-General? Okay, he is here. Let us hear from him.

2.45
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, last Thursday, after the presentation of this petition, I undertook to make a response, which I believed and I still believe, will solve the issues that are actually raised in there. 

I have a substantial paper to present however, the problem, Mr Speaker and honourable members will appreciate, has been the short period between Thursday and today. I, therefore, seek your indulgence to present it tomorrow, after a consultation with you.

2.44
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Hon. Speaker. This concerns some statements made by the Executive, that demean members of Parliament. This applies to all the members; it does not concern only those on the opposition. There should be respect for the Members of Parliament, and Members of the frontbench. 

While in Nairobi for the UN Habitat Conference last week, I was taken a back when our colleagues from other countries brought to our attention a press statement in which our President had been quoted to have made a statement that demeaned Members of Parliament. 

For the President to say that he regrets his tea and food that ministers eat when they visit his home in Rwakitura was so demeaning. It was so embarrassing for him to say such a thing as Head of State. I think these are statements that should not be coming from Head of State because no one asks to go to Rwakitura. 

So, I think that the President must restrain himself from making such statements that demean the Executive and members of Parliament. I wish Madam Kataha was here to deliver this message to His Excellence tonight -(Laughter)

However, Mr Speaker, I hope that in the oncoming meeting these are some of the issues, which we must sort out, because it is not the first time that the President is saying such demeaning statements. I remember in even in the seventh Parliament, there were statements that were made by His Excellence in Tororo -(Interjection)  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Honourable Speaker. Thank you, hon. Okupa. On the 28th July, last year, the President invited those who had competed with him for the Presidency to his home in Nakasero. I attended that meeting, but we refused to eat because we knew exactly what would follow -(Laughter)-so, my advice is, avoid eating those chickens -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, I think I have to come in here to help. I think it was humour. I remember this statement was made at the Vice President’s place at Wakiso. It was about sensitising people to fight poverty and I think the President was praising the Vice President to the effect that he had invited him to Rwakitura to see what activities are going on down there; and he was glad that the Vice President was able to pick up what he had seen and was passing it on to the people. 

This is when he added that there are not many people he invites to Rwakitura and they come back with such knowledge. I think that is what he really meant -(Laughter)- I was there and this is what I heard. He meant that when you go to Rwakitura, please pick up something and pass it - (Laughter)- he was not talking about Members of Parliament; he was talking about his visitors - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, the way it was put was so demeaning and was really not good for public consumption. I know for sure that hon. Minister Opio over there can buy chicken for himself. 

I think that if there are any problems that the President wants to solve with his ministers, he should find better ways of addressing them, rather than bringing them via the public domain. Such statements embarrass us as members of Parliament, and remember this statement followed another embarrassing one where he said that ministers are always sleeping. So, hon. Speaker I think that a series of these statements is surely uncalled for. 

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek guidance and also clarification from you as far as hon. John Kawanga’s question, which he put to you, is concerned. You said that we should be patient and wait for the stakeholders’ meeting. However, I am very much concerned about what is going on -(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: First of all, let me tell you what I said. I said that I am concerned with what is going on around. I also added that maybe there is a misunderstanding, and I suggested that we should sit and thrush out these misunderstandings. It was at this time that hon. Kawanga came in to ask that question of a Member of Parliament wanting to hold a rally in his constituency. I did not say that indeed a Member of Parliament cannot hold a rally without telling the Police. 

What I said is that, such could be one of the issues that we are going to discuss. I didn’t say that you cannot hold a rally. I did not say that because some people might think that you have to seek Police permission to hold a rally in your Constituency. These are issues that we are going to discuss and say, maybe no. This is what I said.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When you say we are going to hold a meeting with the stakeholders, I do not understand which people you call stakeholders. You will recall that sometime back leaders of political parties especially those that have representatives in this House had a meeting with His Excellence the President, trying to chart out ways of how the opposition can work with Government. However, in fact as the hon. member there has said, some people said that our leaders had just gone to State house to feast on tea given by the President. 

Mr Speaker, at this juncture when you say we are going to hold a meeting with stakeholders when the Head of State who is also the head of the party that is in Government stopped these talks, how are we and how soon because as I talk, I am just refraining from losing my temper because nine of my party members, the democratic leaders in this city are in detention. They were picked on Saturday and yesterday. Prior to that, a Member of Parliament who is the –(Interruption)

MR GODI: Thank you, hon. colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, the issue of picking up people is continuing. As I talk now I have been standing as surety for hon. Odonga Otto in Court and just as I walked out, hon. Winnie Byanyima, came in to stand as surety for someone but as I talk right now she has been detained in CPS and they are already proceeding to CID to record a statement. 

Just on Saturday, I was invited by the Member of Parliament for Entebbe Municipality to go and address a rally. As I reached Kitubulu, I was intercepted by Military Police and one of them who knew me said, “Uyo ndiyo Godi”. I was given only one minute to turn around. Imagine the Military Police assuming the role of the Traffic Police, intercepting traffic and telling me the way to turn. These things need urgent tension. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, let me be clear. This is my thinking and I am wondering. Is it a misunderstanding on the part of the people who are involved: If it is a misunderstanding then as Parliament, and I am not speaking for the country but for Parliament? Is it possible to have a meeting so that we can iron out these differences? I think something must be done to clear the misunderstanding. 

2.53
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The two weeks that we have gone through have been hard on earth and I think it is in the interest of the 28 or 29 million Ugandans that we sit down and find a solution to it. I think what is required is goodwill on the side of all parties concerned. If this initiative that you have started could materialise, I think it will go a long way in cooling down tempers and bringing sanity to this country. 

My appeal, Mr Speaker is that this matter be handled as expeditiously as possible. As I shared with you this morning, we on the opposition side are ready to interface with Government and work out a way so that we can move harmoniously. We all belong to this country. We all need peace and I think it is only fair that we sit down on a round table and agree on the dos and don’ts and see how we can move forward harmoniously. 

Otherwise the way things are happening in this country, if nothing is done I think when a person is pushed against the wall too hard he or she will have no option but to fight back, which we do not want to go into. I think it is fair that as urgently as possible stakeholders sit and discuss this issue so that we can resume normality. This is because the way things are happening in this country is bringing ridicule to us as parliamentarians, because as an institution we are supposed to be leaders and we are supposed to give guidance to our people. 

I think the moment we sit down- certainly a lot is expected of us. Mr Speaker, I support the idea that stakeholders sit down and work out a modality as to how sanity can prevail this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.55
MR FELIX OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Mr Speaker, arising from your communication I believe that what happened last week demands our response as members of Parliament. I am standing here in total support of your opinion that as Parliament we need to sit down as urgently as possible because the institution of Parliament is at a crossroad. 

It is at a test because members of Parliament are not respected. They are arrested at will and when they are taken to court they wait for eight hours and the Judges come only two minutes to 5.00 p.m. This is very serious. 

Since we have to provide leadership in this country, Mr Speaker I want to support you and I want to appeal to Parliament that we need to support the move that has been proposed by our Speaker so that we call a stakeholders’ meeting where we can discuss this matter as brothers and leaders of this country. Mr Speaker, I support you.

2.56
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Kabakumba Masiko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that I believe your suggestion will certainly cause a difference in the way we handle ourselves. Previously, especially outside Parliament, the opposition really opted for a confrontational approach but if we sit down- It is unfortunate that our colleagues are in jail, but I hail your effort because as you explained, there could be some misunderstanding somewhere. Hon. Lukwago is an area Member of Parliament for Kampala Central and –(Interruption) 

MR GODI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last week on Wednesday, hon. Odonga Otto, hon. Erias Lukwago and many other members of Parliament convened a meeting and agreed that there is need for us to question who owns the “Kiboko Squad”. 

Hon. Lukwago came up with the idea that since this is his constituency, he wants to have a peaceful rally at the City Square and exercise all his duties including writing to the Inspector General of Police, the DPC, Kampala Extra and informing the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Matia Kasaija. 

Therefore, for the NRM Chief Whip to come and talk of the confrontational approach of the opposition when they are using their constitutionally guaranteed rights and using the right avenues, for her to come and demean their statement, is she in order to say that the opposition were using a confrontational approach?

THE SPEAKER: I have previously explained the circumstances under which a point of order can be raised. When it comes to the question of one having this opinion and another having the other and then you ask the Chair to rule one out of order, I think it is not fair. 

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Rt. hon. Speaker for your wise ruling. If my colleague had been patient enough, I think – So, hon. Lukwago could have thought that it is his right to arrange a meeting at City Square. Unfortunately Government says there should be no meetings of that nature at City Square. That is why we need to sit and agree as members of Parliament on how we are going to relate to Government and carry out our duties as peoples’ representatives within our parties. So, I really agree and support your initiative Rt hon. Speaker and I am eagerly waiting to participate.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki then we conclude this issue because those were just a few ideas that we were exchanging. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I too appreciate that initiative because it is undesirable to see members of Parliament being handled the way they are being handled. I would maybe add that in the meeting of stakeholders we also discuss the privileges of members of Parliament especially when we are submitting on this floor. Under the Powers and Privileges Act, what we submit in Parliament here is a privileged submission and no legal proceedings can be opened against a Member of Parliament. 

So, I think you need to discuss that also so that when members of Parliament are submitting their views in Parliament, they are not subjected to any legal proceedings because the Law and the Constitution protect us.

THE SPEAKER: I think this ends the matter. We shall pursue it and see how to handle the details as to what we should discuss. My idea was how we can stop what is happening and allow people to function without having the scenes that we have had in the past.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As my senior Minister discussed with you, we would like to postpone the presentation of the resolution because we are waiting for Ministry of Finance to oblige on their part. I would like to give them time to do their part.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Education because I am not clear as to how Ministry of Finance is supposed to clear them. Can you really tell us more because we are anxiously waiting for this resolution?

MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. One of the prerequisites for presenting a resolution is to have a certificate from the Ministry of Finance and we have been waiting for it. Up to now we haven’t got it so that is why I said that we postpone until we get the certificate.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, there is only one government and not many. When a matter arrives on the Order Paper I would believe that the government has coordinated and agreed that that item should be on the Order Paper. I find it surprising that an item is on the Order Paper and one arm of Government has not yet done the needful. How does this government work? Is it so disorganised that- (Laughter)

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I came from Tororo on Friday and visited Busitema National College. There was a big signpost reading, “Eastern University of Uganda, Busitema”. I am surprised that such a signpost can be raised at the gate of Busitema National University and this was done some time ago. 

There was also an indication here that Busitema University was supposed to have started last year. However up to now the Minister is still telling us that there is no certificate to that effect. 

How are the people of Eastern Uganda whom we have told and who have got the assurance of the President and almost all stakeholders in this area going to take us as members of Parliament if they so happen to hear what is now being presented in this House? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister of Education, it appears that the House was expecting this business to be transacted today. The only hurdle in your view is the certificate from Ministry of Finance. Since it seems, hon. Members, who would have challenged you on the certificate are inclined not to do so, can’t we handle the matter.

MR OPIO: Thank you very much for your wise ruling. Mr Speaker, I now move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to establish Busitema University under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001.

“WHEREAS Section 22 No. 1 of the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001 empowers the Minister responsible for Education on the recommendation of the National Council for Higher Education by statutory instrument and by a resolution of Parliament to establish a public university; 

AND WHEREAS Section 24, No. 1 and 25 of the Act require the Minister to include in the statutory instrument the objects and functions of the public university and the location of the university

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by Parliament that:-
1.	Busitema University be established with the following objectives, functions and location as set out in the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act 2001 established of Busitema University Draft, 2007 attached to this resolution as an appendix;
2.	That the university’s objectives are:-
i.	To be the standard of excellence and innovation for social transformation;
ii.	To be a leader in integrating scholarship and practice;
iii.	To serve societal needs and to foster social and economic development;
iv.	To be global in perspective, organisation and action;
v.	To engage staff and students in creative and rewarding learning so as to enhance economic and societal development in Uganda and beyond- (Interruption)

MR OYET:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We do recall very well that this House made a resolution that whenever any report is being tabled, a copy of the report must be circulated among members of Parliament.  Now, the Minister of Education is going ahead with his presentations and yet we do not have copies of this report. Is it procedurally right?  I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER:  Which report?

MR BANYENZAKI: We do not have any copy of the report he is reading, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER:  Are we dealing with the report?

MR BANYENZAKI: The paper the Minister is presenting is not in circulation, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Do you want us to handle this business now?

HON MEMBERS:  Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR OPIO: Thank you very much.  
(v) 	to engage staff and students in creative and rewarding learning, so as to enhance economic and societal development in Uganda and beyond; 
vi) to assist local communities to build their capacity for social economic enhancement.  

Mission
The University mission is to enhance professionalism and innovativeness through research and community service, for societal transformation and sustainable development.  

Location
Busitema University a multi-campus model shall have its headquarters at Busitema, Busia, in Eastern Uganda.  Mr Speaker, also we have the -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  So you beg to move?

MR OPIO:  I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded? Yes? Justify.

MR OPIO:  Mr Speaker, in 1992 Government decided that it will have two extra public universities, one in the Northern region and another in the Eastern region.  The one in the Northern region was established in Gulu. We are still in the process of seeing how to get the National Council for Higher Education to credit the branches of Gulu University. 

Mr Speaker, I will now move the motion to establish a university in the Eastern region, that is, Busitema University, to fulfil the commitment by Government to the people of Uganda. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports, as the law says, requested the National Council for Higher Education to carry out studies to establish where we can have the first campus of Busitema University.  After their study, the National Council for Higher Education recommended, as per the law established, that university can establish three faculties, namely, the faculty dealing with irrigation, the one dealing with Computer Engineering and the one that deals with Science Education. These, according to the National Council of Higher Education, are facilities in terms of infrastructure, staff and software.  

Therefore, after the Ministry of Education and Sports wrote a Cabinet paper, which it presented to Cabinet, Cabinet discussed it and approved a recommendation by the National Council for Higher Education. We also had our internal working mechanism, that is, we had to go to the NRM caucus and discuss it. After that we decided to have this resolution presented to Parliament in order to establish Busitema University.  So, Mr Speaker, it is because of the commitment by the government to the people of the Eastern region, that we are moving to establish the University in Busitema.

It is not possible to establish other branches as stipulated in the law, because the National Council for Higher Education would like to do a thorough job. We will then later move and see which branches will be opened. Because of the recommendations by the National Council for Higher Education, these are the areas, which have been recommended to establish the university.  So, Mr Speaker, I would like to request members of Parliament to see how useful the establishment of the University for Eastern Uganda is, as a way to advance education in this country.  

I know there are problems, which we are going to encounter, not only in Busitema, but also in other already-established universities. The Ministry of Education and Sports is planning to make sure that we improve on the physical infrastructure in public universities, as well as the staffing and software, so as to produce high quality graduates.  We are not going to be pushed to have as many universities as we can, but we must make sure that the universities will offer education which is worthy being produced from Uganda. 

I know Uganda has had comparative advantage in terms of putting up graduates of good quality, and as the Ministry of Education, we are not going to move in such a way that we remove this comparative advantage from Uganda.  Mr Speaker, I beg to request for support so as to establish this university.  Thank you.

MR OYET:  Seconded.

THE SPEAKER:  Seconded? Okay. 

MR BANYENZAKI:  Mr Speaker, Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure, says “Presentation of Papers” while Rule 29 says, “Mode of Presentation of Papers,” which the minister has ably presented. Rule 29 (2) says, “As soon as the Clerk announces Papers for Presentation’ the paper shall be laid on the table without question put.”  Meanwhile Rule 29(5) says, “Papers laid on Table may be referred to the relevant committees.”  So, I thought that this matter was going to be referred to the relevant committee -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, somebody said he came from wherever he came, because he was expecting this motion to be presented. Now you are saying you do not want it to be presented and that we should just lay papers? What do you want? Do you want this motion or you do not want it?

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, as much as somebody came rushing for this presentation of papers on the Floor, we must not bend our Rules of Procedure –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Now, some people were saying last week -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, we are experiencing another problem with the Islamic University and there is a petition now. We support a university in Eastern Uganda but let us do the right thing so that when this issue goes to the relevant committee, the committee carries out proper surgery on it, brings a report to this House, we debate the report and adopt it.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Let me give you information. Mr Speaker, this matter is not new. It came up in the Seventh Parliament and was debated. A Parliamentary committee visited Busitema University, and every financial year the Ministry of Education has been reporting it in the policy statements. 

Also, in our report we had given it a go ahead and had wanted it to begin the other year. So, the matter is just being formalised. I think hon. Banyenzaki you were here in the Seventh Parliament when we discussed this, so you know that it is something that was wanted yesterday. Thank you.   

3.19
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I come from Eastern Uganda but I do not want to violate the laws just because I am from Eastern Uganda. Why am I saying this? If this issue was discussed in the Seventh Parliament, we should have concluded it then. Since we never concluded the matter, and we now have new members of Parliament who need to know what Busitema University is before they support us -(Interruption)- Mr Speaker, let us not bend the laws for the sake of wanting to run faster. We want the university, which is true, but let it move in a proper manner -(Interruption)- Yes. What I have said exactly is what I have said.

They questioned the issue of the report or the motion being circulated to members and we proceeded without it being circulated. Tomorrow when another issue comes up, we will argue that, since when we were establishing the university we never circulated the documents, why are you questioning it now? 

I am pleading with you, members, especially my colleagues from Eastern Uganda, to please follow the Rules, because eventually you will pass this and it will remain on the bookshelf. Let them bring the financial implications. We need to know how much money they have put for us in the budget so that when our university is put up, we shall say that our money was in the budget and this is it. That is when we shall follow you. How are you going to ask for the money now? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I need to be guided. The problem here is that item No. 3 on the Order Paper is presentation of papers, but actually the minister was not presenting any paper. The minister was moving a very important motion. If he was actually guided well, the minister should have moved a substantive motion requesting Parliament to pass that motion to establish Busitema University. I think that will be the best procedure- (Interruption)-no what I am saying is that when you say presentation of papers, your role is to present that paper, make some statements, then the paper is either referred to the committee or put to the library- (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members -(Interruption)- no you cannot speak twice, hon. Banyenzaki.  Let us save our time. Honourable members, since you are not clear on what you want, let us postpone further debate on this matter so that you examine all the issues involved and then we shall deal with it later.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT 
OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY 
EXPENDITURE NO. 1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2006/2007

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, this year, this august House appropriated a total budget of Ugshs4.610 trillion, of which Shs3.934 trillion was appropriated, and 676 billion was statutory. My ministry did present to this House, Supplementary Schedule No.1 and its addendum, totalling to Shs 226.5 billion. This was to cover recurrent development and statutory supplements. 

This was submitted to the Committee on Finance of this House. According to the Rules of Procedure, my ministry intends to provide and meet this supplementary through three areas, namely, budget cuts, non-tax revenue, and additional resources. Of this, budget cuts and non-tax revenue amount to Shs49.14 billion. The rest of the supplementary amounting to Shs177.38 billion will be financed through additional resources. I beg to move.

3.25
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to present the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.1 of the financial year 2006/2007. But before I present the report, I want to lay on Table, the minutes of the proceedings of the committee.

Mr Speaker, the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.1 for the financial year 2006/2007 was laid on Table on 3 April 2006. This is in accordance with the provision of Article 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Section 12 of the Budget Act 2001 and Section 16 of the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003. 

Government is required to lay before Parliament, the proposed supplementary expenditure estimates for the identified activities upon which the amount appropriated were insufficient, or when a need arises for the purpose for which no amount was appropriated. The Budget Act 2001 requires that such resource supplementary expenditure should not exceed 3 per cent of the total approved budget in a given year without prior approval of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, the Member, referred the Schedule to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for further analysis. The committee has accordingly considered the supplementary -(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, may be here there must have been an oversight. The Committee on Budget should have handled this business because the Committee on Finance deals with matters of Ministry of Finance. But the budget should have gone to the Committee on Budget.  But you can proceed.  

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that correction.  In future it will be addressed-  (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. What I was indicating is that, the Speaker sent it to the Committee on Finance.  But since this is a budget matter, the appropriate committee should have been the Committee on Budget, where all other chairpersons sit.  

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, now that you have ably guided us, why don’t we refer it to the Committee on Budget so that other missing things are captured? There are so many things missing.

THE SPEAKER: Missing?

MR WOPUWA: Yes, in this report here, like CDF is not there.  

THE SPEAKER: Sorry.  You have raised it but that one is properly handled.  I do not want to give all these details, but my office is handling it.  

MR NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, now that you have guided, in future I think it will be addressed.  The committee met with the ministers of presidency and Ministry Finance, Planning and Economic Development and their technical team. The committee then analysed the schedule, submitted it to the House in relation to the budget that was approved this financial year.  

Analysis of the Schedule

Supplementary Schedule No.1 is composed of technical transfer, which is reallocation and new resource requirements.  A total of Shs 226.5 billion is being applied for as supplementary expenditure, arising from budget pressures during the first nine months of the financial 2006/2007.  This amount is composed of technical transfers, which is reallocation amounting to Shs 49.14 billion and additional resource of Shs 177.38 billion.

On page 2, there is a table which I do not want to dwell on.  Recurrent expenditure attracts the highest proportion of 40 per cent of the supplementary request for the financial year 2006/2007, which is equivalent to Shs 91 billion.  

The wage bill supplementary request of Shs 21.918 billion is due to shortage in staff salaries.  This demonstrates that the wage bill projection presented to Parliament during the budget process was not realistically estimated.  

Analysis by Sector

According to the analysis by sector, Energy and Mineral Development Sector takes Shs 115.12 billion, which represents 51 per cent, Parliamentary Commission takes Shs 25.456 billion, which represents 11 per cent; Ministry of Defence, Shs 24.163 billion, which also represents 11 per cent.  State House represents Shs 9.61 billion, which represents 4.3 per cent, among others.  The resource supplementary expenditure request for financial year 2006/2007 constitutes 5.73 per cent of the total approved budget.  This per cent is over and above the limit of 3 per cent as required by the Budget Act, 2001.

Observations

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the committee observed that although section 16 of Public Finance and Accountability Act requires Government to indicate the effects of the supplementary expenditure changes on the original finance requirements at the time of appreciation and any expected changes in the original statement of output and outcome, this has not been provided in the submission by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  

The supplementary expenditure affects the output and outcome intended in the budget.  These are often not realised and the budget process is undermined.  Therefore, Parliament should have had a full time picture of the cost and benefit of the proposed supplementary expenditure and a report on the performance of the budget for the first nine months.  

There are still poor budgeting practices as clearly shown by persistent supplementary request to fund wage shortfalls. Yet Government has always assured the Parliament of efforts to clean the payroll. 

The committee established that URA had collected Shs 870.404 billion for the period 26th July to February 2007, against a total of Shs 881.588 billion, leading to a cumulative deficit of Shs 11.183 billion for the financial 2006/2007.  However, the source of the additional resources of Shs 177.38 billion, to fund the budget as reported by the Minister was not explained.  

The supplementary request for State House of Shs 12.5 billion overshot the approved budget for the financial year 2006/2007 by 34 per cent which is abnormally high.  This calls for reallocation, which will stifle the programmes for other ministries/departments significantly.  

The committee recommends to this House as follows:

The budget process should be prudent to ensure that items, which can be planned, do not attract supplementary expenditure, that is, wages.  

The amount requested for by State House of Shs 12.5 billion be reduced to Shs 9.61 billion. 

As a matter of principle, supplementary expenditure should reflect the priority areas as agreed upon during the budget formulation process.

Reallocation distorts planning and budget process and there is need to involve Parliament in drawing up new priority areas as a major stakeholder in the development of this country.  Changes in priority need to be addressed well in time.  

There should be deliberate effort to minimise supplementary expenditure in future by ensuring that Government ministries and departments comprehensively project and prioritise the various expenditure during the budget formulation period.  This makes the creation of contingency fund necessary to cater for unforeseen events.  

There is need to reflect the affected votes, expected output and outcome in order to fully assess the impact of the new activities and reallocation. The committee recommends that Parliament passes this supplementary budget amounting to Shs 223.52 billion as provided in table 2. Table 2 shows the recurrent approved and requested supplementary as well as the development approved and requested supplementary. The recommended totals by the committee and the percentage of that total are also given.

Mr Speaker, I would like to correct an error in these percentages. The percentage for the Parliamentary Commission is 47 not 11 -(Interjections)- You look at the total. The approved budget for recurrent was Shs 44.78 billion and we are requesting for Shs 13.83 billion. The development approved was Shs 8.97 billion and we are requesting for Shs 11.62 billion.

In conclusion, the committee urges Government to improve on the budget process in order to minimise the supplementary requirements. The committee requests the House to approve the supplementary expenditure as recommended above. I beg to move.

Before I conclude, I would like to inform honourable members that attached is a minority report signed by hon. Nandala.

3.39
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, the minority report talks about the issue of Supplementary No.1 for the FY 2006/2007. I wish to put on record that the analysis of the supplementary budget never involved the sector sessional committees, and this is vital in the process. A supplementary budget is a mini Government budget and should follow the due process. The following observations need to be addressed:

1. 	Under Public Finance and Accountability Act 2003, section 16, which the chairman of the committee has read very well, the Minister of Finance never stated where he is doing the budget cuts and where he is going to get the new resources. 

	What is the reason for budget cuts? If you are cutting somebody’s money, he should accept. If he comes back to Parliament, you should not blame him for the outputs you had already agreed on with him. You call this non-performance when in reality the problem is the supplementary. All of you know that whenever they are presenting the budget, there is the expenditure and the income. The new resources are Shs.177.38 billion. The Minister of Finance has not told us where he is going to get this money, and it should be very important that the Minister declares the source of these funds.

2. Under the Parliamentary Commission, I understand very well that there is capital development of Shs 11.62 billion and recurrent of Shs 12.48 billion. That gives us a total of Shs 23.10 billion. As far as I know, there is only one figure which is necessary for the supplementary budget. The rest are already in the original budget which we passed.

3. 	The expenditure is not supported with details, for example:

i) 	Under State House, we have a donation of Shs 1 billion for scholarships but the list of students to benefit from this is not attached. Some may have got but we do not know who got or missed. We do not see it here. 

ii) 	We have rent arrears in Foreign Affairs – these are just a few examples – at the Pan-African Congress, and here the details are also not shown. We do not know where this Pan-African Congress is located. 

iii)	The Minister of Education and Sports is talking of compensation to third parties worth Shs 3.16 billion. We do not know who these third parties are. 

iv)	Under the Washington Mission, they are talking of hiring a car for Shs 43 million. Why don’t we just buy a car instead of hiring one for that much?

v)	Under the Brussels Mission, there is Shs 23 million for the African Union mission in Sudan. Why should we send money for the African Union to Brussels when our new AU is here?  

vi)	Concerning compensation for graduated tax to the districts and town councils, the formula is not known. They are just putting figures here and yet that should have been the most important issue, so that everybody knows the formula applied for the compensation.

Mr Speaker, earlier on you alluded to the recommendation that all sectoral committees should have been involved in the exercise of the supplementary budget, as this is a mini-budget as provided for in section 12 (3) of the Budget Act 2003. This should, of course, be in consultation with the ministries, departments, institutions or any organisations affected. The Ministry of Finance should provide the areas of the new resources and those areas which are being affected by the budget cuts as per section 16 (2) of the Public Finance and Accountability Act. All the supporting documents in relation to the expenditure to be made should be availed. 

I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR WOPUWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to talk about the issue of tax compensation for local governments. In the committee report that was presented here, the committee recommended that local governments should be given Shs 45 billion instead of Shs 25 billion. Because of the delay in getting the additional Shs 20 billion, most local governments are almost not working. So, the supplementary budget being brought here now had already been approved when we passed the budget, and therefore, I beg that hon. Nandala appreciates that position so that local governments can get this money. Although it is coming late, the House had already pronounced itself on the Shs 45 billion instead of Shs 25 billion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker I would like to inform this House that hon. Nandala did not attend our committee proceedings. He is a member of the committee, and most of the issues he has raised were actually asked by the committee members and answered.

Our rules are very clear. When a member wants to bring a minority report, you allow him. However, some of the issues he is raising were addressed. Nandala, as you know, is always very busy so he did not attend our committee meetings. In future, Nandala will not come with a minority report if he attends the committee meetings. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the minutes you tabled do not carry his name as present?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, it is true that on Friday I never attended the meeting. We had only one meeting on Friday. This is a big supplementary, but it was only on Friday, and we had an oversight meeting –(Interjection)- Yes, let me make my case. Today I attended the meeting and I raised the issues to the committee. The chairman and his vice were in attendance and I was the third member. If you are claiming that –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, hon. Nandala is insinuating that only two members attended the committee meeting. I want to inform this House that hon. Nandala has a tendency to just visit the committee and leave. I want to assure you that hon. Oduman, hon. Nsubuga, hon. Kabondo and many other members were present. Nandala visited the committee and left. Is it in order for hon. Nandala, who just visited the committee, to say that two people in the committee wrote the report?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, according to me you have raised only one pertinent issue, that this supplementary should have been handled by the Budget Committee. Why didn’t you raise it when we started? The Budget Committee should handle this. You even alerted the Office of the Speaker that the appropriate committee was not handling the matter. This should have been corrected, and I think the matter should have been addressed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, if members will recall, the first question I asked when the Minister presented the supplementary was, “Where is the accompanying income?” The chairperson of the Committee on Finance said, “No, no, we shall handle it at Finance”. I then said, “No, you are not the one responsible”. I mentioned it here, Mr Speaker. I have support. Members, let us be objective and tell the truth for the first time.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, it is true that I came to the committee meeting and we were three. I even told the chairman that I was going to make a minority report. We were three people. We even adjourned the meeting. Maybe he reconvened the meeting, and if you did you should have called me in, but that is not an issue for now. 

Mr Speaker, I want us to follow the rules. If I have raised an issue, like the resources issue, it is important that the committee or the House must know about it. If I have erred by not being there, the issue is now here and it is clear that we must deal with it. 

On the issue of the law, we should not bend the law, Mr Speaker. We should always follow the law. I know we have come from a one party system in the Seventh Parliament and we are trying to learn, but let us try to follow the rules and laws very carefully. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is there any further debate on the two reports, the committee’s report and the minority report?

3.50
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairman and the committee for this report. I do not think we have a winner and a loser in this particular case. I think Ugandans are entitled to know how the money is spent. 

When you look at the supplementary budget, it would seem as if we do not have priorities. When we are looking at this budget, we should set priorities. When you look at this budget, there is nothing tangible at the end of this financial year that we will have covered. The committee has said that most of the money is for recurrent expenditure. Some of you colleagues who have read the coming budget know that priority is on electricity and roads. 

Mr Speaker, out of this budget, about $50 million was taken away from the Ministry of Works. It went somewhere, and the sector was not informed. I want this Parliament to be part of history in Uganda. Let us make sure that whenever a budget is passed, at the end of the financial year there should be something tangible, something we can see. For this to happen, we need your participation. Do not be like my colleague, hon. Nandala, who has good views but will not participate in the committee meetings. If all of us do not participate in the meetings this week and next week, then we shall have a raw deal in the budget.  

Mr Speaker, we talked about extension of this House. I raised it earlier and the Minister said we had money for it. The other day you were commissioning a building that we are renting. In three or five years, we will have spent a lot of money on it. We could have instead spent that money on finishing the extension of the North Wing, the President’s Office and many other sections. I think we have reached a level where we can no longer rely on donors. We must be able to look for our own money within the budget. We cannot continue spending money on the recurrent expenditure. 

Mr Speaker, before the concession of the railways, we met one of the people who were supposed to take over the railways. He said, “I would hate to come to Uganda, take over the railways, give you $50 million, then you put it in your recurrent expenditure. I would want to give $50 million so that you can build schools along the railway line, so that I do not have problems with Ugandans plucking out some slippers and the railway line collapses”. 

I think it is not good for the Ministry of Finance to rush and make budgets every year and yet we do not put our money to good use. We do not have roads and yet the Minister was shy to tell us that some of the money was taken from the sector to another sector. We should be consulted because this is our budget. This is our country. We should sit at a roundtable and discuss. Otherwise, we do not know how this money, which we are talking about, will be spent as soon as Parliament approves the budget. Colleagues of the Eighth Parliament, with the little experience I have, I say let us put our heads together and make a list of priorities so that the budget, with our few resources, can be reflected on the ground and not just on paper. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.54
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I thank the committee for the report. I only want to make one or two remarks. One is in respect to the committee’s observation that they established that URA had collected Shs 870.40 billion in the period, and that this constituted a cumulative deficit. 

I only want to get clarification from the Minister about the methods URA uses for collecting revenue. This question of seizing accounts of local governments, which leads to local governments not being able to pay salaries due to the people it owes, does not make sense. It may make sense to Government, but it does not make sense to the ordinary teacher who is expecting a salary and he or she is told, “You cannot get your salary because your local Government in a certain year did not pay revenue, and we are attaching the account to be able to get tax collected”. Surely, there should be a method that Government can use to ensure that whatever is done internally does not injure people who are entitled to their salaries.

I acknowledge the supplementary estimates, but I am constantly embarrassed by the fact that pensioners in very many districts cannot get their pensions. I do not know what method we would use to ensure that people get their pensions. It is not their fault. It must be an aspect of Government, and it appears that it is not being addressed here at any point in time. When on earth will the pensioners, these small people in the countryside, be able to get their pensions?

Again, for clarification’s sake, do the allowances of district councillors and municipal councils attract a 30 percent tax? This is something, which was specifically asked of me by the councillors of Masaka Municipality. They get a very small allowance but they say that it is now attracting a 30 percent tax. If it is just allowances, why should their small amount of money be deducted? I thank you.

3.58
MR OTEKAT EMILY (Independent, Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My comments come from page 4 of the main report and page 2 of the minority report, specifically on district local governments’ graduated tax compensation. 

As the chairman of the Local Government and Public Service Committee has said, this budget was in the main budget that we passed in this House. What surprises me is that it comes now as a supplementary and yet we had initially indicated that we give local governments Shs 45 billion for compensation. 

There are a lot of problems that local governments are facing. Pensions are not being paid. Pensioners have attached vehicles of the local Government of Soroti, where I come from. The problem is, if we do not give local governments this money, then we are grounding them. My appeal is that even if we have put it on the supplementary budget, we should give them the balance of Shs 25 billion, which is the balance that is required by local governments. I am sure the Minister will clarify on that. Vehicles of Pallisa District have been attached too. They are not moving because they do not have money to pay for whatever they are supposed to pay for in terms of taxes. 

Mr Speaker, the issue of sending the entire balance of the Shs 45 billion given to local governments is very important. I used to be in a local Government. Before the scrapping of graduated tax, local governments were making Shs 80 billion and yet they were not even able to meet their expenses. If they were making Shs 80 billion and we are sending them half of that, how will they be able to meet the shortfall? 

This takes me to hon. Nandala Mafabi’s area. He had asked what formula the Ministry of Finance is using to allocate resources to local governments. I also wonder how the allocation of Shs 45 billion, which is almost 50 percent of the original percentage of Shs 80 billion, was arrived at. We must calculate this. If we give them 50 percent, how will they operate? Do we expect them to operate at 50 percent effectiveness or do we expect them to perform at 100 percent? Shs 45 billion is okay, but we you can raise it slightly more to Shs60 billion, this would make local governments limp a bit. 

Mr Speaker, on page 4 the committee mentions the National Planning Authority. The National Planning Authority was established to enable the government plan wisely for its resources. I have been to the National Planning Authority several times on issues of planning, particularly for local governments. Why doesn’t the National Planning Authority go to the field to collect plans from districts so that they are engraved in the national plan? 

The main problem the National Planning Authority has been facing is lack of resources. Even as I speak, the National Planning Authority is operating at 30 percent of their manpower. That is a big problem. We are all looking at the National Planning Authority as our school of planning, but we are not giving it enough resources. They were given Shs 0.441 billion, which is good enough, but it is also another area where we should have requested for more. 

On the issue of State House, I am happy that funds for State House were reduced from Shs12.5 billion to Shs9.6 billion. I think State House deserves something smaller than what they had requested. We should give them that, considering that in State House there is also a lot –(Laughter)- So, I support this cut.

Mr Speaker, I support the minority report raised by hon. Nandala Mafabi. Where is the Ministry of Finance getting the income? Where is the money coming from? I think the Minister should tell us where the money is coming from. That is what it means to have a budget; you must indicate your income and expenditure. Now, if you tell Parliament that you are expending this amount but you do not explain where you got it from, it becomes a problem.

On page 2, I have already said that the Ministry of Finance should state clearly and give a formula to this Parliament on how they are allocating resources, not only to local governments but generally. What is the formula they are using for allocating resources? What formula does the Ministry of Finance use to allocate resources to Soroti District, for example? When I was Chairman LCV, it was the population that was considered, but this has now changed. There is now what we call the poverty index. (Interruption) 

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I want to give my colleague information. The Local Finance Commission has worked out a formula for allocating funds to local governments, but the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education have refused to adopt the report. So, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education unilaterally allocate money without a transparent formula. 

MR OTEKAT: Thank you very much, hon. Wopuwa, for that information. It still comes back to the Ministry of Finance. Now that the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education have refused that formula, what formula are they using to allocate resources to local governments and also to other ministries? If we do not know the formula that is being used by the Ministry of Finance, then we are at a total loss. As we speak, if you look at the money that goes to districts like Soroti and Rakai for drilling of boreholes and so on, you will get surprised. You actually wonder whether these people carry out any surveys in the districts to establish which ones need water. 

A lot of money goes to Karamoja districts for drilling boreholes and construction of water dams, but a visit to this place will reveal that these things are not there, yet the whole place needs water. So, what formula does the Ministry of Finance use when allocating resources? Do they carry out any adequate survey to allocate resources? I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

4.05
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and the chairperson, hon. Nsubuga, and hon. Nandala. Hon. Nsubuga should have thanked hon. Nandala Mafabi because that report fills in the spaces that were omitted by his report. If you look at page 2, for instance, there are areas where he has even emphasized by bolding the words. This means that in the Budget Act and other attendant regulations, there are certain laws that have been flouted already. Consider the three percent, for example, that is required of the Budget Act, it has already been overshot. In his minority report, hon. Nandala says the details of the figures are not provided. So, what does it mean? Do you get the details and go back to the laws? I think there is a problem. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, paragraph 4.4, on the supplementary request – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the chairperson told the House what the problem was. If the author of the minority report had been sitting in the meetings, these questions would have been put to the Minister presenting the supplementary budget. However, all indications show that he was always not there and yet they had to proceed. My appeal to you, members, is that you should always attend your committee meetings to enable other members sitting in there benefit from your wisdom. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: I thank you for that guidance, Mr Speaker, but the good thing is that they are before us. They can still guide us on how to make an informed resolution regarding the supplementary budget. On page 3, 4.4 talks about the supplementary request for State House of Shs.12.5 billion. Before we make a resolution, can we get the details of what this money is going to be used for? I think it is not enough to just say that it has been cut from Shs.12.5 billion to 9 billion. What is it that requires that amount and where has it been sourced from, so that we take an informed decision? 

My colleague from Masaka has alluded to Uganda Revenue Authority, and I know that there is already a deficit. In that regard, Mr Speaker and honourable members will agree with me that many programmes are going to be affected. It would have been very good if the sector ministers of those affected ministries and the chairperson of the committee came –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I would not have liked to interrupt my honourable colleague, but I want him to clarify if his question is directed to the chairperson of the committee. It looks like he does not trust the chairman who this Parliament delegated to do its work. It also looks like he doubts the committee, which is also attended by the honourable shadow Minister of Finance, a person well known to have diligently performed excellently in the last Parliament. Is he saying that he is not willing to approve this report because he does not trust the committee? Can I get clarification on what exactly he is saying?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I want inform the whole House that when we received the supplementary schedule, they also gave us an addendum which every member got. That addendum was specifically for State House. It has the entire breakdown, which comes to Shs 11.5 billion, 1 billion for donation inclusive. So, the argument that you do not have the breakdown does not arise. If you do not have it, kindly check your records. Every member has the addendum and the breakdown, especially for State House. Each member also has the explanatory note for each vote. So, it is just about the culture of reading. Otherwise, you have the information. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. Yes, we got the addendum for State House and we have a reading culture. I have the supplementary schedule, and on page 7 the column clearly says, “Ministry of Education, compensation of third parties”, however, the details are “nil”. So, are you telling us that “nil” was a mistake? Please!

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Honourable minister, I thank you. Mr Speaker, we are lucky that in Uganda we have one of the parliaments in Africa, and probably in the whole world, which can question, debate and participate in the making of budgets. We are not here to rubber stamp. It is not that I do not respect the observations of the committee or the presentation of the report by the committee, my concern is that we should not be here only to get statements and say, “aye” and everything passes. We should develop a culture that enables us scrutinise things in the manner in which they are presented. 

If we ask for the details, like my colleague has said, it is not a matter of saying, “we have not read”. The purpose of asking for details is to assist the chairperson plus the committee in doing their work. I think that is why this report was brought before us. I believe that scrutinising will help Government and all of us here understand the details, so that as we perform our oversight function we know what is taking place. (Interruption)

MR ODUMAN OKELLO: Thank you, honourable colleague and Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to give information. The chairperson of the committee has alluded to the fact that we could have raised these matters in the committee. I want to inform you that I am a member of the Committee on Finance and that I attended most of the meetings. However, just as the chairman has said in the report, which I did not sign, there were areas of appropriation –(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member has just said that he attended most of the meetings. About how many did he attend? I just want to be guided -(Laughter)

MR ODUMAN: Honourable Speaker, the record of attendance and the minutes of the meetings have been laid on the Table by the committee chairperson. They are available to you for double checking. 

The information I want to give is that these questions were raised in the committee. One of the issues raised was the issue of sources of income. When we talk about a budget, it means talking about how you are going to spend the money and where you are going to get it from. You cannot call something a budget with only one source. You just cannot. 

In this House last year, we passed a budget in which we said, “go and collect money as follows, levy the following taxes and then spend as follows”. That was a budget. Now, we are talking about a supplementary budget. We cannot talk about a budget that specifies only the expenditure. We asked that question, and on page 3 of the committee report it is mentioned that the Minister did not provide information on the sources of income. 

It is now our task not to approve this budget as a supplementary appropriation budget because we cannot tell Government to spend money from sources we have not authorised. In its oversight function, Parliament is required to keep an eye on where Government gets money from, be it from the donors, taxation or otherwise. That is why we are here. If we just let Government spend money without guidance on the sources, we shall be authorising them to use any sources yet some of these may be illegal. We shall be held accountable for having approved a budget of expenditure without guidance on sources. When we sat here and passed the Finance Bill -(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, did you stand to make a contribution or to give information? (Laughter) You seem to be contributing. 

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I am not contributing. I am still giving information. However, thank you very much for your indulgence. The information I want give is that these questions were raised in the committee. It is not true that they were not raised. I notice that the committee chairperson is actually falling short of throwing out the supplementary budget because we cannot approve it without authorised sources of revenue. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, on page 2 of the minority report, the third item under (a), State House - (Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: As I said earlier, you are really making a contribution. Can you please stop there?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, there is still fear within the members of the Committee on Finance that things do not match well with the recommendations, even if we have got the report here. On page 3 paragraph 5.6, for example, the committee says, “There is need to reflect the affected votes, the expected outputs and outcomes in order to fully assess the impact of the new activities and reallocations”. I think that is why hon. Nandala came out to demand for the details of most of these things that are affected by this supplementary budget. It is not in bad faith. We only want to look at it critically so that before we approve or pronounce ourselves on any resolution, we actually know which block figure means what. We want to go to through the details rather than doing it in an omnibus way. Those are the few clarifications I demand from the chairperson. I thank you.

4.19
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the committee chairperson and the entire committee for the report they have brought before this House this afternoon. However, I would like to seek some help from the chairperson of the committee, and I wish he listens attentively.

On page 2 of this report, he rightly states that the resource for the supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2006/07 constitutes 5.7 percent. He also says that under the Budget Act, this should not go beyond three percent, but what the committee finally recommends does not meet this condition. I would like to be guided on this by the chairperson and the entire committee. I would like to know whether, if we passed this figure tonight, we would be within the Budget Act. 

Secondly, on page 3 of the report, paragraph 4.4, the committee says that the supplementary request for State House is Shs 12.5 billion and that this constitutes 34 percent of the budget. They go ahead to say, “This is, in our opinion, really too much. As a result, the committee has approved a reduction to Shs.9.6 billion, which is 26 percent.” In essence, the committee is suggesting that 26 percent for State House is reasonable. Unfortunately, they did not give us the rationale. There is no statement or yardstick to show what is reasonable and what is unreasonable. I think that as far as this particular section is concerned, the committee was inadequate -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I just want to help you on one question. I think the first issue you raised is dealt with by section 12 of the Budget Act. I think that is the one that you are referring to. It says: “The total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed three percent of the total approved budget for that year, without prior approval of Parliament.” So, if there is an approval of Parliament, it can go beyond three percent.

MR AMURIAT: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I think that sorts out the issue. That notwithstanding, I believe there are also other issues that need to be addressed by the committee. The chairperson of the committee has requested this House to pass a supplementary budget under 5.7, of Shs 223.52 billion. However, in their reports they immediately refer to a table, which is inconsistent with that figure. The inconsistency is very clear. 

I wish the committee had used a spreadsheet for their additions. They probably would have got it right. There is a discrepancy of Shs 1.793 billion. Which figure do you want this Parliament to pass as a supplementary budget? The figure under 5.7 or that one indicated on table 2, which comes to Shs 225.31 billion after adding the recurrent supplementary request to the development supplementary request. I would like clarification from the committee. I think this would be in the interest of the House, so that we know what supplementary figures to pass. 

In conclusion, I want to respond to what our Minister of Finance and hon. Mutumba alluded to in this House this afternoon. This is on the matter of where the resources are going to come from to be able to meet this expenditure. I think it is very important that this House is told how Government intends to get resources in order to meet the proposed expenditure in this request from Government. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We have covered this, chairman Budget Committee. We will come back to it if necessary. You will come in. 

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, the Chairman of the Budget Committee is a member of this committee so I am just -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is he a member of the committee?

4.26
MR PETER OCHIENG (NRM, Bukooli County South, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, the chairman is saying that he has also clearly seen some loopholes in the budgeting system of Government. This worries us a lot. When there is a loophole in the budgeting system of a whole country, it leaves a lot to be desired. 

Furthermore, there is this problem of State House sponsorship. Over time, we have been trying to see how this can be streamlined. At one point people who were well off, and I can give one example, were part of the scheme. I will not talk about hon. Godi, but the wife of the then Managing Director of Railways Corporation was also part of the scheme of needy students who were being helped by State House, and this was really an embarrassment, and yet she was in a state university. 

I am really very serious on this matter. Even though we know that there are people who should be helped in this country, it cannot be the type of people we see being helped. There are many people who are being helped and we think that they are really not qualified for this type of help. (Interruption)

THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my colleague, hon. Ochieng, for giving way. I want inform you that as far as I know, the State House scholarships are for needy students, and I want to insist that they are for needy students only. If there is any rich person who is being sponsored under this scheme, I would like to challenge hon. Ochieng to give me the information. Of course, hon. Godi said here publicly on the Floor that he is no longer on the list because he is no longer needy.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, because we are Ugandans, we know some of these things. Since the information has been requested for officially by the Minister, we will make every effort to help solve this matter once and for all.

Mr Speaker, I was also concerned about Ministry of Education, specifically about third parties. Who are these third parties who cannot even be mentioned in the report for people to know? 

The other issue is that supplementary budgets are supposed to be three percent, but suppose it goes beyond that, in a worse case scenario? In many cases I know that with the three percent, they even do not need to come here because they would still be within the borders. We are only left with one month to finish this financial year. Are they going to use the figure requested for in 5.7 within one month, unless of course this money has already been used? Suppose we refuse today, what happens, because this is far beyond? We want to be serious with this Government. 

The problem is that I sit on the Local Government Accounts Committee and I have heard, time and again, issues about spending over and above the requirements. What do they say? They say, “You also do the same. We have records about where you sit yet you are blaming us. We are basically replicating what you have been doing”. How are we going to streamline this? I am sure if we streamlined it here today, even those who are giving examples of what we do here will fear to do this next time.

Lastly, I want to agree with the minority report on this issue; unless fully explained, spending Shs 43 million on hiring a car is a little bit on the high side.

THE SPEAKER: Were they using American dollars where this vehicle is being hired?

MR OCHIENG: We can divide by Shs 1850.

THE SPEAKER: What is the cost of a vehicle appropriate for this service in America? I ask this because you are talking as if it is in Uganda.

MR OCHIENG: Mr Speaker, I am sorry, but I know that cars are even cheaper in America. I have personally imported a car from America to Uganda and it was a bit cheaper than what we get here.

THE SPEAKER: Of what year? (Laughter)

MR OCHIENG: Anyway, Mr Speaker, if we are to spend such big amounts of money, what we are doing now is basically creating a precedent. Suppose every embassy goes ahead to do this kind of hiring, others will follow. Are we not going to spend more money in such areas yet we are categorically finding it more expensive for Government? 

Concerning compensation for graduated tax, Mr Speaker, I want to assure you that there was a mistake, which I think was deliberate by local governments. Local governments were collecting a lot of money but not really telling this Government that they were collecting that amount. When they were required to give accountability at one time, they said they were collecting less. 

I say this because I have not seen the Shs 80 billion they are talking about. The accountability I saw in this House was around Shs 55 billion, then it went down to something like Shs 35 billion and yet they were collecting a lot of money. What happened is that they came back, gave Government wrong data and Government went ahead to process the compensation on the lower side. (Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: Mr Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that local governments make budgets and these budgets are approved. At the end of it, we even have the Auditor-General to audit the final accounts. The money they collect is put in a public document and everybody knows it. 

In the district where I come from, that is Manafwa, we have budgets. If Bugiri does not have, the problem is not local governments. Leaders do not look for information, so I want to inform my colleague that he is misleading us.

MR OCHIENG: The honourable member was a CAO but you will agree with me that Manafwa had just started. It is not Bugiri; we are talking about the total budget of graduated tax by then. By the way, I see this in the local Government accounts and I know quite a number of these things. These people were collecting a lot of money but were not declaring the total amount. They were declaring the –(Interruption)

MR OTEKAT: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. I wanted to inform my colleague that I was the chairman of all chairpersons up to recently, and there are records that we can produce here indicating that at that time we were producing over Shs 80 billion in terms of graduated tax, unless of course he also produces records to the contrary. We should not just talk about what is discussed in the committees and so on. We want proof from the books. Local governments were getting over Shs 80 billion in terms of graduated tax.

Secondly, when graduated tax was scrapped, it also affected all the other taxes. As we speak now, there is virtually no tax being collected. Since graduated tax was scrapped, nobody here in Kampala pays boda boda tax and all the other taxes. So, it has greatly affected local governments. However, Shs 80 billion, on average, was being collected annually from graduated tax. I want to inform my colleague, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before he continues with the debate, I have a feeling that the debate on this item is considered in the same way we treat the annual budget. You see, during the budget time, which we shall handle in June, you consider the revenue and expenditure. You deal with taxation, and that is how the government receives the revenue to spend. However, this item is only for expenditure yet many people are asking for the source. We are not going to impose tax when we are dealing with supplementary budgets because taxes are the source of the revenue. 

People are asking, “Where is the tax issue?” No, we are considering authorising expenditure so that the Minister can be able to access funds that are in the Consolidated Fund. That is the purpose. Asking for the source would tantamount to asking, “What are the proposals for taxation?” 

With the budget, we deal with three Bills. We deal with the Finance Bill, which is taxation. We deal with the Appropriation Bill, which is authorisation of expenditure. We also deal with the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. Those are three Bills. At the moment we are dealing with matters that will go to the Supplementary Appropriation Bill. So, do not ask for the Finance Bill now, which deals with taxation. I think you should read section three because this deals with the presentation of both revenue and expenditure. There are two documents. We are dealing with expenditure in section 12.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, my knowledge tells me that we deal with cash budgets. What we get is what we spend, and what we collect is what we spend. We do not encroach on the Consolidated Fund. What we are asking now is, where are we going to get all that money, because we are dealing with the cash budget? That is all that we are asking.

THE SPEAKER: You see, passing this supplementary has a legal implication that will eventually end in a legal instrument, which the Minister will use to be able to get money to fund the items presented to you.

MR OCHIENG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My last submission on this issue of graduated tax is basically also to seek your guidance on whether it should be called “compensation” or something else. If it is called compensation, then you are supposed to give exactly what the other party was supposed to get from the public.

THE SPEAKER: Well, it is compensation. Before we abolished graduated tax, it was a source of revenue for the local Government. In our wisdom, we said “no, do away with it, we shall find money to compensate you.” You cannot just remove an item without blocking the gap that has been created. So, the government and Parliament, which undertook to abolish graduated tax, has to give compensation to local governments to be able to provide services. It is not a donation. We are not donating.

MR OCHIENG: If that is the case, Mr Speaker, we will therefore request Government to fully give the local governments what they were getting. I am sorry, but I have not seen the Shs 80 billion. All the government papers talk about Shs 55 billion and below, but it should not be less than what they were getting. It should be more or exactly the amount that they used to get before that time. (Interruption)

MR MUGARRA: I want to inform hon. Ochieng that although local governments were collecting around Shs 80 billion or so, they were incurring expenses in collecting this money, including VAT and allowances. In compensation, Government was taking into consideration all those expenses. Therefore, I think they are compensating an average of what they were actually realising minus the expenses. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information that I want to give you, my brother, is that when there was an amendment to move VAT from 17 percent to 18 percent, the purpose of the additional one percent was to compensate for such items. 

More importantly, the problem with local governments is that at the time they were asking them how much they were collecting, they were declaring lower figures. When it came to asking that they be compensated, they wanted to raise the values. I think the best thing to do is go back to the drawing board and ask, “How much did you declare in your returns?” From the returns we can know the costs, which you have incurred, and the balance. They should not get free money when they were hiding the information. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, you are saying that we are authorising the Minister of Finance to get money from the Consolidated Fund. But the money that goes to the Consolidated Fund is the money we have authorised him to tax and if he has taxed it, it is the one which is there. So our question is, “Where are you going to get the 177? Is it the excess on what you have taxed or you are going add another tax somewhere?” But saying that it is already there, even if it is there, we must know how it got there. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Should we really not end this debate? Maybe we should ask the Minister.

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY (Mrs Beatrice Wabudeya): Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, when the chairman of the committee was presenting his report, he recommended a reduction of the money that State House is requesting for. I am standing here to beg Parliament to move, and ask Parliament to reinstate the money to the Shs 12.5 billion. The committee invited me and I appeared before it; I explained, and I think thoroughly, the reasons why we wanted this money. But I also want the House to note that State House is the one that facilitates His Excellency the President and His Excellency the Vice-President to carry out their duties. We know very well that what we ask for each year is not what we get. So, when we are allocated money and the circumstances of the head of state and the Vice-President demand more activity, we come back here and beg for more money in terms of the supplementary.

I want to thank the committee for their report, but also for the recommendations and observations they have made. I am just wondering: if we are blaming Government for not trying to live within what we have passed, why be frugal? Why is it that the committee decided that they should cut the money allocated to State House and not for example the one allocated to the Parliamentary Commission? Because the details that we gave –(Interruption)- I just wanted to use that example because Parliament plays a very important role in the governance of this country and likewise the head of state does play a very important role in the governance of this country. 

When I look at the minority report, if it is to be called a report, I want to say that most of these issues that hon. Nandala is raising –(Interruptions)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker and honourable members, if I ask, you will ask where the list of the beneficiaries of students being offered state scholarships in State House is, when we have the Ministry of Education, which handles education. I am not wrong when I ask for the details. What I am trying to say is that I am not that stupid to ask something that a normal person cannot ask. So, is the Minister in charge of the Presidency right to call me stupid when she knows –(Interruptions)- when she questions the report - you are questioning my intelligence. She is implying that I am not competent or not intelligent enough to make a good point. I have raised pertinent issues that touch the nerves of all Ugandans? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Was she not referring to herself? Was she referring to you?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: She said, “A minority report if at all it is a report” because it is only one person who signed the minority report –(Laughter)- and it is me whom they were referring to.  

THE SPEAKER: No, it is not clear to me.  Help me to know exactly what you are complaining about. Is it the language you are complaining about?  

MR NANDALA MAFABI: The honourable Minister of the Presidency said, “…if at all it is to be called a report.”   

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala that is a personal assessment. She is your sister.

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I did not mean to offend my brother hon. Nandala; he is my Member of Parliament. 

The issues that hon. Nandala raises, as far as State House is concerned, are issues that were raised in the committee when I appeared before the committee. I explained this issue of State House scholarships very well and the members of the committee understood why I could not attach a list at that time. So I want to say that this issue of State House scholarships has been explained here before. The problem is that Members are suspicious. When I try to explain what goes on –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you honourable minister for giving way. We have a very competent Minister of Education. Actually we consider her one of the most competent ministers in this country. I feel perplexed if in spite of that we still have a department of education in State House that gives scholarships. Can the honourable Minister for the Presidency explain the contradiction? Why should we have another ministry of education in State House when we have a very good Ministry of Education?    

MS KAMYA: I thank the Rt. hon. Speaker and the Minister for giving way. The further clarification I am seeking is on this State House scholarship. We are often told that the scholarship is for children of fallen comrades. We have heard that they are for very needy children. I would like to know who classifies the very needy, because I have got very needy people in my constituency, who have failed to go to school? They come to my office everyday; they have finished senior six or senior four but they cannot continue with their education. How do I get them on the “very needy” list, because they are very needy? Besides, I also have children of fallen comrades in Lubaga North, and so we need to know the policy, which can help the very needy, and the children of fallen comrades to get access to the State House scholarships. Thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, I want to inform this House that the State House scholarship is actually very good. One time there was a problem in the Lango sub-region. Over 200 poor students appealed to me as a minister to forward their request to the President. The President, in his wisdom, awarded 36 scholarships to those needy students of the North -(Applause)- whose parents were not there and who were suffering. They managed to go to various universities, like Gulu University, Makerere University and Kyambogo University. But that was last year, and I want to know if they are going to receive this money this year? (Laughter)

THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think I should say something about this issue. There are so many different scholarships in this country. We have the government scholarships, departmental scholarships, individual scholarships, NGO scholarships. Even embassies give scholarships. The other time my colleague was invited to hand over scholarships from a certain embassy.

One would have thought those scholarships would have all been under the ministry. I want to explain that scholarships of different types are given depending on the needs, the office and the availability of resources. And, therefore, I do not think that it is correct to say that every scholarship should go through the Ministry of Education. Many of them are got from different offices and really -(Interruption)

MS KAMYA: I thank you honourable minister for giving way. The information I would like to give the minister is that we are aware of many of the various scholarships that she is referring to. They are usually advertised in the papers, on the radios and through many other forums. Those people that want to access them know exactly how to access them and which protocol to follow. That is the information. I hope when the minister comes up again she will be able to inform us because I still asked, “How do the needy in Lubaga North access State House scholarships?”  The others we know, but State House we do not know.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, it is true there are various types of scholarships in this country. In the Sixth Parliament for example I used to give scholarships to the best boy and girl in PLE every year. But I never came to this House to bring a budget for the House to debate the scholarship I was giving. (Laughter) Here, we are talking about Ugandan taxpayers’ money. We are saying that if you are going to spend the taxpayers’ money on the scholarship you are giving, then we are entitled to talk about it and say that it should be in this place or that place. Otherwise, anybody with their money can give any scholarship they want. I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we passed the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets Act, which spells out how people can procure and dispose, and access information as far as procurement of assets and disposal of the same is concerned. Likewise, this is taxpayer’s money; the State House scholarship is not classified expenditure because if it were, it would have its own budget. Therefore, if it is not classified, it is a public resource, which must be discussed here in this House.

How does somebody access State House scholarships? That is the most important thing. And who has benefited? We must know how the taxpayers’ money was spent. We must also know who benefited from this scholarship. Of course my brother Okot Ogong managed to access the scholarship because one time he was a Minister of Children. (Laughter) How do those who are not ministers access the scholarship? We need the list of all those who benefited from the state scholarships. We know the whole country is poor -(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: May I inform you? Actually this scholarship was given to Lango sub-region. It was advertised on all radio stations in Lira. Those people applied through the RDC’s office, the District Education Officer’s office and the chairman of the district. That is how the scholarship was awarded. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you for the advert. I am from Sironko where the Minister for the Presidency comes from but I have never seen the advert for the poor ones in Sironko -(Laughter)- and this is a very serious matter -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I was on the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs in the last Parliament for three years -(Interruption)- I want to give this information. I must say, the hon. Minister of Education should just not drag herself into this issue of the State House scholarships. You should not get yourself into that because we know how the scholarships in the Ministry of Education are given. The issue of the scholarships given to the children in Okot Ogong’s constituency was very clear. You remember we passed money for about 20,000 for the children in affected areas, which was supposed to be paid, about 150,000 or so per year. So that is different from the State House scholarships.

When I was on that committee, His Excellency the Vice-President was the Minister of the Presidency, and we asked him to provide us with the list of those who had benefited from the scholarship. We never saw that list. Instead, he suggested that we meet His Excellency the President. When we met the President, the only information we were able to come across was the number of children benefiting from the State House scholarships, not the list and the names of the people benefiting. At that time the President apologised to the committee and said, “I am sorry, the beneficiaries of these scholarships have been mainly children from my area because whenever I get back home …” - I wish the hon. Chief Whip of the ruling party could keep quiet and listen.  

THE SPEAKER: You see honourable members, today we are dealing with supplementary expenditure. This expenditure is supplementary to the budget, which we passed for the year 2006/2007. The policy regarding this budget was debated when we passed the main budget in June, July and August last year. The items, which are here, are not new items. They are items that were in that budget. So the question of asking, “what is this”; “what is that”, does not arise. It is just to have a supplementary rather than going into the policy matters of these items. 

Very soon a new budget will be coming to you. That is when again you will debate items in that budget but these are just supplementary to matters that you have already passed.  So, we should really have not gone in all the details of policy matters, which we dealt with when we passed the main budget because this is a supplementary. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I was just giving information based on what was going on in the House here. That is why I brought this matter because it has taken some time. That is why I felt my input was necessary. I was a member of that committee at that time. I wish I could be allowed to complete it in the next one minute –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No. I would not like to cut you short but I am only advising you that people are treating this as a separate budget from the budget, which we passed. We passed the budget but then circumstances have forced us to give more money to run the policies, which we accepted. But as I have told you before, the various respective committees should not end with passing the budget. You should continuously monitor what is going on in your respective sectors and bring reports for debate. You do not have to wait for the budget to bring these matters. Our mandate is wider than dealing with the budget.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, as I conclude this matter, I agree with your ruling to call on the Members of Parliament to be critical during the next budget. I think before we pass any money for State House scholarships we must be given a list, not just the numbers like we were given last time, “3,560 from my area –(Interruption)

MR KABAGAMBE: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the honourable member for raising issues of serious concern. Hon. Okupa has put it on record that the President apologised that the money was for the people from his area. In this House –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: I was in that committee, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of PAC. I am not defending the President but I do not remember anytime the President apologising for that fund. He said he had even camped in Moroto where he had gone to fight the insurgency in Soroti. People approached him. Even when he is at Rwakitura people from different parts of Uganda approach him but these are not necessarily people from his area. He did not apologise for that. I do not remember him saying that.

MR OKUPA: When the President got up and said, “I am sorry”, what does that mean? He was in Soroti in the Army Barracks –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, where are we heading to? I have told you that some of the contributions have been irrelevant to this subject. These matters were debated. As you have said, when the other budget comes, you will be free to continue examining the policies of these matters but this is supplementary to policies that you have already passed, honestly.

MR OKUPA: I agree with your ruling, Mr Speaker. In fact I was just winding up that is why I was appealing to the Members that come that time, we should not only insist on the numbers but also get the list of these people such that we are able to put this matter to rest. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we proceed with the debate? The Minister in Charge of the Presidency was on the Floor. Please, wind up because I want to put the question.

MRS WABUDEYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker for that guidance. This issue of State House scholarships, these are donations given by His Excellency the President as the President of this country to the needy children he sees fit. That should explain the issue that was raised by my friend hon. Okello-okello when he said that they never see adverts to that effect. A President is a President. I want us to remember that the President of the Republic of Uganda is elected by the general masses. Therefore, just like you Members of Parliament are paying fees for children in your constituencies His Excellency the President is also always requested to assist people who need his assistance and it is his prerogative to say yes or no to a student. Therefore, we cannot have a criterion. I do not think that it would be possible for His Excellency the President to have a criterion on the money he uses in form of a donation.  

I will continue to explain this issue when the time comes but as of now, Mr Speaker, I want to appeal to the chairman of the committee to reconsider the recommendation that he proposed to cut the money which State House is asking for from Shs 12.5 billion to Shs 9.6 billion. I cannot imagine what item will be left out or even the rationale that the committee used to propose that deduction. I beg to move that we ask for an amendment on the money that State House is asking for under this supplementary. I beg to move that we restate the amount to Shs 12.5 billion.

THE SPEAKER: Having taken the contributions made, I want to put the question. The motion is that this House resolves itself into a Committee of Supply to consider the supplementary expenditure estimates.

(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

5.15
THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, as you may appreciate, there are 120 centres; we could go through all of them but if you do not mind we could also have a summary.

Statutory supplementary recurrent expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 14,289,840,000 be provided as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Non-statutory recurrent supplementary expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 75,769,610,000 be provided as non-statutory supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Supplementary development expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose the question that a total sum of Shs 136,472,150,000 be provided as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Total supplementary expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that a total sum of Shs 226,524,844,000 be provided for as a total supplementary expenditure for financial year 2006/2007.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the committee proposed that a total of about Shs 3 billion be deducted from State House so that it remains Shs 9.6 billion. The total proposed by the committee is Shs 223.52 billion. So, I do not know when we are going to deduct that money.

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, you see, when I classify statutory and non-statutory, that is when if there was an objection the deduction should have been made. But since now I am putting this figure and you think you want to correct it, then you do it and then we see how we proceed. Otherwise, it would mean – unless you say I recommit. So hon. Okot, the thing is, what we can do, is when I read this figure, I propose, then I put the question. Then you come in to deduct before I put the question. Is it clear hon. Okot Ogong?

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Chairman, I know Parliamentary procedure and I think it is possible to recommit that figure. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok. Which one do you want to recommit? Because if I finally go to this one, then there is no – which was statutory and it becomes non-statutory?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the value of the deduction is recurrent expenditure and here the schedule, which the committee talks about is 88 and 136 which totals to 224. I think the easiest way is to approve the total, less the value. That is the easiest way to move so that we move to the next step.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes. This is what I had proposed.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: So we can approve 224.

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is this. I now propose that a total sum of Shs 226, 524, 844,000 be provided for as total supplementary expenditure for the financial year 2006/2007.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I want to move that on the total sum of 226, we deduct Shs 2.9 billion, which was provided for under State House.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard that that sum which was proposed of Shs 226,524,844,000 be reduced by Shs 2.9 billion in respect of money voted for State House [Hon. Members: “No”] Let us listen. Minister, what do you say?

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and honourable members. We went at great pains to come out with these figures. His Excellency the President, given the fact that Uganda is among the first three countries that are going to handle the issue of CHOGM, has to move a lot to be able to convince a number of other heads of states and governments to come to Uganda. He has also been bringing a lot of development issues in this country. The Vice-President is also moving on the issues of bonna bagagawale” (prosperity for all), and all these are taking in a lot of money. So we would request that the amount of money as given of Shs 226,524,844,000 be approved as it is without any deductions.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we had a report, which proposed a reduction. You have heard the rebuttal. A proposal has been made to deduct, and it has been opposed. Now I put the question to the proposal for deductions.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 226,524,844,000 be provided for as a total supplementary expenditure for the fiscal year 2006/2007.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule I, 2006/2007 and passed it without any amendment. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Fred Omach): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that the Committee of Supply has deliberated on the supplementary Schedule I, 2006/07 and has passed it. I beg that it be passed and be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: You read the sum, the total sum.

MR FRED OMACH: Mr Speaker, the total sum that has been passed is Shs 226,524,844,000. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Has he moved a motion? –(Laughter)- The motion has been moved that we adopt the report from the Committee of Supply on the supplementary estimates as detailed out by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members as you remember, we started with the issue of Busitema University, but there are a number of queries, which were raised on the Floor of the House, which I think need to be examined before we can continue with the debate on this subject matter. Because of this, the best way is to send this business to the committee in charge of social services to examine it and then present a report to us on all issues that will be raised so that we can then proceed with dealing with the motion on the establishment of Busitema University in eastern region -(Interjection)- timeframe? 

Well, the only problem I see is that there is a budget. I stress the issue of budget because according to the Budget Act, I have to send the report to the President by 15th of May. That is about two weeks from now. It is not a question of sending the report to the President, but we want it to impact on the budget before it is read so that our comments are assimilated in the budget itself. 

Normally when we send this report to the President, the cabinet or the President and Ministry of Finance look at it. Sometimes they come back to the Budget Committee to debate the recommendations because Government proposals may vary. If this has to be achieved, we have to send it on time. Otherwise, if we send it out of time they will say, “We have already finalised because the budget must be read”. At least latest should be by 15th of June. It is important that you concentrate on this budget so that the report is sent on time. That is when we can have an impact on the budget, which we want to achieve.

I know we have a lot of business, which has not been handled. I understand that we had loan requests last week. I do not know how far the Committee has gone with these requests. From time to time, if it is necessary, we will be convening for plenary. Otherwise for this period, time should be given to you to complete this work. Let me hear your views. 

5.27
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. During the debate for the supplementary you alluded that Members have the obligation, especially committees, to monitor Government projects. I want to inform you that all committees apart from the accounting committee do not have funds for monitoring. Since I have seen a vote for recurrent expenditure in the Parliamentary Commission, I do not think there is any committee, which has ever inspected any project. If we are to inspect a project, it is the beneficiary ministries or departments, which take Members of Parliament, and they are the ones who write the report. This undermines the performance of Parliament. We have received the indicative, we made a programme to visit projects, but we have not done so. There is a need for a vote for monitoring by the committee members instead of us doing postmortem work. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: In the proposed budget for the Parliamentary Commission, we proposed to acquire ourselves vans and buses that can take you to various places. I know some committees that are doing fieldwork. I know some committees, which have been to Karamoja. Fieldwork should be done. There is a development partner with whom we are discussing this issue of linking Parliament to people outside Parliament. If this materialises, it will help us help you with supervision. But you should come up with periodical reports on the performance of those sectors for which you are responsible. 

5.29
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): I think the concerns of the chairman are not that committees are not supervising. Committees are doing the supervision. Last month we returned from inspecting NUSAF projects in Northern Uganda, our committee left this morning for Karamoja. The chairman’s concern is that sometimes the departments they are supervising fund these committees. This can cause a compromise. It does not end there; there are some voluntary committees in this House, which are being funded by non-governmental organisations to do work. To me this is not a very good practice that members of committees of Parliament of Uganda can be funded by NGOs to do work, that they can be funded by ministries -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: With strings attached?

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, strings attached may not be revealed, but in the long run you may end up being compromised. What I am asking and I would like to support the chairman, is that the Parliamentary Commission’s budget be improved to include money for monitoring Government projects outside this Parliament. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Sir, we have committee funds in the Parliamentary Commission, and we get Shs 3 billion a year. We know it takes care of committee sittings, but we need to utilise the resources for monitoring and evaluation. Until you finish that money you cannot say we do not have resources. I think the problem we have is that maybe accessing those resources from the Parliamentary Commission is the biggest problem. I would plead with your office so that Members be told how to access this money, but this money should be accessed according to work plans you have submitted and agreed on. 

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, earlier this year we were all asked to submit work plans for our committees. I remember that the Budget Committee submitted a very comprehensive plan and costed it to the tune of Shs 65 million. It is my hope that the Parliamentary Commission actually includes this in its budget. I am going to look at this and find out. Otherwise, the suggestion by hon. Nandala is pertinent. The committees should be informed on how to access this money, because that is really the problem. 

MR KADDUNABBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My committee has a report ready on capitalisation of Housing Finance. This morning I had a meeting with ministers of finance on the loan requests and the partial risk guarantees. We requested for some information and the Minister of Finance promised to give us the information by close of business today. If we get it, then we shall move ahead and consider some loans. I would request you that you excuse my committee members so that we can utilise some of this time to consider this loan request because we were told that they are equally very urgent.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; granted.

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE, TRADE (Mr Gagawala Wambuzi): Mr Speaker, I raise to request all Members of Parliament and you that if we are going to increase our resource envelop, it is very important that all leaders in the country get involved in mobilising the whole population to start taking the issue of a daily income, a seasonal income and a perennial income seriously. As we talk, we have visitors: WTO and UNCTAD have sent people here, our Ambassador in Geneva is here, and we also have IITC. They are waiting to pass on a message to ITTC members, that is, the public, ITTC sub-committees, parliamentarians, the business community and selected donors about issues to do with negotiations of the Doha round and about trade in general. They believe that the only way they can empower our community to take off is for our public to know the issues of trade. 

Our public at the moment is very ignorant about trade to the extent that we seem not to be utilising a lot of opportunities that have been given to us by the Japanese. Europeans have given us a lot of opportunities, but we seem not to be picking up quickly. The American Government has also given us big opportunities too. The reason why I am standing here today is to inform all of you Members that it is very important for you to attend the meeting at Hotel Africana tomorrow morning. I want you to come and interface with these gentlemen particularly the shadow minister, you should go and pose serious questions to UNCTAD, you should ask serious questions to the World –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your point –(Laughter)- Yes, chairman.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much. Mine is about the report of the Committee on Busitema University. I think within a week we will be ready with that report –(Interjection) 

THE SPEAKER: But do not prejudice the budget process. You can postpone Busitema and finish with the budget.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, looking at our programme we shall be in position to finish. 

Secondly, as regards the delayed report on the cancellation of Katikamu. I would pray that at least we are put on Order Paper if we are meeting tomorrow. 

Lastly, about Parliament going to do its oversight role, Mr Speaker, I am strongly suggesting that other than having so many committee meetings, the Parliamentary Commission can reallocate some of the money in committees so that we go and supervise what is going on other than having to do post mortems. This is a serious note. In the last Parliament I was with Government Assurances, but the clerk continued telling us that there was no money. We must have some money for Members to go and supervise other than having post mortems only after resources have been squandered. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OKECHO: Mr Speaker, because of the fact that we have to look at the national budget framework paper very critically this time round and the sessional committees have been asked to report to the Budget Committee, we have prepared a schedule for this reports, which will take about four to five days, from May 2nd to May 11th. After that we hope that we will have all the reports from the various sub-committees and we will have submitted. We have actually sent out letters to all chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of the various committees to tell them exactly when they should submit their reports to the Budget Committee. 

It is my request, therefore, that they go and check their pigeon halls. There they will be able to look at their schedules and report so that by the 14th of May we shall be ready with the report to be submitted to you and presented to the President. Any work that may have to be done here has got to bear this schedule in mind. Thank you very much. 

5.39
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): I thank you and especially the Business Committee for putting our petition on the Order Paper every time. They have been very vigilant and today I think it has just escaped by the skin of a tooth as I thought we were going to discuss it. You remember when we were meeting in the Business Committee you promised me that on the 17th when we resume it will be given first priority.  Why am I so eager about this report? It is because it touches almost all Ugandans. 

How can we have such a project when my sister who is representing people with disabilities is not catered for, when pedestrians are not catered for, when floods and culverts are not catered for yet work is going on despite the fact that Parliament is supposed to have an input and at least improve on the status quo? So, I am really worried and -(Interruption)

MR KATURAMU: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. You referred to your sister hon. Florence Nayiga as a Member of Parliament representing persons with disabilities. I wish to inform you that hon. Nayiga is representing Kayunga District. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What we will do is this: let me wait for the work of the Committee on National Economy. They have one report on capitalising Housing Finance as they finished the other one. On the day when we deal with that report, yours will be the first. This has gone on record.

MR MUTUMBA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I am looking forward to that day.

THE SPEAKER: The Kawempe issue will be dealt with on the same day so that we really clear it because it has -(Interruption)

MR KIBANZANGA: Mr Speaker, there is another item, which is very important to some of us and it has appeared on the Order Paper three times. That is the report of the Social Service Committee regarding 167 students of Katikamu SDC. However, every time we get near it the House is adjourned.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we shall do that day when we reconvene as plenary is we shall sit in the morning and afternoon to clear some business before withdrawing to your committees. That way we shall be able to finish as many items as possible.    

MRS NAYIGA SEKABIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg your indulgence that this Minister of Trade gets more formal because all of us are concerned about fighting poverty and we want our people to prosper. He has raised an issue that is of great importance to all of us but I wonder whether my colleagues received invitations to his trade conference because some of us have not accessed such information. This leaves us in a dilemma and we wonder what he is talking about. It is not very clear and I would beg that you give him more time to explain properly and to even formerly communicate to us so that we know where to go and how. We need all the detailed information. Thank you.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, I thought that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Just tell us the time and place. 

MR WAMBUZI: The meeting actually started at 7 O’clock today. Tomorrow it will start again at 9.00 p.m. up to 17.00 hours, that is, 5 O’clock. So if you can just spare a few -(Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, the problem I have is that I am appealing to Members to be in their committees to deal with the Budget so –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: I request for at least one hour in the morning, I am appealing to you. That is tomorrow at Hotel Africana in the Rwizi Hall.

THE SPEAKER: I have appreciated your concern. I think that is a report again from the Social Service Committee on council results. I have said that on the day we reconvene we shall sit in the morning and afternoon and we will be able to deal with many items.

MRS TUMA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The concern of my colleagues in the House is that everybody is trying to help their constituents fight poverty and if the Minister for Trade is serious then surely he should avail Members of Parliament a special session. We have a conference hall here where he can invite all these learned people in trade to come and enlighten us on how we can tackle trade. Thank you very much. 

MR TINDAMANYIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on an issue that is related to the other two reports. We were privileged to represent Parliament at the Great Lakes Regional Conference for Parliamentarians and our report has equally been pending for more than one month. I hope when the new schedule is put up we shall be catered for. Thank you.

MR YIGA: Mr Speaker, I come from Masaka District and sometime back we had the issue of Busitema University coming up on the Order Paper. You may recall that in Masaka we had a Uganda Technical College, Masaka, which was temporary re-located to Busitema. The people of Masaka would like to know whether they are now going to continue having Masaka Technical College in Busitema now that Busitema is becoming a university.  

When is Government going to come up and find land somewhere to put up Masaka Technical University?  Mr Speaker, what I want basically is for the chairman of the committee to handle that issue as well. When he is bringing the report about the university to Parliament he should also have a section addressing that issue so that we are able to re-assure people from Masaka about this issue. Otherwise, we are seeing ourselves as marginalized and really under looked. Thank you.

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I think the concern of my colleague from Masaka is that actually a lot of property or almost all the property from Uganda Technical College, Masaka was transferred to Busitema Technical College and we want to find out from Government whether it is going to replace or return this property to our constituency -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, my understanding is that Busitema University is a public university, although located in the Eastern region. It will be open to any Ugandan who wants to go to pursue courses there.  

MS MUNYIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. About the property that came along with the students, first of all, I would like to report that the students are doing well. I went and visited them. They are enjoying the new campus. However, about the property that they came along with, what I have really seen is that most of it is obsolete books and also the computers are old though they are still trying to use them. So you may not have lost much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member that is annoying and is not courteous. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You remember I participated in the mobilisation of the militia in Lango called Amuka. They did a good job and they are still continuing. However, I want to bring to your attention that for the last 11 months or so, they have never been paid. I have appealed to Government many times but up to now I want to be guided on how those people can work for over one year and two months without being paid. I want to appeal to you and see if we can do something as Parliament so that those are paid.

MR TOOLIT: Thank you my colleague for giving way.  I thank the MP for Dokolo for raising that concern.  I want to say that it is not only about Amuka militia. In Acholi sub-region we have the frontier guards, the home guards, who have for the last 16 months not received even a single pay and some of them are going back to the community.  But I want to inform the House that they are refusing to hand over their guns because they are saying unless they are paid that should be part of their property and we are worried that it will become a very serious source of insecurity to the society. That is the information I want provide. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Leader of Government Business has heard and noted these concerns. He should discuss them and then do the needful. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to enable committees start sitting mornings and afternoons with effect from tomorrow. However, whenever I have assembled some business, I will call for a plenary sitting. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned sine die)
