Thursday, 22 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PLANT PROTECTION AND HEALTH BILL, 2010

2.35
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to table for the first reading the Bill entitled, “The Plant Protection and Health Bill, 2010.” I beg to move.

I have complied with Section 10 of the Budget Act by attaching the Certificate of Financial Implications.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament for consideration and subsequently report to the House. 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ BUSINESS

PETITION FOR THE INCLUSION OF CIVIC EDUCATION INTO THE NATIONAL EDUCATION CURRICULUM OF UGANDA

2.36
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition from your humble petitioners, the Metropolitan Jonah Lwanga, Bishop of the Uganda Orthodox Church; Archbishop Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, Archbishop of Kampala; the Most Reverend Henry Luke Orombi, Archbishop Church of Uganda; Sheik Shaban Ramadan Mubajje, the Mufti of Uganda; Pastor Dr John Kakembo, President of Seventh Day Adventist, Uganda Union; Pastor Dr Joseph Serwadda, Presiding Apostle, Born Again churches.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, please walk and address us from here.

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I beg to present this petition. It prays:

“1. That civic education be included in the national education curriculum of Uganda as a compulsory subject at all levels.

2. That civic education textbooks and teachers’ manuals be prepared at all levels of the education system.

3. That teachers be prepared and empowered to lead and teach civic education, the cultural human and religious values, which belong to an aesthetic and holistic education. 

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray that all the educators, parents, teachers and leaders in Uganda will take up this great challenge to transmit to our youths and society the basic cultural, human, social and spiritual values through a holistic education.”

I beg to lay this petition on the Table, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let the appropriate committee namely the Social Services Committee, handle the matter and then report to the House.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT FOR THE CREATION OF NEW DISTRICTS

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Mr Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I am moving a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 179(1) and (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, providing for alteration of boundaries of districts and creation of new districts. It reads:

“WHEREAS Article 179(1)(a) of the Constitution empowers Parliament to alter the boundaries of districts;

AND WHEREAS Article 179(1)(b) of the Constitution empowers Parliament to create new districts; 

AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to create the districts specified hereunder for the effective administration of those areas and bring services closer to the people, having taken into account the means of communication, the geographical features, the destiny of the population, the economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned; 

AND WHEREAS alteration of the boundaries of Arua District and a district comprising Maracha and Terego counties and the creation of the new districts is supported by a majority of all the Members of Parliament; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament as follows:
1.	That the following new districts be created in Uganda and their headquarters be as indicated herein:

i)	Kalungu District, currently part of Masaka District consisting of Kalungu County with its headquarters at Kalungu Trading Centre.

ii)	Bukomansimbi District, currently part of Masaka District consisting of Bukomansimbi County with its headquarters at Bukomansimbi Trading Centre.

iii)	Gombe District, currently part of Mpigi District consisting of Butambala County with its headquarters at Gombe Trading Centre.

iv)	Lwengo District, currently part of Masaka District consisting of part of Bukoto County comprising the sub-counties of Malongo, Kyazanga, Lwengo, Ndagwe, Kisekka and Kingo with its headquarters at Lwengo Trading Centre.

v)	Mitooma District, currently part of Bushenyi District consisting of Ruhinda County with its headquarters at Mitooma Trading Centre.

vi)	Rubirizi District, currently part of Bushenyi District consisting of Bunyaruguru County with its headquarters at Rubirizi Trading Centre.

vii)	Kibingo District, currently part of Bushenyi District, consisting of Sheema County with its headquarters at Kibingo County headquarters.

viii)	Nsiika District, currently part of Bushenyi District consisting of Buhweju County with its headquarters at Nsiika Trading Centre.

ix)	Ngora District, currently part of Kumi District consisting of Ngora County with its headquarters at Ngora Trading Centre.

x)	Napak District, currently part of Moroto District consisting of Bokora County with its headquarters at Napak Trading Centre.

xi)	Kibuku District, currently part of Pallisa District consisting of Kibuku County with its headquarters at Kibuku Trading Centre.

xii)	Nwoya District, currently part of Amuru District consisting of Nwoya County with its headquarters at Anaka Trading Centre.

xiii)	Kole District, currently part of Apac District consisting of Kole County with its headquarters at Kole Trading Centre.

xiv)	Patongo District, currently part of Pader District consisting of Agago County with its headquarters at Patongo Town Council.

2.	Mr Speaker, this motion requests that the boundaries of Arua District and the district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties be altered as follows:
a)	By incorporating Terego County, formerly in the district comprising Maracha and Terego counties, in Arua District;

b)	Creating Nyadri District, formerly in the district comprising Maracha and Terego Counties, consisting of Maracha County with its headquarters at Nyadri Trading Centre.

3.	Mr Speaker, I propose that the new districts take effect from 1 July 2010. And finally that the headquarters of each district, which is not yet a town council, shall become a town council in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 32(2) of the Third Schedule to the Local Governments Act.”

Mr Speaker, I beg to move and to be supported. 

2.46
DR JOHN ARAPKISSA (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to contribute on this motion. I thank the minister for the motion. 

Kween County is among those, which were proposed to be promoted to a district status. This was discussed during the various consultations; it is even in the Hansard of some date in December, before we broke off for recess. 

What I know is that we have been having a problem with the headquarters. Other groups were saying Kaproron, which is currently the county headquarters and other groups were saying Chepsikunya.

We have had several consultations and one time the minister advised us to hold the LC IV council. We held the LC IV council in August last year and in that council, out of the 29 councillors, 20 were present and they unanimously voted for Kaproron to be the county headquarters.

The minister later on advised us again that we should hold a meeting of all leaders of Kween. We held a meeting on 23rd February and it comprised all the chairmen LC I, all the chairmen LC II, all the LC III councillors, the LC V councillors, the district executive members, the MP, the RDC, the chairman and other officials. 

Out of 266 members who were present, we all decided that we should not line up but instead vote through secret ballot, 146 voted for Kaproron as the county headquarters and 113, I think, voted for Chepsikunya.

The minister said that was not in order; that we should not have counted people but decided by unanimous decision. He then promised that he would come to one of the meetings in future. He said he would come on 6th February but he did not come. He shifted to another day, the 13th March but he did not come. He shifted it again to the 26th March –

THE SPEAKER: What is your point?

DR YEKKO: Two days ago, he said he was coming on the 30th this month. 

THE SPEAKER: You said that one district had been forgotten. Isn’t that the question?

DR YEKKO: The problem is that when he is not in this –

THE SPEAKER: That is what you should have said -

DR YEKKO: The minister said he would want to come, so I really urge him to come before -

THE SPEAKER: What you should have said is whether it was an oversight that such a district was not listed, and then the minister would explain. Because it could be that there was an oversight. 

DR YEKKO: I, therefore, move that Kween be added as one of the districts. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We will then ask the minister to explain why he forgot it. 

We are not going to debate now. But these are queries about the list, which I am just entertaining now. I do not think we are going to decide today. There are some people who are saying that certain districts have been left out; these are the ones I am allowing to contribute.

2.50
MR JOHNSON MALINGA (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also would like to thank the minister for bringing this motion to create new districts. I just want clarification from the minister. 

The people of Kapelebyong requested for the creation of the district, which was passed as a resolution of the district council. The minister wrote to me asking me to give a detailed submission as to why we needed a district. I wrote back but he never replied. I was satisfied that I had given him a satisfactory explanation but I am surprised that the list does not include Kapelebyong district. May I request that the minister reconsiders his position and includes Kapelebyong among these new districts?

2.51
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to seek your indulgence that I make a very elaborate and exhaustive submission on this motion. 

I have got with me here Hansards, which considered a similar motion that was introduced in this House on 8th December. We had a thorough debate on 15th December and we had a very exhaustive debate on the 16th December.

I would like to draw the attention of this Parliament to No. 2 in the motion: “That the boundaries of Arua District and a district comprising of Maracha and Terego Counties be altered ….” 

Mr Speaker, Maracha/Terego district was a creation of a constitutional amendment of 2005; it is district number 23 in the First Schedule of the Constitution as amended. In as far as I am concerned the Constitution cannot just be amended by the whim of a minister through such a motion. And not only that –(Interjections)– yes, 179 also talks about alteration of boundaries within districts, but not destroying an existing district and add it onto the other.

We had a lengthy debate on this matter, but the ruling was to the effect that - first of all, the entire minister, Adolf Mwesige, contested that decision and indeed it was in his fundamental rights to make an appeal. He subsequently appealed against a High Court judgement where the decision to agree on the headquarters of the district comprising of Maracha and Terego counties was referred to the elected LC IV councillors of the two counties as stated in the Local Government Act and the Constitution. 

The other day we were debating this matter and I laid on the Table documents to that effect and the Speaker of that day made a ruling, which is captured in this Hansard, to the effect that since the minister opted to go to court, he would and have the matter sorted out from there because it was prejudicial for Parliament to debate it when it was still before Court of Appeal. 

I am now so surprised that a minister, who is a lawyer and who should be law-abiding, has gone ahead to defy our Rules of Procedure and smuggle the same things into this motion. Even in this same Hansard, when it came to voting, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, and it is on record, asked to be given time to consult and that in February, he would come back to the House.

Mr Speaker, I have high regard for the Prime Minister through whose hands I passed while at the university. I would not like to make it personal, but I would like to appeal to him to be the professor I knew; the professor who respects himself and who knows the truth.

The fundamental question I am therefore asking is: is it in order for us Parliament to discuss a matter that is still before Court of Appeal? What precedent are we setting to begin changing the ruling of the Speaker of that day when it is very clearly known that the Speaker’s ruling shall become part of our Rules of Procedure? I thought we were dealing with gentlemen –(Laughter)– honestly, because everything is on record. What is so special about Maracha/Terego that you can even go ahead to abrogate the Constitution? I am saying this because that in itself tantamount to an abrogation of the Constitution. And I do not think I will repeat it here because I have said it before, it is on the Hansard. 

I swore in this Parliament to protect, defend and uphold the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. And I am sure that each of us used this same Constitution to swear. It will be a very big shame on us, as the institution of Parliament, which is supposed to be the watchdog of the rule of law, to be misused because of selfish interests. I think we will go into history negatively, if we go on to abrogate the Constitution. Remember, there is also a constitutional provision that whoever abrogates the Constitution shall have committed an offence of treason. I do not think all of us, 333 Members of Parliament should be dragged to court because we have abrogated the Constitution. I humbly appeal to this hon. House to allow the rule of law be respected; let the Constitution be respected and that we reject the provisions cited in number two in this motion. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, it was not my intention to have a debate on this motion today. My intention was to receive this motion and we shall be considering the two parts of this motion next week. I had allowed Members to point out any oversights so that the minister can attend to it. Otherwise, the debate will be on next week.

2.58
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. On Tuesday, 8 December 2009, the Minister of Local Government moved a motion here and during the debate he informed this House that Government was consulting on the creation of Kisoko and Mukuju districts and that it would bring an amended motion to resolve this matter when they bring another motion for the creation of new districts. It is captured in the Hansard. May I know, from the minister, why in this motion he left out Mukuju and Kisoko proposed districts when he committed himself?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I am just rising on a procedural point –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t you allow the Member on the Floor to express himself?

DR EPETAIT: Yes, Mr Speaker, I thank the Minister of Local Government for tabling this motion. When you look at the prayer No. 3 of the motion, it is said that the new districts take effect from 1 July 2010. But considering the fact that by mid May, the House is likely to be prorogued, wouldn’t it be prudent that the Committee on Public Service and Local Government doubles its effort to quickly expedite the processing of this report with a view to having it considered before the House is prorogued in order for us to catch up with that time? I beg to seek your indulgence.

3.01
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me a chance. For us in the Opposition –(Laughter)– for a long time we did not so much believe in the creation of many districts, but Government has continued to create new districts. If you check on the list being presented, you notice that we are now concentrating on creating one-county districts.

So, I would like to move a motion without notice, which is for the good of the minister –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think I have been clear that I have just received this motion. I will give you time to think about it before we deal with it. I only allowed Members who can cite oversights here and there for correction. So, do not debate it.

MR OCULA: Okay, let me not debate, Mr Speaker, but what I wanted to improve here is that can the minister bring a motion –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Banyenzaki, you will have time to debate this motion next week.

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we had a similar debate last time, the Minister of Local Government received a resolution from the district council of Kabale seeking for the creation of two more districts out of Kabale District to make them three. On that day, I even tabled that resolution before he promised to consider and have them come within the motion for the creation of new districts some of which have been mentioned in this motion like Kalungu. So, I am seeking your indulgence as to why the creation of Rubanda District has not been considered. May I, through you, have the minister explain this? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.04
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr John Arumadri): Mr Speaker, I rise as the Shadow Minister of Local Government. I have very closely looked at prayer No. 2 and I would like to point out that I have noticed some inconsistencies in it. I will be grateful if the minister corrects them.

But let me start with an abstract matter. In biological science, when you split an amoeba, the two halves take on their individual identities; one half does not revert to the parent. This Parliament created an entity called Maracha/Terego. If part of that entity has now been split to become another district, the other half should not reverse –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are debating, but like I said before, this motion has two parts and we shall systematically handle them in that order. And when we get to prayer number two, you will be free to make your contribution, but that has to be next week.

3.06
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the first part, I would like to say, I am Odonga Otto, Member of Parliament for Aruu County in Pader District since 2001. I am surprised that the last district proposed, Patongo, currently part of Pader District consisting of Agago County with its headquarters in Patongo Town Council - I think this is the highest level of manipulation that is taking place. 

Pader District leaders resolved that they only needed a new Agago District consisting of the entire Agago County. So, the name is a very big issue. Patongo is just a 15-minute drive from Pader District headquarters. So, there is no way we can have a district called Patongo just in the neighbourhood of Pader Town Council. The proposal, which was supported by the district council of Pader, is the creation of Agago District with its headquarters placed at a neutral place. This was owing to the much tension in Pader specifically between Kalong and Patongo. So, if this Parliament cannot help in resolving this tension, then we are just transferring the problem down there.

In the alternative, if you insist on Patongo, then the people of Kalongo, request to remain part of Aruu County –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give is that the manipulation of creating districts and misplacing the headquarters at different places is probably not beginning with Pader. We had a similar problem when Lamwo District was created. The local council had resolved that its headquarters be at Padibe, but in the final case – actually the Minister of Local Government concurred with me that he got information with the request to have the headquarter at Padibe. However, at that moment, because of manipulation, it was put at some place that had not been agreed upon by the people of Lamwo. As I talk now, that issue is still a problem. 

MS AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Odonga Otto, for giving way. I am a Member of Parliament representing Women in Pader District. I want to inform this House that it is true that Pader District requested for a creation of a new district called Agago. I also would like to inform the Minister of Local Government that when, at one point, I asked him about this issue, he agreed having received a letter from the district council that talked about the creation of Agago District. And as hon. Odonga Otto is saying, I would prefer to see the people of Agago decide where the headquarters should be. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we shall resolve all that next week; just check the districts one by one.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. The President was in Pader last week and he publicly made a proclamation that he would appeal to Cabinet to allow the creation of Agago District. So, let us not spoil that chance by bringing this out. However, my appeal to the minister is to have Agago District with the headquarters at Lukole.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that brings us to the end of those comments. I would like to ask the minister to respond to some of the oversights highlighted. 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I am not really up to debate. I am just following on a matter that was raised by hon. Dr Epetait. You said that we will debate this matter next week, but I am wondering whether it is going to the committee – we have been working through committees on such matters.

THE SPEAKER: Is this a new matter or it has been to the committee before?

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, I think this is a new matter because some of the new districts were not initially looked at by the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will decide on that.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I am under a lot of pressure by my people in Namuwongo and the surrounding areas to have a district. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you should be conversant with this Constitution. Kampala is not a district; Kampala is the Capital of Uganda. (Laughter) Hold on; the Republic of Uganda, that is, Article 5: “Uganda is one sovereign state and a Republic: Subject to Article 178 of this Constitution, Uganda shall consist of:
(a)	Regions administered by regional governments when districts have agreed to form  regions as provided for in this Constitution;
(b)	Kampala; and 
(c)	The districts of Uganda ….”

Kampala is not a district; it is a capital of Uganda.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for making that clarification. I have read to them all the provisions of the Constitution, I have read to them all the statutes but they are insisting that they do not want to be conscripted to belong to Kampala; they want to be on their own in what we call Namuwongo District. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mabikke, I think we have to assist you. What I will do is to consider electing a team of hon. Members of Parliament to come and address those people of Namuwongo. (Laughter)

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Perez Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the colleagues for raising these issues. 

Kween district – it is true that there was submission but it is also true like the Member of Parliament has stated that the people of Kween have consistently refused to agree on where they want their headquarters to be located. This Parliament has an experience, you can see it yourselves, on Maracha/Terego and we do not want a similar experience. We are committed as a ministry and a Government that as soon as they are agreeable to the location, we have no problem creating Kween District.

Kapelebyong: It is true the Member of Parliament made a submission and we put in place a technical committee to help us do the evaluations to see whether it fits into the attributes that we consider and we are waiting for the report. 

Maracha/Terego: The issue of Maracha/Terego is not new; it has been on the Floor of this House. Our view as Government is that the issue in court is different from the issue we are seeking a resolution on. We are seeking for alteration; we are not seeking for the establishment of the headquarters. So, we think that we are legally correct. We are not violating any law.

Kisoko and Mukuju: The issue of Kisoko and Mukuju, Mr Speaker, as hon. Ekanya rightly says, the consultations are still going on. Some of these issues are really not as simple as they are portrayed on the Floor of this House.  And the issue of Tororo is one of them but I would not like to divulge into details of how complicated it is as of now though hon. Ekanya knows that surely until the two groups reconcile on where the municipality of Tororo should be located, we shall still engage them to make sure that they agree before we make any other mistake here.  

I agree that should you, Mr Speaker, decide that the issue goes to the committee that it should be handled expeditiously so that the districts can be incorporated into next year’s budget estimates.    

Hon. Michael Ocula, your issue was handled by the Rt Hon. Speaker; I have no comment on that.

Kabale: Sir, we received submissions for Kabale District and we have put in place – first of all, we do not have so many technical people at the ministry’s headquarters. When we decentralised, we stayed with a thin staff. So when you are deploying these people to do these technical assessments, they really take a bit of time. So for those districts which submitted their requests, we are still handling them and nobody should feel left behind. 

Patong: I have no reason to disagree with the honourable members here. Should you feel that there is some disagreement, we shall engage each other and then consult further before we pronounce ourselves on this motion. 

Namuwongo: As for Namuwongo, I do not have any comment. Thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Leave that one. Leader of Government Business!

3.20
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Wadri has rightly pointed out that I taught him and that he has high regard for me. Thereafter, he started criticising me in a manner I did not understand. (Laughter) Because I said that we would stay the issue of Terego and Maracha in order to consult. Indeed, we consulted and the motion is the outcome of our consultations. So what is the matter with my former student? (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, I would like to, first of all, thank Prof. Apolo Nsibambi. The clarification that I want to seek from the professor is as follows: It is me who represents that people of Terego in this House. (Applause) I talk on their behalf. Any matter that affects and relates to the people of Terego can only be aired in this House authoritatively by me. 

I now want to find out from the professor if he asked as per what is in this Hansard that he be given time for consultations and which time was given. I have not seen any of your traces in Terego; I can say that with certainty. Neither has the committee that professor is talking about consulted me, the peoples’ representative. What consultations did you have? Was it in State House? What consultations did you have? (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a very simple question and I would like to inform hon. Wadri that we have a minister in charge of local government. The Prime Minister does not carry out the functions of the Minister of Local Government. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: On the other matter, it will be considered by the Public Service and Local Government Committee and it should be expeditiously handled. Please, return the report by next week.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

3.24
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I move to support the motion. However, the proposed amendment Bill by the minister regarding the Presidential Elections law is very important and I wish to urge this Parliament that we look at the Bill and at an appropriate time, consider very fundamental amendments. One of the issues regards security of the presidential candidate. Today, the Electoral Commission and Government appoint and nominate security personnel to guard presidential candidates without the consultation of the presidential candidates.

I am not saying that the personnel that are deployed to guard presidential candidates have shortcomings, but in order to give more say to the presidential candidates, it is paramount that we include a provision that will allow the Electoral Commission and the presidential candidate to agree on the personnel. This is so that in case the security personnel behave in a manner that does not facilitate the campaign of the presidential candidate, the latter can refer the security personnel back to the Electoral Commission.

The law that we seek to amend and the proposed amendments also has other shortcomings. It presupposes that we are still under individual merit. It limits the time in which intending presidential candidates are supposed to campaign, to 90 days. 

Mr Speaker, as you are aware, we are likely to have more than 100 districts. The people of this country want these candidates to visit even sub-counties and, therefore, since most of these candidates contest under the multi-party systems save for those who will come as independents like maybe if you have hon. Aggrey Awori; but it is paramount that the clause regarding 90 days be deleted because it is redundant.

THE SPEAKER: What is the basis of 90 days? What law would prevent somebody who wants to become a president to campaign for three years? What is the basis?

MR EKANYA: That is the point. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: What will you do with that person? Are you going to charge him? Somebody prepares for a year or two years and you say, “You are committing an offence”?

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think that provision in the law is redundant and needs to be totally repealed. You have stated it absolutely.

Currently, the Anti-Corruption Act - the Penal Code -

THE SPEAKER: You can see it in two dimensions. I think somebody can campaign for years, but there is a difference between official funding and individual campaigns. Maybe they are talking about the days for which the funding can come.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for that wise clarification. I hope when we are at the Committee Stage we shall make that very clear so that the clause regarding 90 days is repealed and improved.

I was talking about nomination of persons to contest as presidential candidates. The Leadership Code Act - the Anti-Corruption Act is very clear. Even the Parliamentary Elections Act forbids somebody who has been engaged in electoral malpractice and has been convicted from being nominated, but if you look at the Presidential Elections Act, it is quite silent. 

In other countries we have best practices and laws that state that for a person to be nominated as a presidential candidate, they should not have been involved in any electoral malpractices in the past. At an appropriate time, we shall propose an amendment that a person who has been involved in electoral related malpractices should not be nominated as a presidential candidate so that we are in conformity with the Anti-Corruption Act; the Leadership Code Act –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what you should appreciate is that an election may be nullified for malpractices. That does not mean that a candidate is involved. So, the person must be directly involved.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is the shortcoming we have in the Parliamentary Elections Act. But in the Presidential Elections Act, we want to avoid that because if hon. Ekanya was a presidential candidate and is a commander-in-chief and so forth, and then hon. Kabwegyere is challenging his victory, hon. Kabwegyere has to sue hon. Ekanya the person. You don’t leave that out - and if the court rules that the election of hon. Ekanya was marred with violence and rigging, it is prudent that if hon. Ekanya is seeking to be nominated as a presidential candidate for the coming election, he is barred.

THE SPEAKER: So, you are introducing what we call vicarious liability.

MR EKANYA: Yes, we want to widen this definition so that candidates discipline their agents and impose strict rules. As you are aware, Mr Speaker, one of the reasons why President Museveni went to the bush was election related malpractices and rigging. We have heard two Supreme Court rulings that are related to the same. It is, therefore, pertinent that we comply with these Supreme Court rulings and widen the issue. 

In conclusion, the amendment proposed by the minister falls short on what we agreed upon here yesterday. The amendment proposes gazetting of presiding officers and polling assistants. I wish to propose at an appropriate time that in addition to gazetting, the names of polling assistants and presiding officers involved in a presidential election, be published in the electronic and print media, among others, because if you asked amongst us here, not more than ten percent of the MPs have accessed the gazette in the last four years, but most of us read the print media. Therefore, it can enable our people access and launch the necessary complaints. I beg to move and thank you.

3.36
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Independent, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for this report. On page 2, the committee makes a very fundamental observation and I quote: “Most of the proposed amendments that were presented before the committee require amending the Constitution…” That was a very fundamental observation. I am one of the Members of Parliament who appeared before the committee and reiterated that despite the fact that we are moving to make a few amendments; those amendments cannot be far-reaching unless the Constitution, which is the mother law, is amended. 

This country was governed for two decades – 20 years - under a political system called the Movement and in many respects, that political system was a form of one-party rule, and when we decided to move into the multiparty dispensation, one would expect that transition from the Movement political system into the multiparty system would be followed by fundamental constitutional reforms to reflect the new system. 

I am worried and I need to express my worries that what we now call the multiparty system only seems to have been a graft. When I talk about a graft, the people who have been to Kawanda Research Station understand this; you can graft a mango tree to an avocado tree. So, what we seem to have is a multi-party system grafted on the Movement institutions and yet the Movement was basically a one-party rule. So, that observation that the committee made is very key and fundamental. 

I would like to bring to the attention of the House events that have happened in many countries in Africa after elections. These events show that a defective electoral system and electoral process can be a recipe for disaster. And, therefore, I think we should not proceed to romance –(Interjections)– yes, because we only seem to be romancing the reforms that we are making. We need to go deep and make far-reaching and fundamental reforms. 

I would like to point out one issue which requires amendment of the Presidential Elections Act and the Constitution. Section 2(2) of the Act provides for the election date of the President. There are many concerns in the country that Ugandans must know of; an exact date and the exact month of the election such that wherever they are, they can come back and elect their President as is the case in America and in many other countries. 

In America, we are told that for every fourth year in the month of November in the second week, on the first Monday, Americans elect a president. So, if an American whether in Uganda or Somalia or Afghanistan wants to participate in an election, they programme themselves accordingly.  

A presidential election is so important that we should not meander and keep the date of electing a president vague. But we realised that if we are to move on this amendment and provide for a specific day, you will also have to move to amend the Constitution. 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I think when dealing with this Bill, there is no way you can now talk about the amendment of the Constitution because the provision of Article 259(2) is very clear: “The Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament, the sole purpose for which is to amend this Constitution; and the Act has been passed in accordance with this Chapter.” 

So, definitely this Bill which we are dealing with cannot amend the Constitution because it is not following this provision. But if you wish, you can move or seek a Private Member’s Bill to amend the Constitution and that will be a separate Bill.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, I fundamentally agree with you –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Mabikke, for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It is on record that during the month of December last year I asked this House to table five Private Members’ Bills. At first it was an omnibus motion seeking to table five Bills, and I was guided by the Speaker to split them into five, and amongst the five, we had the Constitutional Amendment Bill. We did that and we forwarded a copy of that Bill to the Office of the Speaker and all along we have been waiting to be put on the Order Paper so that we can move to present the motion. We are still waiting, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you think motions are forwarded to the Office of the Speaker and not the Office of the Clerk? Proceed, hon. Mabikke.

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, the information given by hon. Lukwago is very important and I think he has supported my argument that in order for us to make meaningful and far-reaching electoral reforms, be it on the Electoral Commissions Act, the Presidential Elections Act or the Parliamentary Elections Act, we needed first to have moved on a Constitutional Amendment Bill. We are looking forward to an opportune moment when that Private Member’s Bill will be moved on this Floor of Parliament because what we are doing now is grafting and not reforming the electoral laws.

Uganda must also borrow a leaf from other progressive democracies. Emerging democracies, especially in Africa, have enacted a law called Presidential Transition Act and I think this is very key in Uganda. All of you are aware that in this country, we have never had a president handing over peacefully to another president. I was very scared when hon. Aggrey Awori stood as a presidential candidate because I did not know, had he defeated President Museveni, what process and transition this country would have gone through, for him to first of all, establish a transition committee, like it is done elsewhere; to exchange notes - because presidents here leave offices with all the minutes and information on the transactions that they have conducted. At what moment would hon. Aggrey Awori have received the command of the Army and security agencies?

So, it is important that as we debate and consider amendments on the presidential elections statutes, we think seriously about having another law which I propose should be the presidential transition Act.

Mr Speaker, I want to wind up by appealing to you, and to honourable members, that these amendments being proposed are very good, but they will not have a far-reaching effect, unless we consider the constitutional amendments. Thank you.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Thank you Mr Speaker. In this second debate on the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, I would like to add my voice to my colleagues’, who have talked about a free, fair and transparent election - free of intimidation. 

I also want to thank my colleagues for the way they passed yesterday’s Bill, based on consensus for us. I think this is the way Parliament should move for the good of this country.

A free, fair and transparent election – free of intimidation - is fundamental for the stability of a country and a government that comes to power based on a free, fair and transparent election is a government that is likely to rule the country with credibility and acceptance by everybody. In order to have this free, fair and transparent election, we have four things; one, the law itself which we have made and we are amending; two, the institutions such as the Electoral Commission, the Judiciary and other institutions that maintain law and order. I also have in mind the candidates and the voters who are key players in an election.

I will take a bit of time to talk about the conduct of the candidates because, however, good a law may be, if candidates themselves are not ready to play in a free, fair and transparent election, without intimidation, that law is as good as useless.

Hon. Members if you start with the 10 commandments made by God himself - I am sure that is a wonderful law; you and I know to what extent we have gone to breach those laws. We even have international laws made by international institutions like the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which are meant to govern our conduct internationally - the foundation of the respect for human behaviour and nations generally - but you know how many nations and individuals have breached these universal declarations of human rights.

My contribution is going to be premised purely on presidential candidates. In this House, although most of us are not presidential candidates, but we are likely to be parliamentary candidates, but potential, who are very close to presidential candidates.  In other words, we are players to this important thing. 

Uganda has had elections at the time of Independence, we have had a time of elections in 1980, and we had elections in 1996, 2001, 2006. God willing we are likely to have an election in 2011. Uganda is lucky that it has this rich history from which we are benefiting and that we are moving from possibly a poor situation at the time of Independence to a better situation now. Therefore, we may not have the best law for elections but if you compare to situations from which we have moved, we can continue to make improvements, and I am sure that now and in the future, we can make a lot of those improvements.

We have just followed the elections in Sudan, a country that had never had an election for close to 50 years. Today, I was listening to the international press where the African Union, Arab League, Britain and America have all made their comments. One thing that surprised me is the judgement that has been made by saying that it may not have been a free and fair election, but considering where Sudan has come from, we feel that this is a great beginning and a great foundation for the future.

What does it mean for us in Uganda and for us in this House? It means that with the elections of 1996, 2001 and 2006, we have to ensure that every experience that we have in an election is an occasion for improvement and that we should never go backwards. We should know that there is no substitute for any credible legitimate government apart from a government that is elected and accepted by the people –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: I want to thank the minister, hon. Daniel Omara Atubo, for giving way. Are you saying that we should learn from the weakness of the past election and, therefore, make laws to improve? If that is the case, have you advised Government and would you support amendment by the Opposition that the appointment of the Electoral Commission should be done jointly in consultation with the multi-party organisation so that we have a credible Electoral Commission?  

According to the last two Supreme Court rulings, the court ruled that the constitution of the Electoral Commission, the capacity and organisation of the last election has not been free and fair. That the current Electoral Commission has fallen short of the acceptable standard and that requires Constitutional amendment so that together we can constitute the Electoral Commission. 

As of today, you have not as Government proposed and accepted our proposal, and we are not talking about individuals by the way. For us in the Opposition, we could even have the same people, but we would like to have a say in how they are appointed and disciplined. As we speak today, the Head of State who is likely to be a candidate can fire the same Electoral Commission who has been accused of defaulting on the elections. Have you proposed to Government if you want us to perfect so that we comply and make the next election better? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I would like to inform the honourable member that I stood for elections in 1980 and I have stood in the 1994 Constituent Assembly elections. I also stood in 1996, 2001 and 2006; and I intend to stand again. (Laughter) But each time, since 1986 - and there have been numerous elections at LC I, LC II, LC V and so on - I have studied them as a sociologist and a practical politician and have noted qualitative change - certainly the experience of 1980 has not repeated itself. (Laughter) 
  
MR OMARA ATUBO: Hon. Ekanya has raised a very interesting point about the appointment of the Electoral Commission - yes, I believe the Electoral Commission is a very important institution in the question of elections but I disagree with you that it is a matter of individuals. I am looking at the Electoral Commission as an institution governed by the Constitution and the law and, therefore, anything that can improve it; I am sure that the government which has been democratically elected has a culture of democracy and will be able to look at it positively. 

Let me concentrate on the issue of the presidential candidates. A presidential candidate offers himself so that he becomes the person who holds the whole nation in his hands. Today, he is the Executive President, Commander-In-Chief, the Fountain of Honour - he is everything - he makes appointments. Today, we are likely to have most of the presidential candidates emerging from political parties or organisations and some have already done so. Therefore, one of the fundamental responsibilities of those who offer themselves, is to ensure that the country called Uganda, and the people called Ugandans, to whom he is appealing for votes, remain peaceful, secure and united. The conduct of presidential candidates above the law itself may even determine the process of an election. Therefore, even before the election is declared official, there is already consultations ongoing – it is important that our presidential candidates conduct themselves in a manner which does not undermine and destroy the foundation of the nation of Uganda and if that one – because we have had a lot of issues on radio –(Interjections)- I will give you time –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank my brother hon. Omara Atubo for giving way. I have noticed that the presidential candidates to be are not in this House, but my honourable brother is here lecturing, giving advice to the candidates who are not here. I would like to seek clarification from him, whether he would like to convene a seminar for presidential candidates to go and deliver this good speech -(Laughter)- to the candidates themselves, because I am not going to be a candidate and, therefore, I do not benefit from what he is saying. I thank you.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Well, I think my contribution is premised on this basis; that we are going to have amendment to the Presidential Elections Act. I was saying that it is not just the law which is important and I came out very clear – you know that you can make fantastic laws – you can have laws even made by God, but if the people who are subject to this law do not obey this law, then the law is as good as useless. I am, therefore, appealing that those of us, you or anybody outside this House who is offering him or herself under this law, should not only obey the law but conduct themselves in such a way that they preserve what we in Uganda really treasure most - national unity and integration, peace and stability. Without this, you are as good as a candidate who is going to come to power and undermine this. 

So, while my brother, hon. Mabikke was talking about a good and bad law for elections – which I support, I still argue that it is not the law which is the end in itself. The people who are subject to this law are even more important than the law itself and, therefore, the candidates who are going to conduct themselves as presidential candidates under this law must obey the law and ensure that they do what is fundamental in order for them to conduct themselves in a way which makes the stability, peace and development of this country paramount. I thank you for listening to me.

4.02
MS ALICE ALASO: (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for this opportunity. It is indeed an opportunity for me to raise in a very general way matters that concern the presidential elections in this country. 

I would like to straight away address the role of military and security agencies in our presidential elections. How I wish that there was a mechanism in law to curtail the involvement and indeed the abuse of security agencies when it comes to our presidential elections!

This country can recall very well the incidents that took place in Bulange during the last presidential elections when a security officer wielding a gun just went about shooting people. That is not an isolated case. There are many incidences when our soldiers and people from security agencies have indeed abused the mandate that they have been given by the people of Uganda and harassed us.

An ideal free and fair election, and a presidential one as such, should be without violence; it should be one free from intimidation; it should be one in which the power of incumbency is not misused and abused.

Yes, we have the laws and indeed I agree with hon. Omara Atubo to some extent; you can have the laws but where is the willingness to adhere to the law? I think that in our case, there should be a demonstration, for instance, by the incumbent President to ensure that he demonstrates to the rest of us how best to adhere to the laws of the land; that he reigns on the military and security agencies not to harass the voters and not to misuse their guns when campaigns are going on.

I also think that free and fair elections are not something that is an event. I think that it is a process that begins well ahead of time. In the case of our country, we are already in it. And as you know, it looks like everybody who is contesting or who is heading towards getting nominated as a presidential candidate is already up for grilling by the Police of this country. The Police and the media will tell you that, “We have been directed by the incumbent President –(Interjections)- to grill so and so.” So, they are grilling us – they are grilling those candidates on the directive of another candidate with whom they will be contesting.

I think this is not fair. The President of the Republic of Uganda should guide the CID and not issue directives for them to keep grilling everybody. This country will be here even tomorrow morning after we are all long gone; this country should be here. So, even if we lift term limits, there is a point beyond which we, somehow, will get finished; we will get out of the way and the country will go on. So, it is our prayer that we look at these presidential elections as a process and, therefore, everybody should be accorded an equal opportunity to freely express themselves.

Barely a month ago, we had a presidential candidate who was nearly beaten up - Dr Besigye was nearly beaten up during a rally. If we believe in elections - as we like saying - as a cornerstone for stability and national development – if we believe in free and fair elections that is; surely, there should be a guarantee by the state to protect the lives of those who offer themselves to participate in these processes.

Unfortunately in Uganda today, when you offer yourself to participate in these processes, you become public enemy number one. It is actually treasonable in this country to even think that you want to be a presidential candidate even before nomination. You can have rape charges on your head; you can have treason charges; you can have people just coming up and the State does not even condemn what they do when they want to beat up a presidential candidate. 

I think that the Government of Uganda should demonstrate to this country that we mean well in terms of presidential elections.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you so much. In relation to a presidential candidate who was nearly beaten up during a public rally - in fact the President was quoted in a government paper –(Interjections)- President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni was quoted in a government paper saying that he heard that someone in the rally was annoyed with Besigye’s lies so the person could not keep standing there. The person had to do something about it. In other words, the whole head of state was seemingly justifying hooliganism against another candidate. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MS ALASO: Thank you very much hon. Otto for that useful information. You do buttress my point and the point we are making is that it is not a favour by those in power, by the incumbent that we contest. It is indeed our own right and anyone of us wishing to contest should have the opportunity. But since a sitting Government exists, we really think that Government should do everything within the constitutional mandate to ensure the safety of all of us who get involved in these elections rather than leave us to hooligans or encourage hooligans to beat us. This contest is about ideas and I think that it is not healthy to introduce guns into the process.

The other issue I want to comment on is the question of access to public media. Our laws stipulate that the national broadcaster should be accessed by all presidential candidates. Unfortunately, because of the so-called “orders from above” and directives from wherever, you find that the national broadcaster and even the private media houses are intimidated. 

We have had occasions where presidential candidates nominated by their parties have gone on radio stations and the radio stations have been forced to apologise –(Interruption)

MR ISHAA OTTO: Thank you, hon. Alaso and thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I want to give is that last week on a Saturday, the president of my party, Ambassador Olara Otunnu, featured on a talk show on one of the local radio stations in Lira called Voice of Lango. This radio station is owned by hon. Felix Okot Ogong. Shortly after the talk show, there was a serious call from “above” informing Okot Ogong to be very mindful of using his radio to host Opposition political leaders. He was instructed to apologise to Government for asking Ambassador Olara Otunnu, which he did and he has been warned to ask opposition political leader. 

Hon. Okot Ogong, a former minister in the NRM Government and additionally, as we talk now, he is still being asked – in fact being forced to host other individuals to counter what Dr Otunnu shared with the people. In fact the following day he was asked to host the good RDC, Rt Col Ochola Odoch, to feature on that radio to counter Dr Olara Otunnu, which he did aptly. Thank you. That is the information, I wanted to give you.

MS NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure because the honourable member is referring to an honourable member who is not present. I know that in our Rules of Procedure a Member who is aggrieved always asks for permission to table a statement in Parliament so that he or she can be assisted. 

The name of hon. Okot Ogong has been referred to, but he is not here. So I thought that since hon. Okot Ogong is not here –(Interjections)– Mr Speaker, I know that we are in Parliament and I was given the permission to speak. So, I request to be protected. As I listened to my colleague, I got confused because the honourable member is referring to the owner of the radio station whom he says is in fear; is not here to tell us if he is indeed in fear or not. Are we procedurally correct to continue with that kind of debate? 

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member who is holding the Floor is the one who allowed the Member to give the information. But it was hearsay, as you can see; he was not there, but he was talking about things that he heard about hon. Okot Ogong.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I only want to appreciate the information that my colleagues have given me and I want to continue to belabour the point of media access during presidential election. 

I would like to state again that we have had cases besides what hon. Ishaa Otto has just told the House. We have had instances where political parties or their officials have been refunded money. There is a lot of intimidation going on even in the private media. When we pay for airtime, there comes “orders from above”, sometimes, I think it is from the minister; I am not sure. But when the orders from above come, they are forced to refund your money and you are denied media access. 

We have even had instances where our officials speaking on behalf of political parties are switched off while they are on radio station. They continue speaking from the studio yet someone had directed that they should be off-air. So when you come out to evaluate what you talked, the people say, “But we did not hear you all these two hours”. 

So, I think we should be very honest on whether we what to have free and fair elections or not, and whether we want a presidential contest or not. If we do not want, let us say, “We do not want a presidential contest”. 

Mr Speaker, the role of the RDCs is something we should focus on. Besides the security agencies whom I talked about a few minutes ago – before the Minister for Security came, I said to this House that the security agencies should style up; they are a major cause of election violence in our country, especially during the presidential elections. 

But having briefed the minister, I would like to address myself to a group of officials called RDCs. The role of the RDCs in our elections, especially the presidential elections is something to watch. The RDCs have on many occasions been documented in courts of laws for abusing their offices and intimidating people –(Interruption) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my counterpart for the presentation she made. I did not want to stand on a point of order just in case she had already substantiated it. But may I seek clarification about this blanket condemnation of security agencies as being responsible for violence in elections? 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, let me just respond to the hon. Minister for Security. Before he came, I was talking about election violence and intimidation, and I said that the root problem of violence in our presidential and sometimes parliamentary elections emanates from the security agencies. This happens when they misuse the authority that we have given them. 

Before he came, I quoted to this House the Bulange incident. I hope that the hon. Minister is aware that there is a one Lt Magara who shot people in Bulange in the last presidential elections. I also know that the minister is aware of the so many instances that were highlighted during the petition on the presidential elections in the Supreme Court. We will be willing, if only he would commit himself to act on them so that they do not abuse this power, to give him more information. But now it is four years down the road and he hasn’t acted; I am not sure if he will act on some of these matters. 

Mr Speaker, I was talking about the RDCS – (Interruption) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I think now I am rising on a point of order. Mr Speaker, I have listened very attentively to my comrade the Secretary-General of the FDC, hon. Alaso. I was very attentive because having missed the first presentation, I was not sure that I have not missed out very important details to justify this blanket accusation of security. 

From what she has just said, it is common knowledge that the gentleman who shot at some people in Mengo was arrested and tried. I would like to inform her that a crime is a personal matter; it is the individual that commits the crime and answers for his actions. So, is it in order for the honourable colleague to present a blanket accusation of criminal action on the part of security agencies because of actions of an individual against whom the state acted? Is she in order? 

THE SPEAKER: No, what was necessary here for you was to make a clarification which clarification you made, and I think now she knows the situation. (Laughter) 

MS ALASO: Mr Speaker, let me conclude by making an appeal although my honourable colleague wants to make me feel like my statements are misplaced. I have a right to appeal to him and to the Government of Uganda to assure this country that the next presidential elections will be violence free; will be intimidation free and as the political head of security agencies that he will take action when these matters are drawn to his attention. That is the appeal I would like to make. 

I also want to, in very final terms, re-emphasise the need for us to reflect on constitutional amendments especially the restoration of term limits; it is good for this country; it is good for democracy and it is the one thing that will allow this country test the peaceful transition to power. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the most important part of the process is the Committee Stage; that is where the law is being made. Don’t you think we should close this general debate and then we go to the Committee Stage? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: So, the motion is that the Bill entitled “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

Clause 1

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, before clause 1, the committee proposes an amendment to Section 6 of the Presidential Elections Act, sub-section (2).

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, again on the question of moving in a systematic manner and to follow these matters chronologically -(Interjections)- yes, before clause 1 and before the amendment proposed by the committee in Section 6, we are proposing amendments to Section 3 and Section 4. Procedurally it would be absurd for us to move to Section 6 when we still have amendments to Sections 3 and 4. I would pray with your permission that we proceed in that manner.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you saying that you have some amendments you want to move before we reach the substance of clause 1? 

MR LUKWAGO: Before we even reach Section 6 which –

THE CHAIRMAN: We are dealing with the text as it is in the Bill; so are you suggesting that even before clause 1 in the Bill as it is, you want some amendments. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, before clause 1, the committee has got amendments and we also have amendments. But I was saying even before we come to the amendments proposed by the committee before clause 1, we should start with ours because the committee starts with Section 6 and for us, we are starting with Section 3 and 4.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are proposing an amendment to Section 3 -(Interjections)- the amendments were circulated; the IPOD document and IPC, they are two documents; the big volume and the addendum.

We are moving an amendment to sub-section (1) by deleting the words: “Within 12 months before nomination date”. The justification here is that under a multi-party system, candidates should be free to hold meetings prior to nominations without any hindrance or time frame. That is our proposal. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean having a dress rehearsal. Is there any objection to that and the reasons? How would the provision read? 

MR LUKWAGO: For the benefit of the Members, Section 3(1) provides as follows: “An aspirant may consult in preparation for his or her nomination as a presidential candidate within 12 months before the nomination date.” We are seeking to delete “within 12 months” and leave “before nomination date”. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee considered the proposal as raised by the Shadow Attorney-General and the view of the committee was that after elections, people should concentrate on productive work. In fact, we even got some proposals from hon. Ekanya who was proposing it should be limited to six months and we rejected that. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But honestly, let us face it, if somebody thinks he is weak and therefore he wants three years to make consultations; are you going to arrest him? What are you going to do with him? He says, “I intend to stand as a presidential candidate in three years’ time; I am moving among the people consulting them. What will you do with him? (Laughter) No. What will you do with him? 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, politics can be such an engagement that you make your people do nothing but politics and they die of hunger -(Interjections)- let me tell you my own experience of how this country could face shortage of food just because people are running around. There are some of us in this House perhaps whose areas are not politically active but there are areas where you can have 20 or 30 people campaigning for primaries and they started in May last year -(Laughter)- yes! And if you get people who are trying to be the president and they are leading parties and you have 37 parties in this county and they are all running around, you can have chaos. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Members, if somebody starts his consultations, how are you going to enforce what you are trying to provide for here? 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, for instance, hon. Kasule Sebunya finished his campaigns last year and he has –(Interjections)- really I finished campaigning and contenders for the next five years started -(Interjections)- there is nothing wrong but the country must not be an electioneering country. We should save people some time because much as we want to experiment with multi-partyism this small country cannot remain an experiment of campaigns. (Laughter) If I am expected to stand in the next five years and then I start campaigns and consultations, when will people work? 

I do not support the amendment. I think let us remain with one year for a presidential candidate and maybe six months for the parliamentarians. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but hon. Member, you have merits in what you are saying. I am only asking you: how you are going to enforce this? Because, what does consultation mean? I may consult one or two people and move to people’s houses to consult them. How are you going to enforce that, “You do not go to people’s houses to consult them”? This is my problem. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: When I visited Dokolo District I was really hurt. Mr Chairman, first of all, the provision as it is which my honourable colleague is seeking to amend is only seeking to change the amount of time available. He is not seeking to do away with the requirement, but the rest of the provisions of that Section 3 remain. 

The purpose of this provision was, as the Bible says, “there is a time for everything.” There is a time to campaign; there is a time to elect and to vote and there must be a time to do other things. I have this – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, help me to understand. The title here is: “aspirant consultation.” Do you presuppose that this aspirant will go and register with the commission and say, “I am an aspirant,” for you to be able to follow him up? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes. Because if you read the rest of the section that is what it says. 

THE CHAIRMAN: That he registers before nomination? 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I can read it for you, Mr Chairman. What he read and he is seeking to amend is sub-section (1). Sub-section (2) reads as follows: “While consulting under that sub-section, a presidential aspirant, may: a) carry out nation wide consultations; b) prepare his or her manifesto and other campaign materials; c) raise funds for his or her campaigns through lawful means; d) convene meetings of national delegates.” 

Sub-section (3): “While consulting, the aspirant shall introduce himself or herself to the commission and notify the relevant local council and the Police of the area to which he or she goes.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, suppose I do not document myself? Is there a system of documenting an aspirant? My worry is to make a legislation that we cannot enforce. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, even if there was need to amend in order to accommodate your concern, it would be to amend to create an offence -(Interjections)- yes! That anyone who breaches these provisions would be committing an offence -(Interjections)– an illegal – please! That is the only way. Otherwise, this is a provision that is -(Interjections)- that already exists and has been in practice. To the best of my knowledge, surely even people who are aspiring to be president must be lawful. Yes -(Interruption) 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I thank you hon. Minister for giving way. I want to seek clarification based on the guidance that has been provided by the Chair. Beyond that we know that when you are head of state, everywhere you go you do both; you do the national duty but you do not forget to tell the people your party. Therefore, you are campaigning. 

Two, you are not going to fund an aspirant. Where is the worry? Then, you are worried over an issue that is going to be undertaken by an individual here in Uganda and outside Uganda. Quite honestly, how are you going to make sure that you enforce that provision and for what? I was wondering, when my dear professor, the hon. Kabwegyere, talked about time for work. This Government does not as a mandate provide employment for everybody. What employment are you talking about you people -(Interjections)- it does not. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I think what we can do is that we can enforce this provided we have a system of documenting aspirants that any person who is going to stand as a candidate for presidential elections shall first register as an aspirant so that we are able to – yes! Anyway let us try it. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The point, which always bogs my mind, is lopsided because if you are to go by the proposal of the hon. Amama Mbabazi, it can only save an incumbent. We cannot criminalise anybody for aspiring to be a presidential candidate. This is just having an idea that actually I may be interested in standing as a President. I can harbour that idea for even five years and in the course of the consultations, I might actually realise that my project is not viable -(Laughter)- and I withdraw. Like many - I am surprised – I wish hon. Omara Atubo were here; oh! He is there - you remember he was also an aspirant at one time. (Laughter) He consulted and found out that it was not actually possible. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: You see hon. Katuntu, supposing somebody wants to be a comedian who is acting; how are you going to deal with him? 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, according to hon. Amama Mbabazi that will be criminal. In fact the hon. Okot Ogong has been very clear for the last four years and has even been holding meetings. (Laughter) The suggestion of the hon. Amama Mbabazi - I know he is the Minister for Security and is sometimes very enthusiastic about arresting -(Laughter)– but let us play decent politics and competition. You know the world is not about arresting people. (Laughter) Do not wake up every day and imagine that once you compete with somebody and you disagree, he is therefore a criminal. Really, it is about competition. What we need is to have guidelines. In fact this provision as it is has been redundant; it has been redundant. Why? It is because it is not enforceable. 

Two, there is no law, and hon. Amama Mbabazi should know this, he is a senior lawyer. You see the efficacy of any law is its enforcement and applicability. That is a general principle of law. For anybody who went to law school, if you have got a law which you cannot enforce, which is not applicable, it is no law. (Applause) So, Mr Chairman, as I summarise, many people have been going to radios; they have been holding small meetings trying to say, “Look here, my candidate - one of them is the President-General of DP - he has had this aspiration of becoming a president for almost the last ten years and he has made it public. So what the hon. Amama Mbabazi is seeking is to criminalise that aspiration and ambition and that is criminal on hon. Amama Mbabazi’s part. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, why don’t we put it on hold as we are thinking about it and then move to others that are easier? Meanwhile, you think about it. 

MR ISHAA OTTO: Mr Chairman, there is already an amendment on the Floor and you can see that there is general consensus in the House apart from one Member from the other side. (Laughter) And so to stand over it would be wasting time. The Electoral Commission wants this law as soon as it can be passed. So, I think that we should just move on. I would actually beg you, Mr Chairman, to put the question; or hon. Mbabazi just concedes. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will obviously not match the language and style of my colleague, hon. Katuntu, and the insinuations in his references to me. But I think that this is a very important and critical point on which we should as much as we can generate consensus because it applies to us on this side today; it applies to you on the other side tomorrow. So, I think the proposal by the Chair that we stand over it is a correct one and we accept it. We stand over this and we go over it until next time. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, we put it on hold; we shall revert to it. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The next amendment is in respect to Section 4, sub-section (4), paragraph (g), and for the benefit of Members, I will read it verbatim: “A person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person has within the seven years immediately preceding the elections been convicted by a competent court for contravention of any law relating to elections conducted by the Commission.” -(Interjections)- It is parliamentary; I know what I am talking about. 

For the benefit of the Members, I will assist you. Sub-section (3) provides as follows: “For the purposes of sub-section (1), a person is qualified to be a Member of Parliament if that person is a citizen of Uganda; is a registered voter; has completed a minimum of formal education.” 

And for one to stand as a President, you must be qualified as a Member of Parliament. This law went ahead and said in sub-section (4)(g): “A person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person has within the seven years immediately preceding the elections been convicted by a competent court for contravention of any law relating to elections conducted by the Commission.” 

The amendment we are moving is to the effect that a person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person - we are seeking to substitute paragraph (g) of sub-section (4) as follows - has within ten years immediately preceding the election been found by a court of competent record either in course of trying an election petition or in criminal proceedings to have personally committed an electoral offence or illegal act or in any other way participated in election malpractices -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, I see people who rig elections. 

The justification is that we want to bring this law in line with -(Interruption)

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Chairman, the Shadow Attorney-General was supposed to provide us with the amendments. We have been trying to go through the amendments he has circulated and this is one of those that we do not see. Is it procedurally correct for us to proceed without getting copies of what he is tabling? 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, first and foremost, these are amendments, which were taken to the committee. It is not a new amendment and the chairman can bear witness to this. 

Secondly, we supplied an addendum to the IPOD document entitled IPC memorandum and people have got copies of this. 

MR EKANYA: As a supplementary, yesterday I requested that we need to meet. Today I went to the office of the Government Chief Whip so that we could meet but he was not there. This was so that we could confer and have consensus as we agreed yesterday. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukwago, are you trying to amend sub-section (4) to cover parliamentary and presidential elections? Is that what you are trying to do? Because sub-section (4) says, “A person is not qualified for elections as a Member of Parliament if that person … then you start from (a) to (g). Are you now saying that this provision should also cover the presidential elections? That is only for (g) or for all the circumstances enumerated in 4(4)? 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, there is no contradiction with all these aspects provided for in the preceding clauses from (a) up to (f).

THE CHAIRMAN: No, because you see 4(4) as it is now is for Parliament and we are dealing with presidential elections. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we have proposals to amend the Parliamentary Elections Act –

THE CHAIRMAN: We are not dealing with that. We have not got to that stage; we are dealing with presidential elections. Unless what you are saying is that you want to add president on Section 4(4), otherwise as it is now, it is restricted to a Member of Parliament. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, that is a question of arrangement of the provisions because we intended to move – there will be amendments to the Parliamentary Elections Act but now we are dealing with this. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I am raising this because you say you want to amend 4. I have looked at 4 and (g) is under 4(4), which is about Parliament. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, if I may add, it should be the other way round. What we are dealing with here are elections relating to presidential candidates, and what they are actually specifying is that in order to be one, you have to also qualify as a Member of Parliament; and they are informing us who a Member of Parliament is by way of qualification. In other words, you cannot substantively begin talking about the qualifications of a Member of Parliament in this Bill. It can only be consequential. 

After we have debated the Parliamentary Elections Bill because we have time to do so and when there are consequential amendments, they can always be effected in either law. You cannot substantially debate the qualifications of a Member of Parliament here when you are not actually dealing with the Bill responsible for elections of Members of Parliament. 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I appreciate what my honourable colleague and learned friend, hon. Lukwago is trying to do but I agree with the Attorney-General. If you amended the Parliamentary Elections Act in the way that hon. Lukwago is trying to, then in effect you would have applied that amendment in the Presidential Elections Act because this Act says a person should be qualified to be a Member of Parliament for him to qualify to be a President. 

If you are going to introduce new qualifications for membership of Parliament, you do it under the Parliamentary Elections Act. You don’t do it under the Presidential Elections Act. But once you have provided for it under the Parliamentary Elections Act, automatically it will affect whoever wants to be the President under the Presidential Elections Act. 

MR RUHINDI: Thank you so much, hon. Ben Wacha. Article 80 of the Constitution spells out the qualifications of Members of Parliament. You cannot proceed to amend the qualifications of Members of Parliament unless you also reflect on Article 80. I just wanted to draw that to your attention. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I think you are right because in any case, you are trying to enlarge the disqualification clause contrary to what the Constitution provides for. You can’t do it because, for instance, in the Constitution it says within seven years. So you cannot now move from seven years and go to ten years when the Constitution says seven years and by an ordinary Act you say ten. I think we abandon it as it will contravene the Constitution. 

MR LUKWAGO: I understand that, Mr Chairman. The principle which we are talking about is there. We appreciate that technical bit and it is only the aspect of ten years yet it talks of seven years. The other aspect, which requires the constitutional amendment, is only seven years. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t you move to another one, which we can deal with? 

MR LUKWAGO: We are bringing it to seven and if possible, we can create a separate one so that it is seven years to be in tandem with what is provided for in the Constitution. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, then the law is there. Why do you then labour when the law is there? Let us apply the law as it is because you will achieve what you want. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think the word used under the present law is “convicted”. This is under (g) and that is where the problem is because once you use the word “conviction” or “convicted”, you must have gone through a criminal process and convicted. But what this amendment would have sought to introduce is, for example, there has been an election petition and the trial court found Abdu Katuntu – God forbid - to have committed an electoral offence, I do not again have to go through another criminal process. 

THE CHAIRMAN: If for instance the Constitution talks about strict proof, you cannot then talk about proof because the language in the Constitution is “convicted.” So, you can’t even just make it a conviction; it may not be easy to achieve. Can we move?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move –

THE CHAIRMAN: The proposed amendment had aborted. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman -(Mr Kigyagi rose_)– you can continue your rigging with impunity -

THE CHAIRMAN: He is wasting your time. Let us proceed.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Chairman. We are moving an amendment to Section 4 sub-sections (17) (18) and (20). For the benefit of the Members probably who do not have this Act, I could read them out.

THE CHAIRMAN: Read what you want to amend.

MR LUKWAGO: What we are proposing, Mr Chairman, is that sub-section (17) (18) and (20) be repealed. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Read them. 

MR LUKWAGO: Section 5 provides as follows: “Under the Movement political system, a person who is elected president while he or she is a member of a local government council or who holds a public office shall resign that office before assuming the Office of President.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Why do you want to remove that?

MR LUKWAGO: We are now under a multi-party system. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But the Movement Political System will return. The provisions of the Constitution are clear. We may hold a referendum and people may decide to return to the movement system. This is the law that will be used in the circumstances. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, these are matters which were discussed together with the NRM – 

THE CHAIRMAN: They were discussed but I am pointing it to you that by the Constitution, we may have a referendum saying that we return to the Movement System because these are systems that are provided for in the Constitution. 

MR LUKWAGO: But, Mr Chairman, they were agreed upon.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you agreed upon them, that was an oversight. But these systems are provided for in the Constitution. I think this has aborted. Next amendment! 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes that sub-section (2) of Section 6 should be amended by inserting at the end of the subsection the following: “… in any case not later than three days before the polling day.” In essence, the sub-section would read as follows: “The commission shall also transmit to each returning officer as soon as practicable after nomination days a sufficient number of ballot papers for each constituency within the electoral district of the returning officer, in any case not later than three days before the polling day.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Should I put the question to it?

MR EKANYA: No, Mr Chairman. I –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Can I first supplement and then you come in. Mr Chairman, this specificity is very necessary but we have also to bear in mind the challenges that the Electoral Commission faces in enforcing some of these provisions. Mind you, materials have got to be taken to the sites; they have to be taken care of; there must be security and there must be many things to be put in place. So, after necessary consultations - and the chairperson will agree with me on that - I propose that we reduce this period of three days to “… in any case not more than 24 hours before the polling day.” 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, I concede.

MR EKANYA: I have no problem and we really want to support it but we want to be very clear to say “sufficient.” I want to beg the chairperson that we add the words: “The ballot papers which tally with the registered voters as per the register” so that we avoid the Electoral Commission distributing ballot papers in excess which leads to rigging. Let us send ballot papers which tally with the number of the registered voters of that place. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But there should be some extra ones because some may be spoilt. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, we want to avoid stuffing of ballot boxes. We want to ensure that the Electoral Commission does not spend excess money and print ballot papers, which are not necessary and that is the purpose of having a register. So, the ballot papers should tally with the registered voters so that we avoid the ambiguity of sufficiency. We have had situations – 

THE CHAIRMAN: But do you foresee a situation when a ballot paper is spoilt? Because if there are 100 voters and you send 100 ballot papers and you happen to have this kind of misfortune of five or so being spoilt, what do you do with those voters? I think they can put extra ballot papers and I  think what you need to do is to know the serial numbers of ballot papers sent to a polling station rather than sending the exact number. We may have a misfortune of ballot papers being spoilt.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I will seek the indulgence of my acting Leader of the Opposition to withdraw that amendment.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I want to give in to the Deputy Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, on page 2 of the IPOD document we are proposing an amendment to Section 15 by repealing paragraph (c) of sub-section (1) section 15. Section (15) is about allocation of symbols and colours, “Where an election is contested, the commission shall as soon as practicable after the nomination days –
a) 	Allocate to each candidate the symbol of his or her political organisation or political party in the case of a candidate sponsored by a registered political organisation or a political party;

b) 	Allocate to a candidate who is not sponsored by a political organisation or political party a symbol or colour chosen by him or her; or 

c) 	In any other case allocate such symbol or colour as it considers appropriate.”

The justification here is that we have two categories of candidates who are specified in (a) and (b) sponsored by parties and independents; (c) is redundant, those other categories are not known and we have had cases where the commission has used it to allocate symbols to independents and they have caused litigation in a number of cases so (c) should be deleted.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, we concede.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

MR TASHOBYA: Before clause 1, Section 16, sub-section (3) should be amended by deleting the words “seven days” and replacing them with the words, “ten days.”

The justification is to increase the number of days in which the returning officer is to display the list of the presiding officers and polling assistants appointed.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: We have an amendment to Section 16 still. On page 2, we are proposing to substitute sub-section (3) with the following: “Each returning officer shall transmit to the commission, at least 30 days before the polling day, a list of the names of all presiding officers and polling assistants appointed under the Electoral Commission Act for each polling station in the constituency with names and numbers of their respective polling stations.” 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I want clarification from the Shadow Attorney-General. I see under paragraph (g) of his proposed amendment, Section 16(a) which says, “Section 16 of the principal Act is amended – 

a)	By substituting the words 90 days with the words 120 days.”

The justification is to allow time for campaigns. Is he abandoning this? If he is abandoning it, I would crave your indulgence to introduce it. This is because with the increasing number of districts, a presidential candidate cannot really cover those in 90 days.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for that proposal. Although the districts have increased, the geographical area of the country remains the same and we also have to know that campaigning takes time and resources so 90 days is adequate.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I beg the indulgence of my chair. For example, a presidential candidate can have one day per district. If you increase the number of districts that means that even if Iganga District was originally one and now they are three, he might have three days in each of the districts. Whereas geographically there is no expansion, administrative units have increased and if you are to campaign you need another network to organise that particular campaign.

MR RUHINDI: This administratively sounds a good proposal but all know what we go through. Down there when it is actual campaign time, there is tension on the ground particularly for our people who move with us everyday, 120 days my colleagues is not a short time.
 
MR WACHA: I thought about this but we are all politicians and we know what campaign means. If you campaign, your campaigners want you to go to every part of the Gombolola and now the people we are talking about are already traversing the country anyway. We just want to make every part of the country to feel that they are also as important as the other areas, give them the time they need. What logic do we have for saying that we now have 112 districts and my presidential candidate takes only one hour in my district? Do I feel as equal as the other districts where you will spend two days? What logic do I have?

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we fear increased days? What is the fear here?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: The fear is that we have already deliberated on the time before campaigns for the presidential candidates. We have said that we have got a full year or even more. We are now increasing the time of campaigns to four months which has financial implications. Maybe my friends are telling us that they have got too much money – 

THE CHAIRMAN: You are considering this financial implication. Is it mandatory that somebody must do that? It will depend on his decision. This is permissive – you may or you may not. So, what is the harm?

MR ODONGA OTTO: With new districts being created, assuming we have 215 districts, every county becoming a district means eventually we may have to spend the whole year campaigning. I would still think the worst case scenario should be to leave the 90 days because we cannot spend four months or a whole year campaigning. In any case, Ugandans make up their minds on who to vote the moment they are nominated. Like in Pader, assuming we create Patong District, it is just 40 minutes drive between the two districts meaning you can have a rally in the morning here and in the afternoon there. I would really desist from the idea of increasing the number of days just because the districts are increasing. In any case, the districts may still increase and so, I would support maintaining the 90 days.

MR EKANYA: As the Leader of the Opposition, that is not our position but an independent opinion of hon. Odonga Otto. We still stand to defend the position by hon. Ben Wacha and very strongly because it is important that freedom of speech and assembly as provided for in the Constitution is guaranteed and our people are not denied opportunity to interact with presidential candidates. Suppose we have 30 presidential candidates like we have over 30 political parties – the Electoral Commission and security need adequate time to organise and avoid a situation where you have one presidential candidate –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: With all due respect to those who have proposed 90 days, experience has shown that campaigns are very exhausting that some candidates even lose their voices and they will need a rest – (Laughter)- it is a fact; it is a human reaction. You know that our climate is changing and during the time of the campaigns, we may have roads, which are not accessible, the rallies can be affected by the rains or storms. So we should give allowance to give any candidate time to do effective campaigns. I do not see anything wrong in adding another 10, 15 or 20 days. I think four months is adequate because these people are human beings and we need to give them time and there is no financial implication. I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Anybody who has got involved in campaigns realises that after going out in the field for four or five days, you need a rest. You also need time to go back to your family for a day or two. If you are running for 90 days, that means you are running non-stop - but you need to go like you cover 10 districts, you have two or three days of rest and then you go and campaign. That is what happens even in parliamentary elections and campaigns. I really implore my colleagues to really make the other side to see the reasoning. In any case, nobody is forcing you to use the four months and in case you think you can cover this country in one week, please then you cover your country in one week.

MR BYABAGAMBI: I think the Electoral Commission has already budgeted and because this money is contained in the coming budget, the presidential candidates are funded by the Electoral Commission, the security is by the Electoral Commission. Therefore, increasing to 120 days means that they have to look for more resources to cater for that one month.

Secondly, we are coming to May. When you increase to 120 days, it means the nominations must take place in October because elections must be there in February. You can imagine the remaining time that we now have and for the Electoral Commission the enormous job they are going to have to do because they have to make sure that whatever they were going to do in six months must now be done in five months. I think we are putting too much pressure on the Electoral Commission and they will not handle this matter financially and also the human resource may not manage.

MRS KIRYAPAWO: We are now looking at the candidates getting fatigued and candidates wanting to get holidays but we are not considering the people because imagine four months and people are doing nothing but going to attend candidates’ meetings. People are doing nothing and yet they have to look for money to take their children to school. Four months is a complete season and people are not doing anything but going to listen to candidates. If we are looking at the 90 days and after the presidential candidates then we have parliamentary elections, you will find that we are going to take a whole year. How many days will you want? You are now just looking at the presidential elections, what about yourselves? Are you going to ask for two or three months? (Interjections) Yes, because we are even creating sub-countries, parishes and villages in constituencies. Will you go village to village? (Laughter) So, we have to consider everything because 90 days is quiet adequate for the campaigns. I thank you. (Applause) 

MR GUTOMOI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I think four months is better. I am now aware that even some candidates who are trying to lobby for elections in their delegates’ conferences have been asked to record statements with the Police. So, I wonder what will happen when one feels that another candidate has told lies about his integrity and you are supposed to record a statement with the Police station - that needs time! So, if we do not give these people enough time –(Laughter)- then how are you going to the police station where sometimes you are supposed to go three or four times and in any case, some candidates will be asked to go and attend court sessions. Unless we are going to say when there are suspected or alleged lies or court cases, they are suspended until after the elections. If some of the candidates have pending court cases that have not been suspended and if the alleged lies have not been taken   seriously and suspended during the campaigns, then we have to run these presidential elections for four months. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Onzima

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman -

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, hon. Ben Wacha.

MR WACHA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. This was a very serious motion, but as a Member of the Legal Committee, I also noted that the Electoral Commission had started certain processes. Therefore, the timing might be affected. Maybe we should consider this in the next Parliament. (Applause) Therefore, for the time being, should God allow me to come back, I withdraw this. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. 

MR KIGYAGI: Mr Chairman, I want to support the motion.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I now put the question that Section 16 as amended - do you have another amendment?

MR LUKWAGO: Yes, Mr Chairman. The amendment as indicated on pages 2 and 3 of the IPOD document - I beg that I move all the amendments at a go because they relate to the same sub-section. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you read them.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged, Mr Chairman. We are seeking to substitute sub-section (3) of Section 16 to read as follows: “Each returning officer shall submit to the commission, at least 45 days before the polling day, a list of the names of all presiding officers and polling assistants appointed under the Electoral Commission Act for each polling station in the constituency with the names and numbers of their respective polling station.” 

We propose immediately after sub-section (3) to insert the following: 
“(3)(a) The commission shall publish the names submitted under sub-section (3) in the Gazette at least 21 days before the polling day and invite objection, if any.
 
b)	A person may within seven days after publication of the names of the presiding officers and polling assistants under sub-section (3)(a) lodge a complaint against the appointment of a presiding officer or polling assistant to the returning officer.
c)	The returning officer shall within two days after receipt of the complaint consider the objections and inform the complainant of his or her decision in writing.
d)	A person dissatisfied with the decision of the returning officer may appeal to the commission within four days after the decision is made and the commission shall handle the appeal and make its decision within five days after receipt of the appeal.
e)	The decision of the commission shall be final.
f)	The returning officer shall fix a copy of the list referred to in paragraph (3)(a) at his or her office in the constituency.”

The justification is to enhance transparency and effectiveness in the electoral process and to give ample time to persons to give their objections against certain persons appointed as presiding officers or polling assistants.

Mr Chairman, this amendment will give an opportunity to all stakeholders in the electoral process to have a say regarding the people being appointed as polling officials. So, in this particular case, we need a Gazette to be given and time given for people to raise objections. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Attorney-General, what is your view? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, you can bear with me that 30 days, first of all, is too long.

Two, the financial implications of addressing the proposed amendments from (3)(a) to (3)(f) proposed by the shadow attorney-general are colossal.

Finally, I wish that when the Shadow Attorney-General is making a proposal, he first reads the existing legislation because it is quite clear and adequate. It says – this is the one, which has just been amended from seven to ten. The proposals have already been carried; you are not even recommitting. 

But it says, “At least seven,” which now becomes ten days “before the polling day,” each returning officer, shall –
a)	Fix at his or her office, within the district and in each constituency, a list of the names of all the presiding officers and polling assistants appointed under the Commission Act for each polling station in the electoral district with the names and numbers of their respective polling stations to enable persons raise any objections they think are necessary.” This is precisely what you are talking about.

b)	 Permit free access to and afford opportunity for the inspection of the list by the candidates for their agents and any other interested persons during normal working hours.

We should, to some extent, leave some latitude to the Electoral Commission otherwise we are going to make the electoral process completely unmanageable - from one station to another, from one stage to another, objections, tribunals, objections, tribunals! You are not going to do anything in the election process.    

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t I put the question to it? 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like the Attorney-General to help me because the parent Act says in 16(3)(a) that persons will be enabled to raise objections they think are necessary, but in this proposal that the Shadow Attorney-General has presented, we make a proposal about when to dispose of the objections. The parent Act is silent about how and when to dispose of the objections. Wouldn’t it be necessary that at least we provide for the disposal of those objections before the polling day? 

MR RUHINDI: Certainly, the Electoral Commission is in charge of the electoral process and it will have in-built mechanisms for addressing such objections. We have already passed a provision of – but I don’t think that one actually is relevant to this particular situation of tribunals and so on and so forth, at parish level and so on and so forth. But in my opinion, objections have always been addressed appropriately. My worry is, fettering the discretion of how the Electoral Commission functions in a sense also impairs its independence to do its work and so on and so forth and completely impairs the electoral process. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, there are suggestions that there are sufficient provisions covering the situation. I think I should put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

Section 16, as amended, agreed to.

Section 17

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to Section 17 of the Presidential Elections Act that sub-section (ii) of Section 17 should be amended by inserting at the end of the sub-section the following: “Where the candidate is sponsored by a political party or organisation, the notification shall be signed and filled by the secretary-general of the political party or organisation or any other person authorised by the political party.” 

The justification is to involve a political party or organisation in the withdrawal of a candidate. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 17, as amended, agreed to

Clause 1

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 1 of the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, in clause 19(a) which should be re-drafted as follows: “Withdrawal or disqualification of candidates for elections:

1.	Where as a result of withdrawal or disqualification of other candidates for election there remains only one candidate, the returning officer shall immediately declare the remaining candidate elected unopposed.

2.	A presidential candidate who is aggrieved by the decision of the Electoral Commission to disqualify him or her shall have the right to petition the Supreme Court for redress within a period of four days of the decision of the Commission.

3.	The Chief Justice shall immediately upon receipt of the petition appoint a tribunal constituting of three Judges to handle the petition provided that the petition shall be disposed of expeditiously and in any case within a period not exceeding ten days.”

The justification is to provide a mechanism under which a disqualified candidate can be heard. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question – 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I have dialogued with my colleague, the chairperson of the committee, and we realised that we sustain the amendment to clause 1 of 19(a) but we drop two and three because they are actually not necessary; they are more or less redundant. After the disqualification or withdrawal, a successful candidate is declared and once that is done, then the normal process of petition commences. In other words, then we proceed under Article 104 of the Constitution and section 59 of the Act itself, in which case the elements of disqualification come up. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the decision taken by the Commission to disqualify a candidate is a serious one; a candidate for presidential elections and declaring the other one unopposed without any challenge – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, as we have said, if we declare somebody elected unopposed and you are aggrieved, you appeal immediately. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, there are two things here; what he is talking about is an election petition; there you would be challenging the election of that candidate. In that case, it would be very unfortunate if this person is not given room to appeal before the other candidate is declared a winner. It would be very unfortunate to take the decision arbitrarily.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, there are two issues to look at. One is the act of disqualification. And the second is the act of declaring the other one unopposed. Where does a person who is aggrieved or disqualified go? What sort of remedy is available to him? Is it for purposes – for example if you go ahead and declare the other candidate a winner, then he can maybe just be compensated in terms of damages because someone will already be on the seat.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. If one is declared elected unopposed and, therefore, becomes the President, one is aggrieved by this declaration because he is deprived of competing for the position. So, if he succeeds in proving that the declaration was improperly made, it means the declaration of the other candidate is nullified and the process of election of a President is redone.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman that is where the problem is. If we take that route, that means you will take three or four years to dispose of that process because there is already a sitting President. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, there is no sitting President because after the election of a President in a Presidential election, the one who continues to be a President is the President who was elected previously, and he is given time to hand over. The reason he is given that time is to provide time within which the appeal has to be disposed of. 

If you elect a President at the end of February or beginning of March, he does not take over until 12th May. The reason for giving that period is to give time to the Supreme Court which is the trial and final court to hear and declare. Therefore, the taking over will not have come. He will be a President elect, but not a President. 

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to comment on this issue. If we say for example that a person is disqualified maybe for lack of papers, and you petition, that means you will waste the time for elections. If the elections are scheduled for say, 22nd February and the nomination is done three months before, where will you get the time to go to court? That means that you will extend the time for presidential elections, which will be against the Constitution. 

So, I think the best thing is to wait until the elections are done and then you can petition. You are given three months for your grievances and so on. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have no problem with withdrawal, but the whole aspect of disqualification. First of all, the ground is not clear because as of the Constitution Article 102, there are already qualifications for being a president. By the time you get nominated, you already qualify to stand.  What does this provision anticipate to be the grounds for disqualification which already the Constitution would have qualified you to be registered? Withdrawal is okay but the question of disqualification -(Interjections)- Article 104 is about petitions after election, but I think there is sense in the committee —

THE CHAIRMAN: The example would be, you bring your papers but the people who are supposed to have nominated you are not registered voters - then you are disqualified; yes, you can only be disqualified.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think once the Electoral Commission has nominated you, it has finished and you are now a candidate; and if anybody is aggrieved, then there is a process for him to challenge the decision of the Electoral Commission. But for the Electoral Commission to nominate you, then it goes back to look into its own decision to disqualify you will be highly irregular.

In fact you are causing problems for the Electoral Commission because once they have nominated you and they call to say, “We have now disqualified you”; they will be accused of so many things. Ordinarily, if any person vested with authority under the law has taken a decision, anybody aggrieved by that decision should be allowed to follow a process to challenge that decision.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are you saying the commission should never disqualify after nominations?

MR KATUNTU: In fact it is a one way traffic. It is like the Electoral Commission having declared you as a winning candidate or a duly elected president or Member of Parliament, and then it goes to look into that decision that actually it was wrong to declare you a winner -(Interjections)- yes, because it is now looking into its own decision.

THE CHAIRMAN: It is the court, which would decide -

MR KATUNTU: Absolutely, Mr Chairman, that is what we are saying -(Mr Byabagambi rose_)- hon. Byabagambi, you will have your opportunity; just wait. The difference of where you go and where I go, we talk —(Laughter)- once the Electoral Commission has taken a decision, it has declared you duly nominated and, therefore, a candidate. Any person who is dissatisfied with that decision can now challenge it through a court.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am just seeking clarification from you. The disqualification I am seeing coming from the Electoral Commission may not relate to reasons that made you be nominated. It may relate to your conduct during elections. For example, if you walk and go and kill another candidate in broad daylight, who do we leave that power to disqualify to? I just want you to empower the argument -(Interjections)- there are election offences. I really want to be helped, where the conduct of a candidate during elections cannot be dealt with by the Electoral Commission. That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR KATUNTU: I think the Chairman would be in a better position to answer that clarification, but to me, the Electoral Commission is only mandated to organise a free and fair election. So, if you go on committing a crime, then the crime agencies take up the case.

The point I am labouring to make –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: What is the practice, Mr Chairman? The practice is, you go; you are nominated by the Electoral Commission and it says, “You are a successful candidate”, and once you are nominated as a successful candidate, it will be wrong then to say that we are withdrawing your candidature as the Electoral Commission. The best way is, if somebody is aggrieved then let the process of the court take its course.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, what happens ordinarily –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: I thank you very much. It is not true that once the Electoral Commission nominates you as a candidate, it cannot disqualify you. We have had incidences where the Electoral Commission has nominated candidates, especially parliamentary candidates, and then new information comes in about qualifications, maybe the age and others. 

The Electoral Commission has disqualified two people I know. The Ntungamo case in the Sixth Parliament -(Interjections)- yes, I know; it is the same Electoral Commission and even in the Seventh Parliament, the Hoima case. I think there was a problem with the documents and this information came in after these people had been nominated and declared as candidates by the Electoral Commission. If there is new information that comes in, I think the Electoral Commission should be given leeway to determine whether or not, basing on the new information, it can disqualify the candidate, presidential or otherwise.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the days for nomination of candidates are even gazetted and they are given as two or three. Those are the days when the Electoral Commission is supposed to be taking the decision of either rejecting a nomination or accepting it and after accepting and declaring you a duly nominated candidate, they have been giving some certificates to show that actually I am now a candidate. There is no way in my view, reasonably, that they would sit again on any other day and say they are going through another process of nomination -

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Katuntu, the situation of disqualification by the Commission would come this way. Suppose you have one day or two days where nominations should take place; a person comes and he says, “I am a candidate”, and he tenders in his documents. He is accepted and he is nominated. Then another one comes in to be nominated, they look at his documents, they disqualify him from being nominated and there remains only one candidate whose papers have been accepted. What do you expect the Commission to do at the end of the day?

That is a disqualification, when they reject your papers when you had gone to be nominated. But then if you are aggrieved - because at the end of the day, the nomination was for one day; they only have one candidate, Erias Lukwago, having been properly nominated, and then they say, “Hon. Erias Lukwago is the President, elected unopposed”. That is the situation where the Commission can disqualify you.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the situation you are talking about is catered for under the Constitution in Article 103 clause 6(a) “Notwithstanding the provisions of clause 4 and 6 of this Article where in a presidential election, only one candidate is nominated after the close of nominations, the Electoral Commission shall declare that candidate elected unopposed.”

So, if one is disqualified before nomination that means that person was not at all a candidate. He is not a candidate and, therefore, the person who is nominated is -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the operating word here is “disqualification”. You cannot be disqualified before you qualify and to qualify is to be duly nominated. That is only when you can be disqualified - after you have qualified or -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for giving way. I think there are two things here. There is failure to qualify and then there is disqualification. For example, I am sorry to use this, Mr Ssebaggala failed to qualify. He was not disqualified. So, disqualification only applies to someone who has been nominated. Those who fail to qualify will remain aspirants. I just wanted to give that information. 

MR KATUNTU: I am just -(Interjections)- I will hand over to the honourable minister then -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Chairperson, and thank you hon. Katuntu. I think it will be helpful to the House also, in looking at this matter - to look at who the aggrieved parties are. We are in a multiparty dispensation and if this disqualification is coming within the nomination period, it is not just about that individual whose papers are not up-to-date or who has a case. It is also about the parties that sponsor and, therefore, the possibilities of making a substitution within the nomination period. That is what I wanted to -

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe what we can do to clear this one, is that we may say that where, as a result of withdrawal of a candidate for election, or where only one candidate is nominated, you can do that formulation; or where only one candidate is nominated, the returning officer shall immediately declare that candidate elected unopposed. I think we can formulate -

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I have been straining hard to follow the logic of the presentation and I really need to be helped. We all accept clause 1, “Where, as a result of withdrawal or disqualification of candidates for election, there remains only one ….” What this means is that the nomination process has been completed, so Katuntu and Mbabazi are already candidates -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS: For which post?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: For Secretary-General of NRM maybe. (Laughter) So, what is being proposed here - this appears to be accepted that where, as a result of withdrawal, in other words where the nomination process has been completed, then there are two possibilities under clause 1 which we are all accepting; one, for the candidate to withdraw, which is very clear, and if only one remains, the election official declares that one elected unopposed. Two, if the other nominated candidate is disqualified then -(Interjections)- wait, I am coming. Then similarly, the remaining candidate is declared elected unopposed. 

You know that was not the issue. The issue was that if the disqualified person is aggrieved by that decision - this is what the other side is proposing - why don’t you provide a tribunal there and then to sort out that question of qualification? And the argument by the Attorney-General is that once the Commission is satisfied that you do not qualify, even if you had been nominated, then this provision which we all accept leaves the Commission to declare the remaining candidate elected unopposed. Then, for he or she who was disqualified and is aggrieved with that decision, the provisions of Article 104 and section 59 of the Presidential Elections Act apply. In other words, immediately, he or she is free to challenge that decision of declaring the other person elected in the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court is given specific days and periods in which this must be resolved. So I was saying that I strained myself to understand the logic in the presentation here. Maybe I can be helped.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. We are talking about situations where a candidate is disqualified, but I want the honourable minister to tell this House, under what provision in this Presidential Elections Act is the Commission empowered or any other authority given power to disqualify a candidate? Because before you make a provision to cater for a situation where one is disqualified, you must first provide for the disqualification; that the Commission or any other authority shall have powers to disqualify a candidate under such and such circumstances. Then these would be consequential amendments. But now, when you look at the provision under section 19, where you are trying to insert an amendment, it does not in anyway talk about disqualification. What we have here are situations where a candidate dies or where a candidate withdraws. Those are the only situations envisaged. 

And when you go to the Constitution under Article 103, clause 6(a), the Commission can only reject nomination of a candidate on certain grounds, but that is not a disqualification. So the disqualification you are talking about is not at all envisaged under the law. Therefore, the clarification now I am seeking is, how do you cater for a situation which is not provided for under the law?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I would like to be assisted on this. Unfortunately, the Attorney-General seems to have -(Interjections)- maybe the chair will assist. 

Article 104(1) states, “Subject to the provisions of this Article, any aggrieved candidate …” any aggrieved candidate - the one we are saying should go to court is not a candidate and so he cannot be an aggrieved candidate -(Interjections)- no he has been disqualified, so he is not an aggrieved candidate. That is under Article 104; the one you are saying should proceed under - “… may petition the Supreme Court for an order that the candidate declared by the Electoral Commission elected as President was not validly elected.” 

Mr Chairman, if I put in my papers and without doing any wrong, I have been declared President elect; how can you say I was not validly elected? What crime will I have committed because I have been declared and I qualify as a president? So, really this article does not apply. [MR LUKWAGO: “Withdraw and we go on.”] This article applies to aggrieved candidates; those who have participated in an election and lost and are aggrieved by the results. That is my reading of this article, Mr Chairman and hon. Amama Mbabazi. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No. What would happens when you go for nomination as a presidential candidate then you tender in your papers but when the commission checks and finds that there are some defects or certain conditions missing in your papers; can’t it make a decision that you are not properly nominated and disqualify you? 

HON. MEMBERS: They have no powers. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see the scenario is this: You look at Article 103(1), Election of the President: “The election of the President shall be by universal adult suffrage through secret ballot. 

2) A person shall not be a candidate in a presidential election unless – 
a) That person submits to the Electoral Commission on or before the day appointed as nomination day in relation to elections, document which are signed by that person nominating him or her as a candidate.” 

True the nomination is supported by 100 voters in each of the three regions, or at least two thirds of all districts in Uganda. Now what happens is that you submit and by an oversight you miss these requirements but again by an oversight you are nominated. But eventually, when the commission checks in all these, they find that there were certain conditions that you did not fulfill although you had been nominated; can’t they disqualify you? 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, you are aware of the doctrine of factus officiol when an authority is vested in an individual to exercise certain powers and you go ahead to exercise those powers; you cannot reverse your own decision. That is the doctrine of factus officiol. So when the commission whether by mistake, oversight or inadvertency takes a decision to nominate you; there you are beyond the reach of the commission; you are a candidate. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What constitutional provision would prevent the commission which has detected this defect to disqualify you; apart from that theory which you are mentioning; what is it? 

MR RUHINDI: In addition to the article you are referring to, Mr Chairman, let us also reflect on Sections 11 and 13 of the Presidential Elections Act maybe they can also guide us –(Mr Katuntu rose)- this is important hon. Katuntu. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, the learned Attorney-General was not here when I was seeking the clarification about Article 104; I do not know whether his colleagues have already briefed him such that he can now really guide us on Article 104. 

MR RUHINDI: I will do that after internalising it but in the meantime, let us first see the implications of these sections. I will make reference to the Constitution at a later stage. But I thought this is important because it is a post nomination; Section 13 is post nomination because it says: 

“Inspection of nomination papers and lodging of complaints:

A registered voter may, during office hours on the nomination day at the office of the Returning Officer or other places determined by the Commission, inspect any nomination paper filed with a Returning Officer.

After the closure of the nomination time, and during such period as may be prescribed, inspect any nomination paper in respect of a candidate at such time and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; and 

a)	May lodge any complaint with the Returning Officer or the Commission in relation to any nomination in respect of a candidate challenging the qualifications of any person nominated.” 

So what happens when the Commission finds out that, for instance, that person was not qualified after the inspection - after the investigation? And you may also actually reflect on -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Tell us what happens.

MR RUHINDI:  He is disqualified. 

MR LUKWAGO:  Where is it provided for? 

MR RUHINDI: You may also want to reflect on Section 11, factors, which may invalidate a nomination. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but first of all, listen to this before you submit:  “Factors, which may invalidate a nomination...” So it means that you have been nominated but then certain factors are revealed, which invalidate you nomination.  

1)”A person shall not be regarded as dully nominated and the nomination papers of any person shall be regarded as void, if the person’s nomination paper were not signed and seconded in accordance with section; 

2) The nomination paper of the person was not accompanied by the list of names of registered voters as required by section 10(1); and 

3) The person has not complied with sections 1 and 3; 

4) The person seeking nomination was not qualified for election under section 4; 

5) The person seeking nomination has been dully nominated for election as ….” 

So, there are circumstances under which - although you were declared nominated - your nomination is invalidated if these facts are considered. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, what you have just read is exactly what takes us to court. And once you prove that actually the person was not duly nominated, even his election is overturned. That is the reason we have been going to court; that is one of the grounds. But the most important thing, and now that the Attorney-General is here, you see the Constitution is very clear. When it seeks to talk about an aspirant in, first of all, Article 104(1) which the Attorney-General had advised that a person aggrieved should proceed under this article; I am saying my own reading of it is that the only person allowed to proceed under Article 104 is an aggrieved candidate. [MS KABAKUMBA: “Who has been aggrieved”.] Once you have been disqualified, you cannot be an aggrieved candidate -(Interjections)- you see to be a candidate you even need to look at the Parliamentary Elections Act. You must be a dully nominated candidate. If you have been disqualified, you are actually a person –(Interjection)- you are actually a person – please, this is the law, hon. Kabakumba, it is not history. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I have not seen my learned friend in this mood before. Hon. Abdu Katuntu is always a civilised – yes -(Interjection)- you are a young parliamentarian so - when does one who is aspiring to be a candidate become a candidate? You become a candidate as soon as you are nominated. So the moment you are nominated, the Electoral Commission accepts your papers and declares you nominated; you are a candidate. Therefore, if you have gone past the act of nomination; you are a candidate in terms of the requirements of Section 59 of the Presidential Elections Act and Article 104(1), which my learned colleague was reading. Even he or she who has been disqualified was disqualified as a candidate already -(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Minister, for yielding the Floor. I wish I had carried the judgement in the case of Al Haji Abdu Nadduli v Ndaula. That case went up to the Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal held that Haji Nadduli was not a candidate within the meaning of the law and therefore if he wanted to challenge the election of Ndaula, he should have moved as a voter with the supporting team. That was the ruling and the reason was that his nomination was not proper in law and, therefore, they said he was not a candidate within the meaning of the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but that presupposes that one takes that position at the time he files the petition, because for him he would say, “No, they have improperly disqualified me; I am a candidate”. He asserts himself as a candidate and because of this, he uses that provision to petition the court that he was improperly disqualified and this one was improperly elected unopposed. Although sometimes hon. Katuntu may say this is not history to you. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I have been in this Parliament since 1998 and I have participated in making this law that we are discussing. I hold several qualifications both locally and internationally.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, I was just saying hon. Katuntu may say this is not literature.

MR EKANYA: Thank you. Mr Chairman, I want to propose that we stand over this so that we give ourselves more time to consult and move to the next one. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you think you need more time to think about this? In that case, maybe this is an appropriate time to adjourn. Okay.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto –(Mr Lukwago rose)-

THE CHAIRMAN: No, please I am adjourning. I put the question. Sit down, please.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I think it is a bit difficult to report on what we have covered in terms of the pieces we have been looking at. However, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Presidential Elections Bill, 2009 and reflected on the actual provisions of the statute and considered amendments up to section 18. This is because section 19 was not concluded. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE SPEAKER: Please, hon. Ekanya, sit down. He stood over several amendments; he has to read them.

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, the provisions, which were stood over are on the Hansard and we shall proceed from there when we resume. Therefore, I beg to move that the report I have made from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that we adopt the report of the Committee of the whole House on the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we adjourn I have been requested to inform you that you are warmly invited for the launching of the Five Year Strategic Plan of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum on the 27th of this month at 10.00 a.m. The venue is the Parliamentary Conference Hall. The communication is signed by hon. Fungaroo, secretary-general of the forum. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business. I appeal to you, hon. Members, to go and study all the proposed amendments to this Bill, and also to think about the other one of the aspirants, which we stood over, so that we continue with the Committee Stage on Tuesday starting at 2.00 p.m. The House is adjourned until then. 

(The House rose at 6.33 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27 April 2010 at 2.00.p.m)

