Tuesday, 29 April 2003

Parliament met 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have no intention of derailing the debate on the ministerial statement save that I am standing here on a matter of public importance and concern. 

On Friday I presented the matter and requested government to explain the circumstances related to the recent Constitutional Court ruling, in view of its interruption of the status quo of the Political Organisations Act. 

It was the Speaker in the Chair, Madam, and he ruled that because of the importance of the “Lukyamuzi case”, whenever the Leader of Government Business surfaced he should answer the queries Lukyamuzi put across on behalf of the people of Lubaga South, and the nation at large. Now that we are privileged to have the Leader of Government Business here with us, I beg you to accept that no process or discussion goes ahead until that clarification is made.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether it should be the Leader of Government Business or the Attorney General to give us that position, because I would imagine that is the latter’s role. However, does the Prime Minister have any information on the interpretation of that constitutional ruling?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I raised the same as a question for oral answer and I forwarded it to the Clerk to Parliament over three weeks ago. I specifically asked that either the Attorney General or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should come and explain the implications of that judgement. 

Also, this afternoon I talked to the Clerk and he told me that he had already forwarded the same question to the Attorney General for an answer. I therefore suggest, Madam Speaker, that we have the question put on the Order Paper since the Attorney General has the question already, and we get a clear answer. (_Prof. Nsibambi rose). The Leader of Government Business could have some information for us.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been away and I am delighted to be back -(Applause) - but it is appropriate that the Attorney General should make an answer to that question. If you read today’s New Vision it appears that he has given some answers already, but he is supposed to Table a formal answer to Parliament. I have no hesitation in informing you that I will cause him to answer that question. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me invoke my powers under rule 60(3) so that we do not discuss this matter. I direct now that it be placed on the Order Paper as quickly as possible. If it is not discussed tomorrow then it should be on Friday, because it is a matter of public concern. Thank you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last Friday a number of Members of Parliament raised the issue of people from Hoima who had camped outside our gates. They were bundled up and taken away to Lugogo Indoor Stadium. It was stated that today the minister would make a statement about it, but I do not see the relevant minister here to make a statement on the matter.  

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, I am supplementing my colleague, hon. Jack Sabiiti, because the earlier Order Paper did have provision for a ministerial statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs but on this it is deleted. Does that mean that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not going to answer the queries, which were raised on Friday? 

The Speaker had directed that both the Minister of Defence and that of Internal Affairs should come here to answer those queries that we raised on that day.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As of midday today, only one minister had indicated that he was ready. That is why he is on the Order Paper. I have no indication from the Minister of Lands or from the Minister of Internal Affairs that they would like to make a statement.

MR SABIITI: We want assurance because these people are suffering. We want to know what the Government is doing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where did you say the people are? Where were they taken?

MR SABIITI: They were dumped at Lugogo Indoor Stadium, they are starving, and the children are in a very pathetic state.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I know you have been away but I am sure you have grasped the issues at stake.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. After grasping the issues, I shall ask the appropriated minister to answer. I have to know the issue specifically, and I cannot assume that it is necessarily the Minister of Internal Affairs to handle it. I normally study the question and the problem and then try to prescribe through the appropriate authority. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is an emergency. The people are still in Lugogo Stadium, so we need a statement - as quickly as possible - on their situation. Let us get it during the course of this week.

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Minister of Defence indicated this morning, a statement has been prepared and he is coming with it. So, I beg the indulgence of the House that we wait for the minister to come with the statement. 

This morning I was assigned the duty to attend a meeting with the Second Deputy Prime Minister on Golden Spear 2003, and that is where I was. However, I have been in contact with my minister, who is on the way coming from the offices in Bombo. I beg that we give him another ten minutes; he will be here.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2002
 
Clause 25:

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 25 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendment to clause 26(5).  Re-draft the clause to read as follows: 
“The Minister, on the advice of the Central Bank may, from time to time, by Statutory Instrument, revise the minimum capital requirements as circumstances warrant with approval of Parliament.” 

The justification for the amendment is the import of this clause. It substantially affects the whole Bill, and Parliament should be involved when the minimum capital requirements are changing. I beg to move.

DR CRISPUS KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do hope that my colleague, the Minister of Finance, has closely consulted with the chairperson of the committee. There is a precedent to this situation in a different law, which we made before. We got a clarification that when it comes to subsidiary legislation, if there is a matter in which we feel Parliament should be centrally involved, then it means we must go ahead and make substantive legislation. But if it is a Statuary Instrument, which is subsidiary legislation with the minister, the guidance we have had before is to subject the minister to Cabinet rather than him coming back to the whole Parliament. So, I want some clarification on that.

MR RUZINDANA: Madam Chairperson, whose guidance? 

DR KIYONGA: I cannot remember the specific law we are passing here, but there was an argument on the Floor and the Chair also did guide that really we need to differentiate between subsidiary legislation and primary legislation by Parliament. That is because Statutory Instruments are subsidiary legislation, which would normally not attract a full debate of the House. The House needs to know that there is a subsidiary legislation and in case they have concern, then they would perhaps question it. Otherwise it should pass with the notification of the House. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I fully appreciate the comments raised by hon. Crispus Kiyonga on subsidiary legislation. In most of the Bills that have come before this House - for statutory instruments, we have only required them to be laid on the Table of the House. For this one, we particularly require the approval of Parliament. 

The reason is that if you look at the licensing requirements before one can form a financial institution under this Act, minimum paid-up capital is a very critical element. In fact it is very substantial. Before the Financial Institutions Statute, the one we are amending, we had left it to the Central Bank to do. 

The Central Bank, in a statutory instrument, revised the minimum paid-up capital from what you passed here as the equivalent of US $1 million for foreign banks, and US $500 million for an indigenous bank, to US $4 billion. That is a substantive change. It alters the licensing and operation of the institutions, because it is a very substantial clause. 

That is why in this one the committee felt that to change the minimum capital requirement for financial institutions, it should be initiated by the Central Bank. But before it becomes operative, it should be subjected to debate because of its significance. That is why we really proposed this amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed by the chairperson -(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: I am sorry, Madam Chairperson. The issue being raised by hon. Kiyonga is quite important. How do we subject a statutory instrument to parliamentary approval? If we entrenched it into the law - the minimum capital - then we could only amend that provision. We cannot now say it is a statutory instrument. 

I am of the view that we need a little legal advice on this matter. We can even re-commit it and we perhaps have some of our colleagues, the lawyers, assist us on this one. Otherwise, it is not correct to have a statutory instrument approved by Parliament. That is substantive amendment of the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am aware that we have enacted laws in this House with the provision that the statutory instruments would be brought here for approval by Parliament. We have already done it. So, there is a precedent. However, I am prepared to stand over this particular matter for further advice. What do you think chairperson?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the committee took a lot of time on this provision. We also sought and obtained legal advice before this amendment was drafted. We were fully aware of the lack, at this moment, of subsidiary legislation arising from statutory instruments. In fact, to make some of the statutory instruments achieve what was never intended by law, we have required them to be Tabled. But this one is not just for Tabling. It would require specific approval because of its significance.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, you are right. In some laws we made provisions for statutory instruments to come to the House. Right now our committee is looking at one of them with regard to the PERD Statute. It is amazing that after looking at this statutory instrument, a lot of issues have arisen to the extent that even the minister is beginning to appreciate some of the issues that are coming up from the stakeholders, from government itself and from Members of Parliament. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, this must come to the House. I think that the reason for it is very well understood. 

You know, in other Parliaments there are Committees on subsidiary legislation. In this Parliament we do not have a committee on subsidiary legislation. So once the minister has enacted it, it has the same force as any other legislation. Very often the minister may not consider certain aspects of the statutory instrument, and at the end of the day the citizens may be greatly affected by that legislation. That is why, since we do not have a committee on subsidiary legislation, we thought it important now to make sure that we have checks and balances. This Statutory Instrument should come before us, particularly since it concerns a big matter like this. Thank you.

DR NKUUHE: Madam Chairperson, on this matter of subsidiary legislation I can give you one example. The Communications Act was passed in 1997 and it is only last December that the subsidiary legislation was actually put in place; five or six years later! That legislation has caused a lot of outcry out there in the private sector because the small companies are saying that they are being hurt by the big ones, and they have even appealed to Parliament. 

So, I think it is very important that where you think there is a likelihood of controversy arising, it has to come back to the House. I support the amendment by the chairperson.

MR MWONDHA: Madam Chairperson, I wonder whether this will be helpful: could the chairman consider putting the minimum capital into a Schedule and require that that Schedule can only be amended by Parliament? Will it save us the trouble?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mwondha is proposing that instead of the statutory instrument coming here, the minimum requirement should be put in the schedule, and that is what should come here in case an amendment is needed. That is what he is proposing as a compromise.  

MS KIRASO: From hon. Mwondha, what would be the difference between amending it in the substantive law and amending it in the schedule? 

MR MWONDHA: The difference would be that then we would not be dealing with subsidiary legislation. We would be dealing with our own legislation.

MR MULENGANI: Madam Chairperson, I want to supplement what hon. Mwondha has said, but my feeling is to avoid deliberate apportioning of these figures. We would, therefore, put a limit on the number of particular addresses in terms of fees or in terms of amounts of money because it may be deliberate that eventually they would apportion this to various sectors. 

I do not know whether I am clear, hon. Mwondha, but what I am saying is that we should avoid deliberate apportioning. We should put a limit to that matter, and I think what the chairman is proposing are double standards. Thank you.
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam. I propose this as a way forward. We should delete clause 26(5) such that any amendment would have to come by a substantive Bill. Then it will come here and Parliament would debate it. I think that is a way forward.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I remember we did that to solve another problem some time back. We removed the powers from the minister completely so that he would be obliged to come here anyway. In effect that is what you are saying.

PROF. KAMUNTU: What we considered and why we came up with this amendment is precisely what hon. Katuntu is proposing. The minimum paid-up capital required for the financial institutions, which is at the beginning of the law, should be passed by this House. Being a provision of such significance, it should not be left to the minister, or to the central bank. It should come to this House because it is substantive. 

Why we are doing so? We have the Financial Institutions Statute, 1993, which we are amending. In that statute you passed that the minimum paid-up capital of not less than US $500,000,000 invested in such institutions in Uganda shall be required before a bank can operate. That was local. Similarly for foreign banks, it was US $1 billion, but because you left statutory instruments to be done without recourse to this House, this clause was changed to US $4 billion. Some financial institutions got a lot of trouble as a result, partly because it never came to the House to be examined. We are now trying to cure that in this amendment. 

How we do it – at least this was a compromise arrangement. We started from this position and the committee was told, after consultation with the minister, that it is very hard to bring an amendment to a Bill and, therefore, it will be easier to bring it in the statutory instrument, only requiring the approval of Parliament. That was like an easier way for the Executive arm of Government to implement this law. 

If we go back to what he is proposing, it will be harder, as far as we are concerned; it will be more difficult to amend this provision. The middle - average way or compromise, we had provided with the amendment we suggested, and the minister agreed that it would be more appropriate. We need your guidance. As far as the committee is concerned, this would be easier.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, how frequently do you anticipate that a minister would actually make a statutory instrument with regard to this requirement? It might come once in three years. Is it something they do every six months? If it is not that frequent really, then it could come to this House!  

MR RUZINDANA: Actually we enacted a similar clause when we passed the Micro Finance Deposit-Taking Institutions Act. We also made the same requirement and this House passed it. So, I do not see the problem now.

MS KIRASO: On top of what the chairman and hon. Ruzindana have said, I need to be guided. If by coming to the House for approval the statutory instrument goes against the whole purpose of a statutory instrument, as we are being told, what then would be wrong with hon. Katuntu’s proposal?  Would we not achieve the same?

If we are silent and deleted clause 26(5), like hon. Katuntu has proposed, then the central bank would not do something like that outside the law. That is why they brought this for us to approve the capital requirement. So, any changes in the capital requirement levels will, by implication, have to come to Parliament.  

I wanted to know if there was any problem with deleting 5. If there is no problem, to be consistent with what statutory instruments are supposed to be, we should adopt hon. Katuntu’s proposal.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if we delete 5, it means that either it will come as – if the minister wants to amend, he must come here with an amendment bill.  So, the question is do you want an amendment bill or a statutory instrument?

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I am standing also to support hon. Katuntu’s argument for one reason.  Our intention at the committee level was to bar the minister or the central bank – initially they wanted the central bank itself to do the statutory instrument but then we tried to bring in the minister.  Now, we are saying that Parliament should be the one to approve the amendment to the minimum share capital.  If that is the case, as hon. Katuntu has suggested, I accept the idea the committee had of bringing the statutory instrument to Parliament since it is the same thing we are trying to achieve. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Nandala, which part of the law will direct the minister to come here if you delete it completely?

MR NANDALA: He will just be coming here with a bill to amend 26(2) and change the minimum share capital.  Short of that, he cannot do anything.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I think we need to be very clear.  In the drafting, the bill reads: “The central bank may, from time to time, by statutory instrument, revise the minimum paid-up capital requirements as circumstances warrant.”

If you pose for a minute, you will have passed the minimum paid-up capital for any financial institution before it is licensed.  If you leave it this way, it means after you have passed the minimum paid-up capital. The central bank can change it to any level without recourse to Parliament. And we felt that was literary abdicating the responsibility of Parliament by simply leaving it to the central bank to change it as and when it wants.

We went further to say that the central bank should not make statutory instruments, it should be the Minister in charge of Finance. So, we proposed those amendments.

Secondly, as a compromise arrangement, we felt that instead of having to propose an amendment to the bill, which is more cumbersome - this was our view - it would be more flexible if an amendment to this provision came in form of a statutory instrument, but that instrument is approved by Parliament. That was a more orderly way to allow the Minister of Finance and the central bank to respond to changes that happen much more quickly than if they were to propose a substantive amendment to the existing law.  That was the reasoning why we changed this amendment.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, why don’t we take into account what the chairperson has said that: “subject to approval by Parliament, the Central Bank –(Interruption)-

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is some noise here. Sergeant, can you assist us on this side?  

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Madam Chairperson, I was proposing that we say, “subject to approval by Parliament, the central bank may, from time to time, by statutory instrument revise the minimum capital requirements as circumstances warrant.”

MR KIWALABYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The reasoning from the chairperson of the committee interests me in that they wanted to make this very provision so fundamental that the central bank cannot change it and the minister cannot change it at will.  So, it is so important a provision that it should be approved by Parliament.

That being so, Madam Chairperson, I do not see the reason why again the chairman argues that they should make it easy for the minister to change, because that was not the intention. The intention was to make it hard for the minister to change and it is not that the requirement for that capital should be changed every time.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I said, “smooth”, smooth is not the same as easy - (Laughter). Smooth means the minister will respond to changes much more quickly than if he was to go through a substantive amendment to the existing law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Kiwalabye. I understood what the chairperson meant. If the minister came with the bill, it would go through the First Reading; it would go to the committee for 14 days. It may take one and a half months before it comes back.  What he is saying is that we can achieve the same by bringing a statutory instrument here, it goes to committee even for two days and comes back. That is what he meant.  He was simplifying the work for you.  Are you okay now?  

MR KIWALABYE: Yes, that is what he is telling us that "smooth" or whatever, but the original idea was not to make it so smooth, although he uses the word “easy” as being one of the words to explain the situation.  Not every time, Madam Chairperson, is the requirement for change of capital necessary. If that is the case, then the financial situation in the country will not be stable.  That is why the committee felt that it should come here and be debated fully and the representatives of the people affected should give their views, and maybe the private sector and the stakeholders should be consulted. It should take time.  That is what the intention is. 

So, Madam Chairperson, I do not see the problem with the amendment of hon. Katuntu.  If it has to be changed let it go through the normal procedures of changing the law.  After all, it has been fully debated and the stakeholders have been consulted. We can now make a revision of the law properly and that is what I call “smooth” in my view.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The understanding I get from the submission of the hon. National Political Commissar and hon. Mwondha and Abdu Katuntu is that statutory instruments are subsidiary legislation, which normally should not be part of the business of Parliament.  If that is the case, then I see no reason why we should not go with the submission of hon. Katuntu, because statutory instruments go into the details that Parliament normally may not be able to do.  Now, if we are saying that we do not want the minister to have the final power, then we should not put it under a statutory instrument.  Let us say that if the minimum capital is to be valid, then the minister must come with an amendment to Parliament.  

Our Rules of Procedure provide for suspension of certain procedural requirements, if we think a matter is urgent.  So, I do not think that should be an encumbrance.

PROF. KASENENE: Madam Chairperson, when we debated this, the general understanding was that a statutory instrument was to facilitate the operationalisation of the law, rather than amending it.  It was in that spirit that we came to this compromise position that the purpose or the role of that statutory instrument is to operationalise the law to make it easy for the minister to adjust according to situations.  

Now, it seems some learned colleagues are giving us an interpretation that number five as it is, means it would give power to change the law.  If that interpretation is correct, I stand to be guided, but that does not seem to be the spirit in which we came to this agreement. And in that case, I would go with the amendment of hon. Katuntu that we delete number five.

MR KALULE SSENGO: I disagree, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, if we delete number five, I have been asking, where is the directive part of the law ordering the bank and the minister to come back here, if we delete this?  How will the minister and the bank come back here?

MR KALULE SSENGO: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of that committee.  You will appreciate that financial institutions are very dynamic.  Now, if we went by the proposal of hon. Katuntu, you will be bogging down these financial institutions for a long time having to follow the procedures of Parliament to approve the amendment. Whereas with this provision of the Chairman, it is a question of the Bank of Uganda sorting it out with the minister, but then they bring it to Parliament so that we are informed of what is going on.  

You will appreciate, Madam Chairperson, there could be something very urgent that has to be acted on in the financial institutions.  Now, if you have got to bring a law and have it drag for two months, you might actually affect the financial institutions in a very negative manner.  That is why we are suggesting that let us have a faster process, and at the same time, let us make sure that Members of Parliament are aware of what is going on. And that is why we came up with this proposal.  So, I would beg this House to go by the amendment of the committee.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, do we agreed that this House wants to have input in any changes on this?  So, what we are arguing about is just the form.  I think we all know that we want the House to have input in any changes. That one is agreed, and it is the bottom line.  So, the other one is just to form the statutory instrument or a substantial amendment to the law.  That is all.  

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, we are looking at the general principles of legislating.  The minister has said that the spirit with which they reached an understanding was on the basis that it was to operationalise the law.  The figures here have been entrenched in the law, and amendment of those figures does not mean operationalising the law; it is an amendment of the law.  You cannot use a statutory instrument to amend the law; it will go against the principles of legislature.  

Madam Chairperson, when you look at these figures, they are all provided for under Section 26(2) and 26(3).  They have been entrenched - the currency points - so they are really substantive aspects of the law.  So, how do you amend them by a statutory instrument?  This is what we are saying is wrong.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I think it is very important to understand both the principles of law and the principles of economics involved in this provision.  The first one is- you have explained it quite ably. The minimum paid-up capital is a very important provision in the Financial Institutions Statute.  It is also part of the licensing requirements.  You cannot establish a financial institution unless you meet this minimum.  

It is also an instrument that you can use to prevent entry into the financial sector operation.  You can put it so high so that no one qualifies to form a financial institution, and that is why it is provided for in this law. Because of its significance we felt we cannot leave it to the central bank and the minister to change it at will. 

Now procedurally, again, we felt that economic circumstances sometimes change radically.  For the minister and the central bank to respond to those changes without delayed action that might have serious consequences, we simply allow that change to be accommodated by a statutory instrument, to increase this minimum through a statutory instrument, if and only if this instrument is approved by Parliament.  

The way you have explained it, it should be in the interest of the minister that instead of making a substantive amendment where you would have to go through the Attorney General, drafting it, going to Cabinet, coming to the committee for approval, writing a report and coming to Parliament, all the minister will do after being satisfied that the circumstances in the economy warrant changing the minimum paid-up capital for banks - because this gives them confidence if those circumstances warrant it, all he would do is to bring the statutory instrument to this House and we debate it at that level and we operationalise the provision of this law.  That is why we made it this way.  But, of course, the House has the right to change it and that is the reason behind it.

MS KIRASO: I think, Madam Chairperson, you better give us some guidance because what hon. Kamuntu has just repeated is what he had said before and I think we had already jumped that stage.  The stage at which we are is, can we enforce what we want to see. In other words, we should bring this requirement to the House so that we know that they have changed the capital requirement.  Can we bring it by statutory instrument, if what hon. Katuntu pointed out is right?  Because - I do not know, I am not a lawyer that is why I said, maybe, Madam Speaker, you could give us guidance.  

Is it wrong legislation to require a statutory instrument which, according to Prof. Kasenene, is meant to operationalise and not to change a law?  If procedurally it is not right, then we should do the right thing. But it achieves the same objective.  So, I would like your guidance. Maybe the lawyers in this House can guide us. 

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I would like a bit of clarification.  I seem to hear that at the end of the day the minister brings a statutory instrument and then this House debates it. What about if the House has reservations, how do we proceed after it has been passed as a statutory instrument?  Do we change it or what would be the effect of the debate when he has brought it here?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now, honourable members, we have two issues here: First of all, this House has already set precedents.  We had lengthy arguments about Parliament getting involved in statutory instruments and this House decided that we should get involved in certain sectors.  We have done so, I think, with electricity and one or two others.  That one we have done; we have already set a precedent.  

Secondly, I do not agree that a statutory instrument is only to operationalise.  You know that the instrument gives a minister power to continue changing the law.  Actually, the minister would be carrying out her powers alone to change the law we made here.  So, in taking the decision, you must be cognisant of that fact.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  The issue of the economist getting worried here should not arise because we are now dealing in currency points, which means if there is inflation the currency point will be valid. Therefore, it would directly affect the local currency.  So the economics does not work.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Last information Chairperson, then we take a vote.

PROF. KAMUNTU: The minimum paid-up capital for a bank is not simply a question of currency points.  It is a question of risks in the economy; it is a question of substantial changes that might warrant banks to increase a minimum capital to take care of those risks that they perceive.  The currency points might exist but we are not addressing that.  

We are simply saying that if the economic circumstances change, and it requires changing the minimum capital requirements, the central bank or the minister should do it but he should do it with the approval of this Parliament.  That is what we are really saying.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 26 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 27:

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Chairperson, you know, in your absence we especially fixed today for this discussion on security.  It was decided a long time ago, last week.  We only managed to go to a new item because the minister was absent.  I am requesting you that because of the special matter regarding security, life and properties, we can stand over this and listen to the minister who is very busy. Tomorrow he may be in Ituri, or he may be in another place - (Laughter). So, now that he is here, we really should take advantage.  We should stand over this matter and allow the minister to make his statement, we debate it and then - this financial issue is not a matter of life and death.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this Financial Institutions Bill has been lying around with us for quite some time.  It was partly handled in November, it has come back and I think we should also finish it.  

Secondly, I have not seen the text of the minister’s statement.  So, I would like him to circulate his statement to the members so that we can discuss it tomorrow substantively. Let us proceed with this bill. I put the question that clause 27 do stand part of the bill

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28:

PROF. KAMUNTU: After consultation, Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments to clause 28(6)(e).  We substitute the following - after consultation with the minister we felt clause 28(6)(e) should have the following amendment: “marketable Uganda Government securities that are held by financial institutions for trading purposes.” The justification is that we need to define liquid assets to include long-term securities like bonds.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 28 as amended agreed to.)

(Clause 29 put and agreed to.)

Clause 30:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments to Clause 30(b) by deleting the letter “n” in the word “many” to read “may” as this is more appropriate. This is a typing error.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30 as amended agreed to.

Clause 31 put and agreed to.

Clause 32 put and agreed to.

Clause 33 put and agreed to.

Clause 34 put and agreed to.

Clause 35 put and agreed to.

Clause 36 put and agreed to.

Clause 37 put and agreed to.

Clause 38 put and agreed to.

Clause 39 put and agreed to.

Clause 40 put and agreed to.

Clause 41:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendment on clause 41(3) by deleting the words “and any official of the financial institution who participated in the commission of the offence”. The justification is that the sanction is impracticable, and not consistent with the rest of the law.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41 as amended agreed to.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 42 agreed to.

Clause 43 agreed to.

Clause 44 agreed to.

Clause 45 agreed to.

Clause 46 agreed to.

Clause 47 agreed to.

Clause 48 agreed to.

Clause 49 agreed to.

Clause 50:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, in clause 50(1) we propose to delete from the clause the words “and on a quarterly” in the third line to “an audited” in the fifth line. The justification, Madam Chairperson, is that publication of an audited financial statement could be misleading to investors and the public at large.  

We also propose a new Clause 50(2) to read as follows: “A financial institution shall exhibit on a half yearly basis in the banking hall of each of its offices and branches, a copy of its audited financial statement stating the fact that they are not audited. The justification is to enhance transparency within the financial sector.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50 as amended agreed to.

Clause 51 agreed to.

Clause 52:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments to Clause 52(4) and clause 52(8) to read as follows - we amend by inserting at the end of that clause the words: “within six months and notify the financial institution accordingly”.  The justification is that we need to provide for a timeframe for a vetting process. It might be abused if we do not do that.

Clause 52(8) is deleted and the justification is that there is no need for an additional director when the central bank can cause an emergency board meeting.  This may also be seen as interference in the management of the institution.  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52 agreed to.

Clause 53:

PROF. KAMUNTU: In Clause 53, Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments on 53(e). Replace “he” or “she” with the words “the financial institution” and then replace “his” or “her intention” with the words “its nomination”. The justification is that the institution applies to the central bank.  I beg to move. 

We also delete the word “economic” in the last line before "interest". The justification is that the conflict of interest may be wider than simply economic interest, hence the need to keep it quite open.  I beg to move Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, I think you moved amendments on clause 53 and 54?  I think we had not - 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I should have confined my remarks to 53(e) and then moved to 54 after you have passed Clause 53.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 53 agreed to.

Clause 54:

PROF. KAMUNTU: In Clause 54, I have already proposed an amendment to delete the word “economic” in the last line before the word "interest", and the justification is that the conflict of interest should be wider than simply economic.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 54 agreed to.

Clause 55:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we move the following amendments on Clause 55(3) and Clause 55(2) as well.  We amend 55(2) by adding a new clause and insert a new sub-clause to read as follows: “effectively direct the business of the financial institution”. The justification is clarity on the duties of the executive director.

Clause 55(5) is deleted. The justification is that it is redundant as a consequence of the foregoing amendment.  I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55 agreed to.

Clause 56:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, clauses 56(3) (4), (5), and (6) are amended as follows: we create a new clause 56 (2) to read as follows: “Any individual director who acts in accordance with this section shall make his or her intention known to the board in writing prior to reporting to the central bank”. The justification is that this is for transparency purposes. 

Clause 56(4) is renumbered. The sub-clause is to be clause 57(1).  Clause 56(5) is also renumbered to become Clause 57(2).  56(6) is renumbered to be Clause 57(3). The justification for all these amendments is for better drafting.  I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 56 agreed to.

Clause 57:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments in Clause 57(2)(a), 57(3) and 57(5) as follows: Amend by substituting “within three days” for “at such a time”. The justification for this substitution is to provide the time limit, hence avoiding possible abuse of this provision.  

In Clause 57(3), we propose to insert “or one third of the total directors whichever is greater” after the word “directors” in the third line. The justification is to ensure that a number of directors are involved in the decisions taken and are therefore accountable for the consequences.  

Clause 57(5) is a new one. We insert a new sub-clause to read “Where no director turns up, the central bank shall take appropriate action as it deems fit.” Justification: this will cater for a situation where directors willfully or otherwise do not turn up for the meetings. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 57 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57 as amended agreed to.


Clause 58:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete Clause 58(6)(c), and the justification is that external auditors are independent and should not be allowed to be compromised by the same institution they serve. They are supposed to audit by participating in internal meetings. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 58 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58 as amended agreed to.

Clause 59 agreed to.

Clause 60 agreed to.


Clause 61:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 61(5), we propose to insert the word “external” where the word “auditor” appears before "the auditor". The justification is simply to be more specific. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 61 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61 as amended agreed to.

Clause 62 agreed to.

Clause 63 agreed to.

Clause 64 agreed to.

Clause 65 agreed to.

Clause 66 agreed to.

Clause 67 agreed to.

Clause 68 agreed to.

Clause 69 agreed to.

Clause 70 agreed to.

Clause 71 agreed to.

Clause 72 agreed to.

Clause 73 agreed to.

Clause 74 agreed to.

Clause 75 agreed to.

Clause 76:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendment to Clause 76(1). Delete the words “officer, employee” in the second line. The justification is simply to keep the central bank out of micro management of financial institutions. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 76 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76 as amended agreed to.

Clause 77 agreed to.

Clause 78:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments to Clause 78(3). Delete the word “for” after “imprisonment” in the last line.  Justification: This is a grammatical error we are correcting. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 78 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 78 as amended agreed to.

Clause 79:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendment to 79(3) by inserting the phrase “without reasonable cause” after the word “which” in line one. The justification is to provide for a situation, which may be caused by circumstances beyond the institution’s control. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 79 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79 as amended agreed to.
 
Clause 80:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we make the following amendments to Clause 80(2), 80(3) and 80(4): In Clause 80(2), we replace the word “any” with “a competent” in the first line. The justification is to avoid ambiguity.  

In Clause 80(3), we insert the word “and” after (1) in line two. The justification is to ensure that the two sub-clauses are both covered. 

In Clause 80(4), we delete the word “officers” in the first line. The justification is that officers are subject to internal management disciplinary procedures. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 80 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 80 as amended agreed to.

Clause 81:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 81(2)(c), we propose to replace the word “paid” in the last line with the word “met.” The justification: it is a grammatical and typing error. Then re-number (f) to delete the double numbering, re-number (g) to delete the double numbering which is in the bill and to delete (h) simply to avoid the re-numbering in that clause. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 81 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 81 as amended agreed to.

Clause 82 agreed to.

Clause 83:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose, in Clause 83, to delete the words “this Section and” at the beginning of line two. Justification: The phrase is hanging. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 83 be amended as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 83 as amended agreed to.

Clause 84 agreed to.

Clause 85 agreed to.

Clause 86 agreed to.

Clause 87 agreed to.

Clause 88:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments on Clause 88(6). Replace “one hundred and twenty days” in the second line with “six months”. The justification is that, we want to allow more time within which the financial institution is able to recover to the required prudential standards. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 88 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 88 as amended agreed to.

Clause 89:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendment on Clause 89(1), (2), (3) and (5) as follows:

A new sub-clause 89(1) to read: “Where a financial institution complies with the prudential standards within the period specified in this part, the Central Bank shall request the shareholders of the financial institution, subject to Sections 52 and 53, to appoint an interim Board of Directors, charged with the management and control of the financial institution”.  

Clause 89(2), also new, “The interim Board of Directors appointed under this section shall hold office of such terms and conditions as may be prescribed in the instrument of appointment, and in any case at the post of the Financial Institution”.

Clause 89(3), also new: “Where, within six months of its appointment, the central bank is of the opinion that the interim Board of Directors is managing the financial institution in accordance with prudential standards, the Central Bank shall request the shareholders of the financial institution, subject to Section 52, to confirm the appointment of each eligible individual director”.  

The justification for these amendments is to provide for the event that the financial institution turns around during the statutory management. 

Madam Chairperson, the last Clause which is 89(5) is amended to delete the words, “paragraph” and “of” in line two and four. The justification is that this was a typing error, which is being corrected. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 89 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 89 as amended agreed to.

Clause 90 agreed to.

Clause 91 agreed to.

Clause 92 agreed to.

Clause 93:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments in Clause 93 by deleting sub-clauses (4), (5) and (6). The justification is that (4) and (5) are implied in the administration of the Central Bank, and (6) is covered by Clause 122. It is therefore redundant. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 93 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 93 as amended agreed to.

Clause 94:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments on Clause 94(1) and (2) as follows: We delete the phrase “or its appointed agent in consultation with the Central Bank”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment from Clause 93.  

Clause 94(2), delete “or its appointed agent”. Again, the justification is that it is a consequential amendment.  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 94 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 94 as amended agreed to.

Clause 95 agreed to.

Clause 96 agreed to.

Clause 97 agreed to.

Clause 98 agreed to.

Clause 99:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete 99(4).  The justification is that every one should be given a chance to complain. I beg to move Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 99 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 99 as amended agreed to.

Clause 100 agreed to.

Clause 101 agreed to.

Clause 102 agreed to.

Clause 103 agreed to.

Clause 104:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, Clause 104(1) is amended by renumbering the sub-clauses. The justification is that there was a typing error. I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 104 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 104 as amended agreed to.

Clause 105 agreed to.

Clause 106 agreed to.

Clause 107:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments on Clause 107(4): Replace “Central Bank” with “minister” in line one and insert “time” after “to” in the same line. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment and a typing error. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 107 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 107 as amended agreed to.

Clause 108 agreed to.

Clause 109 agreed to.

Clause 110 agreed to.

Clause 111 agreed to.

Clause 112 agreed to.

Clause 113 agreed to.

Clause 114 agreed to.

Clause 115 agreed to.

Clause 116 agreed to.

Clause 117 agreed to.

Clause 118:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendment on Clause 118(1) and (4). In 118(1) we delete the words “all savings” in line 2. Justification: We are correcting a repetition.  

Clause 118(4) we amend by inserting the phrase “in the print media” after the word “advertise” in line 3. Justification is that we want to be more specific. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 118 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 118 as amended agreed to.

Clause 119 agreed to.

Clause 120 agreed to.

Clause 121:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose a new Clause 121 to read as follows: 
“All fines and penalties expressed in monetary terms and recovered by the Central Bank under the provision of this law shall be paid to the Consolidated Fund.”

The justification is that we want to ensure that all monies collected by the Central Bank are remitted to the Government.  We beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Now chairperson, are you removing the original 121 or they will be renumbered?

PROF. KAMUNTU: We are proposing a new 121 so that there is renumbering.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That would be 121(a)?

PROF. KAMUNTU: It will be a new 121 and the 121 in this Act will become 122 because nothing in this Act shall be deemed to relieve a financial institution from any of its obligation. It is totally different from what we are trying to provide here in the new 121.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So it is a new section?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yeah

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new section 121 be introduced as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 121 agreed to.

Clause 122 agreed to.

Clause 123 agreed to.

Clause 124 agreed to.

Clause 125 agreed to.

Clause 126:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments on Clause 126 subsection (3) by deleting the “cal” in line three. The justification is simply that this was a typing error. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 126 as amended agreed to.

Clause 127:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 127 subsection (1)(a), we propose an amendment by inserting the phrase “issuing of” between the words “or” and “passbooks” in line four. The justification is that there was a grammatical error we are correcting. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 127 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 127 as amended agreed to.

Clause 128:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that Clause 128 be amended by inserting a new sub-clause 128(1) to read as follows: “A financial institution shall promptly report to the national law enforcement agencies any suspected money laundering activity related to any account held with the financial institution.”  

We also make a new sub-clause 128(2) by renumbering Clause 127(2) as 128(2). 

We further propose a new sub-clause 128(3) to read as follows: “Any financial institution which contravenes the provisions of this section commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 250 currency points.”
Justification: For better drafting and limiting the liability and the reporting requirement to the financial institution. 

Clause 128(1), we substitute the following at the beginning of that clause to read as follows: “The Central Bank may, in consultation with the Minister, make regulation…” Then we transfer sub-clause 1(c) (d) (e) and (h) to Clause 129(2). The justification is that these are important provisions, which should be changed or amended by statutory instrument with the approval of Parliament.  

In Clause 128(1), insert the following new paragraph “(l) Providing for the allotment or issuance and or registration of the transfer of five per cent or more of any of the shares of a financial institution listed on the stock exchange market.”

The justification is that this is a consequential amendment following clause 18(2). 

In clause 128 (2)(a), we insert the words “in the regulations” after “prescribe” in line one. This is to bring to the attention of all concerned the type of penalty, and not leave it open-ended. Madam Chairperson, I beg to move. 

MR KATUNTU: I am having difficulties in following the amendments of the chairperson. Madam Chairperson, in 128(1), what did he amend exactly?  “May make regulations…” - is it "in consultation with the minister" or "on approval by the minister"? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The chairperson introduced certain new sections sequentially and renumbered others. But I think let him give the details.

MR KATUNTU: I think it is not properly drafted, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You are talking about 128 (1), in the middle of the page?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Clause 128 (1) says, “The Central Bank may make regulations and issue notices…” So, in the amendment we are proposing, we are substituting that with “the Central Bank may, in consultation with the minister, make regulations and issue notices…” and the rest remain the same.  

All that the committee wants is to put checks and balances but allow the Central Bank to have the flexibility and responsibility to manage institutions. But also, we are trying to bring some accountability of the Central Bank to the Minister of Finance. That is really what we are trying to do.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you okay, hon. Katuntu?

MR KATUNTU: I am still uncomfortable. What is " in consultation with the minister"? What purpose does it serve? I thought you are talking about checking the Central Bank, not directing it, because that would be unconstitutional! But with making regulations with the approval of the minister, then the minister can come here and account for that approval. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, the way you drafted these things, there are too many 128 (1)’s.  Probably there are four of them!

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the committee is inserting new clauses so that when they are entered, there will be re-numbering. I guess when you look at them you can see that all these are new clauses that are intended to strengthen. For instance, the new 121, sub-clause (1), is aimed at money laundering.  

I understood hon. Katuntu’s comment to be on Clause 128 (1), on page 140 of the bill. What we are trying to accommodate by using the word “consultation” is to avoid the word “directing”, because to direct would go counter. So, consultation would mean that at least the minister is in the know.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am also getting a bit perturbed. Clause 128(1)(c) says, “providing for the minimum level of capital for financial institutions”. This is already under a substantive section, 26(1). Why are we again brining it here? If we are bringing it here, we should also make it mandatory in this regulation that it should be by the approval of Parliament. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, if you look at the existing 128 as drafted, these are regulations and notices the Central Bank gives in its supervisory function to commercial banks.  Therefore, the committee felt that yes, this role must remain the function of the Central Bank.

Secondly, the committee also felt that these regulations should not be subject to the approval of the minister, but the Central Bank must keep the minister informed. Therefore, this is an improvement on the previous situation, where the Central Bank would give regulations and notices without necessarily drawing them to the attention of the minister.  

The minister may not direct the Central Bank. This is not the intention. But the minister must know, because the Central Bank must consult him. That is number one.

Two, I would agree that since we have already passed that the minimum capital requirement for the finance institution can only change with the approval of Parliament, we can look at this for further amendment on 121 (c). But the rest is simply to give the Central Bank powers, or to allow the Central Bank to supervise commercial banks without being directed by the Minister of Finance, but just consulting him.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Are you satisfied hon. Katuntu?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I am still very uncomfortable. I am sorry. Approval does not mean direction. And consultation has no legal effect at all. They can consult, so what? 

We have had the experience here before. When it came to the UCB saga, the minister was telling us he was helpless.  He said they had to consult him, that is what the law provided for, but his hands were tied.  So, the minister could not even account for the consultation to Parliament. But if he is to give his approval, then if there is a mistake, he can come and account for that approval in Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can you propose an amendment?

MR KATUNTU: Instead of “consultation”, Madam Chairperson, I propose “approval”.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand up to oppose hon. Katuntu’s proposal. It is not correct to say that "consultation" has no legal effect. There is a difference in a person saying that this thing was done without any information whatsoever reaching me.  

Secondly, we are talking about political ownership of decisions made. A minister who is consulted must come to this House and own what the Governor has done. If he cannot agree with him, you take immediate steps to advise accordingly. 

What this clause is doing, Madam Chairperson, is in fact to cure what might have happened during the sale of UCB. You want political ownership of these decisions but without necessarily taking full responsibility for the work of the Governor.  Otherwise, you are going even to interfere with the provisions of the Constitution, which allow him to act independently, but which do not mean that he cannot consult.  

Once you say you approve, then the provisions of the Constitution will have been infringed. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 128 be amended by the introduction of a new clause as proposed by the Chairperson, by renumbering some of them and transferring some of them -(Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to the chairperson of my committee, I would like you to allow us to stand over this clause, so that we bring up an amendment, which I think he erroneously skipped. There is something, which I wanted to bring to his notice.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, it is true. If you look at 128(1)(C), which says, “providing for the minimum level of capital for financial institutions”, we dealt with this in the previous amendment. But when you look at the regulations on the issues described under this statute, these are regulations intended to strengthen and allow the Central Bank to supervise financial institutions. We would need to look at this in light of the amendment we have made specifically on this one as well. So, I concur. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You want to stand it over?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, we stand this over.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, let us stand over clause 128. And let me ask the drafts people to assist in reformulating the text here, because there are so many 128(1)’s and so on. Let me ask the legislative people to assist you to redraft.  We stand over this one.

Clause 129:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose amendments in 129 (1), (2) and (3) to read as follows: In 129(1), we replace “Cabinet” with “Parliament”. This is a major provision, which needs the input of Parliament, because it affects major provisions of the law.  

In 129 (2), replace “Central Bank” with “minister”. Justification: we want to harmonise it with other provisions in the law. 

We propose a new 129(3) to read as follows: “The minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations – 

    (a) providing for the licensing of financial institutions
    (b) providing for the computation of the on-going capital adequacy requirements for financial institutions
    (c) Classifying institutions as financial institutions for the purposes of the definition of a financial institution under section 3 of this Act.”  

The justification is that these are consequential amendments as in clause 128. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, I think we need to stand over this as well, because you have transferred certain provisions of 128 to this one. So, the structure is actually going to change. Can we stand over both so that they are considered together?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Fine.

Clause 130 agreed to.

Clause 131 agreed to.

The First Schedule agreed to.

The Second Schedule agreed to.

The Third Schedule agreed to.

The Fourth Schedule:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we propose that the Fourth Schedule be deleted. This should be covered under regulations.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Fourth Schedule be deleted as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to)


The Fifth Schedule: 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, we are proposing the deletion of the Fifth Schedule as well, using the same reasoning that these are covered under regulations.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Fifth Schedule be deleted as proposed by the chairperson.
(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that Clause 18(1), about Shareholding, be recommitted to the Committee of the whole House for reconsideration.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, Minister, I want you to move for the House to resume, and then you can give your report. That is what I wanted you to do. Ask for the House to resume so that you can report. You say, I beg to move that the House do resume – (Laughter)- and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PRIVATISATION (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled “The Financial Institutions Bill, 2003” and stood over clauses 128 and 129, and passed the rest with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Prof. Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue you raised, we shall deal with it when we come to the Third Reading. It is premature at this stage.

Honourable members, earlier we had an item on the Order Paper for the Minister of Defence, who was not here when we began. He has since arrived and circulated his statement. I hope members have got it, because I really want members to have the text. Now that he is here, let me ask the minister to make his statement.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by sincerely apologising for coming late. I am sorry, there was a break of communication because of the engagement I was involved in. 

I had telephoned and spoken to the Speaker. I indicated to him, and we agreed, that actually I would not be here at 2 O’clock. So, I am sorry there was a problem of communication. But I apologise for that.

Last week, Parliament requested for, and the Speaker asked the Ministry of Defence to update Parliament and the country on the security situation in the country. I am making this statement on that basis. I will obviously try to confine myself to defence matters, and to matters that cut across the various security responsibilities.  

I am fully mindful of the fact that I briefed Parliament on the situation in the north of the country on 27th of February, this year, and on the situation in Ituri two weeks later, on 11th March.  I will, therefore, try to cover the period since that time.

On the situation in the North, I begin by covering the effort to talk peace with the LRA, and I would like to ask honourable members to note the language I have used here. I am calling it LRA, without giving it the description that I normally do, in the spirit of trying to promote a peaceful settlement.

On 10th March, His Excellency the President, as Commander-in-Chief, directed the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces to cease operations in Lapul sub-county, Pader District, to allow the LRA make contact with the government peace team. This measure was taken to stop the LRA from using that area as a safe haven while continuing to murder and terrorise innocent citizens.  

The LRA has instead rejected this offer to use Lapul safe zone, while at the same time refusing to state its preferred alternative venues.

The government has also proposed the following zones as new assembly areas, from which LRA can choose one to assemble in: 

1. Kadomera - Apyeta Brige Palabek, Waligo area.
2. Akikok Game Reserve - north of Namukora - east of Madiope - west of Nyanyinya Mountains .
3. The area north of River Nyimur, along the borderline.

In gross violation of the cease-fire the LRA claimed to have declared, it has continued to commit atrocities. More than 70 innocent civilians have been killed. It has injured more than 60, abducted more than 200, carried out 22 ambushes and burnt six vehicles.  

The chronology of events constituting the LRA response is as follows:

On 10th March, this year, His Excellency, President Museveni designated Koyo, Lalogi and Wipolo villages in Lapul sub-county, Pader, as a safe contact zone where UPDF would cease operations. The freeze in operations was for five days, a period long enough for the LRA to show response.

On 14th March, the LRA purported to invite the government peace team for contact within Lapul.  The peace team diligently moved 10 kilometres deep into the bush to the supposed rendezvous.  The peace team waited in vain for the rebel negotiators. The government team, rather than return empty-handed, decided to use their presence in Lapul to educate the wanainchi about the team’s mission. The peoples’ response was to ask the peace team to request His Excellency, President Museveni, to extent the period for Lapul being a safe zone.

The Government team, rather than return empty handed, decided to use their presence in Lapul to educate the wanainchi about the team’s mission. The people’s response was to ask the peace team to request President Museveni to extend the period for Lapul being a safe zone. 

On 15th March, President Museveni obliged with the people’s request and extended the safe zone offer to the LRA to the 20th of March. This was also because the LRA response to a written communication, as usual, and through a “co-ordinator” verbally and ambiguously claimed that it was finally ready for contact on March 17th and 18th. But again, the peace team waited in vain, till 20th March, for LRA’s negotiators. Meanwhile, the team had been doing more mobilisation in Gulu and part of Pader districts, with the people again requesting for an extension of the safe zone offer. 

On 20th March, upon being informed of the people’s request by the peace team, President Museveni again extended the safe zone period to 31st March. 

The LRA commanders, Vincent Otti and Tolbert Nyeko, eventually broke their silence but it was only to dismiss the Lapul offer. 

On 28th March, Tolbert Nyeko wrote to the peace team claiming that they did not want the Lapul safe zone because it was a trap. He claimed the UPDF had to cease operations in the entire Northern Uganda because the LRA had done so itself. Otti, LRA's second-in-command repeated this claim, when he telephoned MEGA FM radio station in Gulu.  

The truth though is that the LRA violated its so-called cease-fire of 1st March within 24 hours of declaring it, and has continued to do it almost on a daily basis since that time, with a heavy toll on the people. It would be total irresponsibility on the part of the Government if it conceded to the LRA’s wicked trickery. 

A few examples will suffice to show how the LRA has violated the so-called cease-fire and openly abused the offer of a safe zone to carry out more heinous acts as follows:

    • On 1st March, within 24 hours of its “cease-fire”, the LRA ambushed a UPDF foot patrol at Laguti, Pader, killing five soldiers, and beheading and burning their bodies.
    • On 2nd March the LRA killed Capt. Okech Kuru, an intermediary the Government peace team sent to deliver letters and mobile phones to the rebels.
    • On 15th March the LRA attacked a civilian camp in Oroko-Apyeto Internally Displaced People’s (IDP) camp, Gulu, killing 11, injuring eight, abducting three and burning down part of the camp.
    • On 19th March, a group of LRA rebels attacked Iri village, looted foodstuffs and abducted a woman before fleeing towards Zoka forest.
    • The following day, 20th March, an enemy group of LRA tried to attack Acet IDP camp but was repulsed. 
    • On the same day, the LRA attacked Olwal IDP camp, looted some foodstuffs and abducted two civilians.
    • The following day, 21st March, the LRA laid an ambush between Pawel and Palukere on Adjumani-Gulu road, killing four soldiers and two civilians, and injuring 11 soldiers and five civilians.  
    • On 21st April they robbed civilians between Buchoro and Gangdiya and abducted five civilians to carry the looted items before they fled towards south of Paicho.
    • That same day, the LRA invaded Obilokong village on Zoka-Adjumani road, killing two vigilantes.
    • On 22nd April, the LRA robbed civilians near Buchoro and abducted 12 people and headed towards Orom areas.
    • On 26th April, the enemy LRA laid an ambush near Parak Primary School in Lakwana division, killing one civilian and burned one vehicle. 
    • On the same day the enemy burnt houses, killed one civilian and injured three others in Apyeta.
    • On 28th April, yesterday, the enemy infiltrated Aboke, looted foodstuffs from the shops and abducted people in Lalogi, Pader District.

    • Following the obstinate refusal by the LRA to positively respond to UPDF’s limited cessation of operations in Lapul, the President directed the Army to resume operations in the area. 

    • The UPDF is committed to its cardinal duty to protect the lives and property of the people and cannot afford to extend the “safe zone” anymore as much as it would be desirable, because it would be pondering to LRA’s impunity of killing innocent civilians while claiming to be ready to talk. 

    • It is worth noting that the Government had earlier suggested to the LRA to assemble in areas of Owiny-Kibul, Panyikwara and sparsely populated areas in Uganda along the Uganda-Sudan border to facilitate dialogue with the peace team. They refused on the false ground that there was an outbreak of ebola in Owiny-Kibul. 

    • The Government continues to encourage the peace team and other stakeholders to remain open to dialogue with the LRA. 

    • The UPDF has done the following:
    • Improved its air power for rapid response to LRA activities.
    • Some of the forces withdrawn from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) are to be deployed in the north and northeast of the country, to assist in fighting these rebels. 

I had told Parliament in my last statement that we would be deploying a battalion in Katakwi and another battalion in Olilim. Unfortunately we have not been able to do this because obviously we had to respond to the situation in the Congo, in Ituri. That is why we had not carried out those deployments. But now that we have left Ituri, we are ready to carry out these deployments, and in the next few days, the following deployments will be made:

    1. The 19th Battalion is going to be deployed in Katakwi.

    2. The 33rd Battalion is to be deployed in Kapchorwa and in fact it is on the move. It should arrive in the next few days; and 

    3. The 53rd Battalion and a task force are going to be deployed in Lwebusengo in Bundibugyo.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Where is the page the Minister is reading from? I do not know whether I am colour-blind or I have the wrong copy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, minister, is that additional to the one you have issued already?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am reading out from page 7, paragraph K (2). I said that some of the forces withdrawn from the DRC are to be deployed in the north and northeast of the country, and I am filling in the details. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The 35th Battalion is going to be deployed in Acholi Bu, the 65th Battalion is going to be deployed in Corner Kilak, and the 83rd Battalion will be deployed in Atiak. 

In addition to that, we have been having a problem of escorting food by the World Food Programme and others. We have given orders that the escort for this food is strengthened. So, in the next few days we will have more Mambas and more soldiers escorting this food. 

The 73rd Battalion will be deployed in West Nile in Nyalamur, and finally, the 75th Battalion will be deployed in Alwali, eastern Lango in Otuke. I am talking of Alwali instead of Olilim. So, those are the –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, actually, I should be seeking guidance. Is it proper for any person to disclose the deployment of troops in public?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a resolution of this House demanding immediate and emergency deployment of troops in different parts of the country; we passed the resolution here. So, the minister is responding to our demands. Honourable minister, proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. Of course, I fully appreciate the background from which my brother is raising that point. This is a new and fundamental departure from the practice of government deployments of the past. We act transparently, and I would like to tell this House –(Applause)- and the whole country that we are going to deploy the forces in all these areas and other areas, which I will mention subsequently and transparently. 

The command of the UPDF is also being streamlined up to company level.

Issues of soldiers’ welfare and transport are to be tackled, hopefully, in the next budget with this Parliament’s support.

The situation in the West:

In the West, the general security situation in Kasese, Kabarole and Bundibugyo is now calm. The ADF, which used to be the main security threat, has decisively been dealt with in terms of strength and weapons. Most of their commanders have either surrendered or been captured and/or killed. However, some small and scattered mobile groups, which have been stealing food and property for survival, are reported in areas of Oicha, Eringeti, Kamango, Karuruma and Mwalika. These are areas along the Semiliki river belt within the DRC. Some of these rebels are suspected to be in hiding in areas of Goma and Butembo. 

It should be noted that the ADF is a core group of terrorists composed of militant Islamic radical fundamentalists whose aim was to create an Islamic state in Uganda. The strong commitment by its leadership and other members of the core group were recruited on the basis of Islamic radical fundamentalist principles. It is this commitment, besides coercion, that used to maintain internal cohesion among ADF combatants. 

If I may just give more information on this, as the House remembers, Uganda took a position to support or join the coalition allies in the fight against Saddam Hussein in Iraq. This was precisely because we knew all along that Iraq had been supporting this group to commit acts of terrorism against Uganda, as has indeed been proved by the documents that were found in Baghdad recently.  

Government, under the Luanda Agreement, agreed with the DRC to maintain a Brigade on the western slopes of the Rwenzori to deal with this threat.

The Situation in the Northeast:

In the northeast generally, the area is peaceful. Incidents of armed cattle rustling by the Karimajong warriors in Moroto and Kotido districts still continue as Karimajong warriors with illegal guns still cross to neighbouring districts of Lira, Soroti, Kapchorwa and Katakwi to cause chaos. Such instances have always happened during the dry season during the search for pasture and water. 

These incursions have always called for the intervention of the UPDF, coupled with the mobilised militia organs in the affected districts to ensure security.

In January this year, a massive operation supported by tanks and aerial bombardment was carried out in Lira District in areas of Olilim and Atangata. However, the aerial bombardments caused some cattle to run in disarray, or to scatter, but a total of 1,600 head of cattle, which were rounded up, were handed over to the Karimajong at Aloi.

Raids by the Pokot from Kenya:
The Pokot warriors have been carrying out raids in Uganda on several occasions as mentioned here below: 

    1. On the 26th of February, they raided six cows from Kabei sub-county.
    2. On the 5th of March, they raided four cows in Suam sub-county.
    3. On 7th March, the Pokot warriors from Kenya raided 150 cows, 20 goats and 40 donkeys, and injured one civilian in Suam sub-county.
    4. On 11th March, these same warriors raided some animals in Riwo village in Bukwa sub-county, Kapchorwa District. 
    5. On 10th April, about 300 Pokot from Kenya attacked Chebiny, Seretio and Kaproron parishes in Suam sub-county, more than 300 houses were burnt, 60 people were killed and about 150 animals were taken.

The UPDF has continued to carry out operations to flush out these Pokot warriors and return the recovered head of cattle. For example, 129 head of cattle were recovered and handed over to Kapchorwa district authorities.

Some of the incidents when UPDF came in contact with them are as follows:

    1. On the 25th of February, two Pokot warriors were killed.
    2. On 13th March, the UPDF came into contact with Pokot warriors and two of them were killed and two guns were recovered and handed over to police.
    3. On 24th March, the UPDF came in contact with Pokot warriors and during the exchange of fire, two Pokot were killed; and
    4. On 13th April the Pokot warriors who had come to raid in Bukwa were repulsed by home guards.

The disarmament exercise, which started in February, as I reported to Parliament, has so far realised 10,659 guns. A total of 107 suspected warriors possessing illegal guns have been successfully prosecuted. 

Through the ongoing mobilisation, the gun has been criminalised. It has always been taken for granted in Karamoja for one to possess a gun.  

The general situation in Karamoja is improving, and other sectors of Government, for example the Judiciary, Water and road works, are being put in place to establish order.

The UPDF headquarters have received, apparently, credible reports that some of its officers have engaged in cattle thefts in the course of their duty. These reports are being investigated for verification, and as soon as this investigation is over, remedial measures will be taken and the people of the region and the country as a whole will be informed.

The Situation in the Central Region:

In the Central region, the general security situation is calm, save for some incidents of armed robberies within Kampala and its suburbs, which have been the source of insecurity. 

Most of the suspects have been arrested and many illegal guns recovered by a joint security operation, which was launched late July 2002. The general court-martial has tried most of the arrested hardcore suspects, and they are now in prison - those who were convicted.

It is worth noting that urban terrorist acts of the ADF in Kampala and Jinja have been neutralised for some time now since July 2001. Since 1997, a total of 38 bomb blasts were exploded in Kampala and Jinja cities, killing 82 and wounding 236 people.

With the formation of the Joint Anti-Terrorism Task Force (JAT) under military intelligence as a lead agency to counter the ADF urban terrorist threats, great achievements were made. 

A total of 184 were arrested and 125 were charged in courts of law, for terrorism. These include those who would plant and assemble the improvised explosive devices, which were crudely manufactured in people’s homes.

The quiescence of these urban terrorist acts does not mean that the threat of terrorism is over, and especially when the Amnesty law is being used to walk out of prison and reorganise. What I mean here is that many who have been arrested for suspicion of being terrorists, while in prison they applied to the Amnesty Commission - or whatever it is called - seeking amnesty and many of them have been granted amnesty without trial. This is a problem that obviously government is looking into to see how it could be addressed.

The Situation in Ituri Province, DRC:

In the DRC in the Ituri region, the security situation is still fluid. Against a backdrop of organised ethnically motivated massacres and skirmishes, the Ituri Pacification Commission, which gathered in Bunia from 1st to 14th April, established a mechanism for the pacification and provisional administration of Ituri. It is made up of those people whom I have listed in the report.

Standing against many enemies of a new political dispensation in Congo and a new culture where Congolese participate in forming their own political and security institutions, the UPDF was able to secure and “midwife” the Ituri pacification process, which has given birth to a leadership by consensus. Uganda is proud of this as it sets a precedent that is useful for stability and peace in the Great Lakes region as a whole.

There is still work to be done in order to guarantee security of the people of Uganda due to threats from the Congo. The recent capture of the so-called People’s Redemption Army (PRA) terrorists in Ituri, who had been flown there by Rwanda to destabilise Uganda, is clear testimony of this.

On 10th March, the PRA rebels were captured at Lena camp followed by more than seven captured after the attack of the UPDF on their defence at Bule. Those captured revealed the following:

    1. All of them were formerly supporters or sympathisers of Reform Agenda of Dr Besigye.
    2. All of them were voluntarily recruited and taken to Rwanda to join PRA rebel activities.
    3. Targets for recruitment are serving army officers and men, especially those un-deployed veterans, LDUs, the jobless and those wanted by police for crimes they may have committed.
    4. The mode of transport used is both private and public means up to the Uganda/Rwanda border, and then by using panya routes into Rwanda. In Rwanda, transportation to Kigali is directly co-ordinated and organised by Rwanda Intelligence operatives.
    5. Kabuga is being used as a military training centre where most recruits have been trained in light military drills, field-craft, stripping and assembling of guns and tactics.
    6. All PRA captives and reporters were trained, armed and airlifted to Ituri by PRA for purposes of being infiltrated into UPC/Lendu combatants planning aggression against Uganda using proxies.
    7. Plans and attempts by PRA under the direct patronage of RDF to open up several fronts to destabilise Uganda have been unearthed and curtailed.

It is important, Madam Speaker, for me to stress that Uganda is not a threat to Rwanda and we have no intentions of attacking Rwanda. We do not have them now, and we have never had them before.  

It is however surprising that since July 1999, no serious plan for effective deployment of a neutral force to guarantee the security concerns of Uganda was put in place to enable orderly withdrawal of Ugandan troops from the Congo. Instead, demands have been made on Uganda to protect the lives of the people in Congo while at the same time accusations have been made against Uganda because of her presence in Congo. We have taken a decision to withdraw all our troops and we shall abide by this.  

We have worked out, together with the UN in Congo (MONUC), a schedule of withdrawal and from last Thursday, the 24th of April, we shall not take more than a maximum of three weeks to completely withdraw. By Friday we had withdrawn, by airlifting, 1,650 forces. Those are the ones that could be airlifted. The rest of the force is to move on foot. I would like to inform this House that we had committed very close to 10,000 soldiers in Ituri.  

Relations with Rwanda:

Our relationship with Rwanda is still fluid. Prior to 1997 when forces were committed to the DRC, then Zaire, to fight the Mobutu regime, relations was warm and cordial. Problems began to emerge due to differences of how to relate with the Congolese in the process of resolving the problem in Congo. 

Uganda wanted the Congolese to manage their own internal affairs while Rwanda preferred to play a more assertive role. This is the reason why Rwanda attacked the UPDF in Kisangani three times, as the President and myself previously have had occasion to comprehensively brief this and the Sixth Parliament.

Due to the deteriorating bilateral relations, and in pursuit of her hostile activities, Rwanda started to support political opposition prior to the 2001 general elections.  

Since 2001 to date, Rwanda has harboured and supported PRA, the Ugandan dissident group that is linked to the LRA and the ADF, in order to destabilise Uganda with a view of causing “regime change” here in Uganda. 

To achieve the hostile objectives, Rwanda started using her territory and eastern DRC as bases, using proxy forces composed of RCD-Goma, a Congolese rebel faction supported by Rwanda; PRA which was founded, trained and supported by Rwanda, and UPC, a militia group predominantly composed of Gegere sub-group, which Rwanda supported after Uganda rejected its request for arms that they intended to use against other 18 ethnic groups in Ituri province.  

Rwanda started airlifting weapons to arm UPC in September last year, aggravating the already volatile security and humanitarian situation in Ituri. 

In February this year, Rwanda airlifted some PRA rebels from Kigali to Mwongbwalo, Fataki, Bule and Kpandroma, where final preparations were being made. However, 22 of these rebels were on 14th March captured by the Lendu militia, who objected to their territory being used to attack Uganda. Those 22 PRA were later handed over to the UPDF, while five others surrendered to the UPDF. All have confessed having been trained, armed, financed, co-ordinated and airlifted into Ituri by Rwanda.  

Under the London Understanding of October 2001 between Uganda and Rwanda, both countries agreed to relocate each other’s dissidents to third countries, as a confidence building measure. Whereas Uganda has already relocated four high profile Rwandan dissidents, Rwanda has deliberately refused to relocate any of the high profile Ugandan dissidents in Rwanda. We are remaining with one high profile Rwandese, a general who was the former Minister of Defence, who came recently. But plans are underway to relocate him too.

Rwanda has persistently refused to refrain from using its media for hostile propaganda against Uganda as per the London Understanding, whereas Uganda continues to refrain herself. 

Rwanda is still dishonest in her dealings with Uganda. As a deliberate falsehood, Rwanda alleges that Uganda uses UNHCR controlled refugee camps to harbour and train the Interahamwe. I was delighted the other day to read the statement of the head of the UNHCR, the former Prime Minister of the Netherlands - I think. He made a categorical statement that these camps are free of the Interahamwe or any training of any kind for military purposes. 

In spite of strained relations, Uganda has done the following:

    1. We have offered maximum co-operation to the joint verification mechanism between the two countries.
    2. We have hosted all verification and investigation visits to suspected sites in Uganda.
    3. We have hosted the bilateral border meeting of force commanders in February this year, while Rwanda has failed to host reciprocal meetings in Kigali or anywhere in Rwanda.
    4. We have co-operated with the UNHCR on establishing or re-establishment of tripartite mechanisms for the voluntary repatriation of Rwandese, yet Rwanda has frustrated the conclusion of an extradition treaty between the two countries. 

In fact there is one, which Rwanda denounced, because they claim it was made between Uganda and Rwanda against them.  However, let me repeat that Uganda has no intentions of threatening Rwanda’s security, either directly across our borders or via the DRC. They should simply relax. 

But, I would also like to assure you and the country that, of course we should do our job should our sovereignty be threatened by anyone. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, government is committed to improving the combat power of the UPDF in order to accomplish its mandate given by the Constitution. Government will, in the next financial year, propose to allocate adequate resources to enable UPDF modernise itself. 

The UPDF withdrawal from DRC shall enable our army to protect all lives and property in the north and north-eastern parts of our country as well as the rest of Uganda. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MRS BEATRICE WABUDEYA (Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here on behalf of the people I represent in this Parliament. I would like to find out from the Minister of Defence why he has made no mention of Sironko. I am surprised and disappointed that while there is an outstanding expectation that there will be a unit in Kata to protect the people of Sironko, the Minister has come up with a very extensive plan to protect districts that have been faced with cattle raids from Karamoja, and Sironko has been left out. 

He has left me to imagine that now all the Karimajong rustlers are going to target Sironko District, which is not protected. May I know from the honourable minister what plans he has for my district? Thank you.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I just want to say that this is an omission by error and as my colleague, the minister, knows very well, I am under instructions by the Commander-in-Chief, actually to deploy a force there.  So, I should have mentioned that we intend, as we withdraw more from Congo, to put a force as instructed.  But I should have mentioned Sironko as one of the areas that have been affected.  Thank you.

MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  First of all, I thank the minister for the conclusion that the UPDF withdrawal from DRC shall enable our army to protect all lives and property and so forth.  All along I have been wondering why our soldiers were in Ituri protecting Hema and Lendu whereas our people in Teso, Lango and Gulu are dying.  This is a very serious issue and I am glad they are reaching that conclusion of protecting our brothers and sisters.

MR STEVEN BASALIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to inform my brother that while UPDF was in Congo, the Rwenzori Region was protected and we have been having peace.  So, these soldiers who have been withdrawn from Congo will still protect the Western Region, the North and the northeast.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you for that information.  Madam Speaker, I am not going to respond to that.  We are aware that charity begins at home; we should have protected our people first.

Another clarification I want to make, Madam Speaker, his Excellency, early this year and late last year, promised us that by the end of the dry season in the North, Kony would be history. But the problem is that up to now, Kony is causing more attacks than before.  I am wondering whether the dry season in the North is still there, and when is it ending!

Madam Speaker, some times I get confused when I hear our beloved President in South Africa going to mediate peace between the Hutu and Tutsi in Burundi when we have our problems here.  I think we should put our house in order before we go out of the country.

I want to seek from the honourable minister another clarification. Recently, about two to three days ago, I read in the newspaper that actually our soldiers in the North are walking barefooted; that they have no clothes, they are malnourished and yet, Madam Speaker, our budget was cut by 23 per cent to facilitate these brothers and sisters of ours who are protecting us.  

I read in the newspaper that in a certain parish in Gulu a priest was shot, and I understand he was airlifted to Kampala for treatment. That has not been reported in this report. And also, that about three vehicles and a motorcycle were burnt.  I want to know whether that was true.  I really wonder why there is no response from soldiers when people are being shot and vehicles burnt!  I have been hearing from our honourable colleague from Gulu that actually the reason why this war is still continuing is because our soldiers are benefiting, and I am forced to believe that maybe what they are saying is true!

Another problem I want to observe is the way the people around Karamoja region are suffering.  Really why?  We have a government with all the machinery in place.  Why do we allow our people to suffer to this extent?  I come from Central Region where we have worked for 50 years to build houses and plant coffee.   Now, I imagine if that kind of attack happens to us and everything we have worked for in 50 years is just destroyed within no time when there is a mechanism to protect these people, Madam Speaker!

MR KIWALABYE: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way.  I wanted to inform my colleague that it has already happened in Central Region.  The area I represent, that area is called “Luwero Triangle”. People lost everything.  That is why we do not want to hear anything like war.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mutuluuza, try to wind up please.

MR MUTULUUZA: Lastly, my appeal, Madam Speaker, is to the members of the Karamoja Region to try to educate and sensitise their brothers and sisters to avoid this primitive and backward –(Interruption)- yes, I call it backward and primitive; Cattle rustling is an ancient activity. 

MR APUUN: Madam Speaker, I have listened very attentively to what the honourable member was trying to bring out.  Is it in order for the honourable member to use un-Parliamentary language to discriminate a tribe in this House?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the member was talking about activities of a certain tribe, which are primitive.  He is quite in order.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I am referring to cattle rustling.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I was also saying that you are describing the activities of certain people in Uganda, which are primitive.  So, you are in order.  Conclude.

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  But I am referring to cattle rustlers; I am not referring to the Karimojong as a society. But if I have offended my brother, I beg to be forgiven.  

I was making an appeal, Madam Speaker, that the members from Acholi - as I stated earlier on, the war is supported by the people whether you believe it or not.  So, in my opinion - I think I am right - I just appeal to the Acholi people to make sure that they don’t support the rebel activities. Because, as I said earlier on – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wind up.

MR MUTULUUZA: - insurgency has almost taken place in every part of Uganda, but because people in those areas were not ready to welcome the insurgency, that is why there is the no insurgency in Central, Western and so forth.  So, I think if the people of Acholi land also reject Kony, he will really fail.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR ARAPKISSA YEKKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I want clarification from the minister. First of all, I wish to thank him for his statement. But, when will Government arm or rearm the recently trained LDU’s in Kapchorwa?  As a background to this, early in 2002, LDU’s in Kapchorwa were disarmed because there was some impending insecurity within the district. But soon after that the situation deteriorated. 

In October last year, His Excellency the President, Commander-in-Chief, instructed the Army Commander to train and arm LDU’s in Kapchorwa. And in March this year, 400 were trained but on their passing out, the Divisional Commander of the Third Division in the eastern region gave different instructions, asking them to join UPDF and others to go home.  In the long run, only 60 were armed and 340 were not armed. 

And about two weeks ago, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs read a statement here that 157 guns and uniforms are being distributed and taken to Kapchorwa.  I want to inform you that up to now, all those instructions have not been followed. 

Following that, Kapchorwa continues to get cattle rustlers and the political mood in the district for the Movement has really come down.  People are saying that they voted the Movement to punish cattle rustlers, but they have been ignored.  Then they are also wondering whether the third division commander is immune to instructions from the Minister of Internal Affairs, and His Excellency the President.  

So, the clarification I want from the minister is this: when will this 340 LDU’s who have not been armed get armed? Because, what we know is that from 1988 up to last year, 2002, Kapchorwa had enjoyed a very good security situation. Before the LDU’S were put in place, there was a lot of chaos and people had fled. Up to now, others have not returned, especially from the year 1986 to 1997. But when the LDU’s came into place, combined with the UPDF and other security forces, the security situation improved.  

One positive thing with the LDU’s is that they really have the zeal to fight these cattle rustlers because the cattle may be their own or they may belong to their parents or their in-laws, unlike the UPDF who at times only respond after the rustlers have already gone. The LDU’s have the advantage that they know the routes where these cattle rustlers pass.  

Then the other comment I want to make is about operations by some of the UPDF soldiers in Kapchorwa. They have actually encouraged the raids - I will quote an example where UPDF carried out an operation in Bukwa in hon. Kapkwomu’s constituency around 28th March. Five days after that, Kenyan MPs in ten vehicles came up to Kapchorwa, alleging that 3000 head of cattle had been rounded up by UPDF and brought to Kapchorwa.  When they reached there, they were only shown 129 miserable calves, and thereafter they vowed they were going to reiterate. And indeed they reiterated on the 11th of this month.  

Yesterday, I was in Genge sub-county, and they are still 31 head of cattle belonging to the Pokot, which were being taken gradually by the UPDF.  So, I agree with the allegation by the minister that some UPDF operatives are encouraging cattle rustling and I feel that investigations should actually be carried out thoroughly.  I thank you very much.

DR KAPKWOMU: I thank you Madam Speaker, and I thank the honourable Minister of Defence for his elaborate ministerial statement. I am glad he has said there is a battalion supposed to be based in Kapchorwa district. I am glad to inform you that a few of them have started moving there.  There is, however, some piece of relief in the area after the 11th massive cattle raid where the death toll now is at 31. 

While we are happy that the LDU’s have really protected the lives and the people, I concur with Dr Yekko when he says there was a directive by the President to arm and deploy the LDU’s in Kapchorwa.  Our experience has it that the combination of the LDU’s and the UPDF actually produces some bit of relative security, calm and strength.  Out of what we are told as having been killed, I am frank enough to say that it was the support of the LDU’s with co-operation of the UPDF. By giving them some ammunition, these young men would have been useful to us if really we safeguarded our border. 

There has been a lot of information flow between West Pokot and Kapchorwa district because we have many of our relatives who are locked out at Busia boundary. This information has always reached the district.  Fortunately, the Secretary for Defence of Kapchorwa Council comes from the area, which was attacked and they have got this information. The information reached the office of the Chairperson, Security Committee; I wonder what happened between the RDC’s office and the central Government because this was a warning in advance. It would have been prevented but nothing took place. 

At the same time, as I quoted the other day, there is likelihood that some Kenya Reserve Forces were involved in this raid. That is already external aggression. May I also get some clearance from the Minister of Defence, as to whether ESO has had any access to such information, because it is an external aggression?

There have been several letters written to government; I have written a few of them. I have even written to the Minister of Defence, but some of them were before the raid. The stories from the ground indicate that we misuse the guns. May I request the Minister of Defence, as a consolation and as a way of encouraging the people of that area that they are still Ugandans being protected by the government, to go right up to the grassroots and find out from the wanainchi exactly what agony they are going through? How did it come about, and what do they think about government? Because what we may be receiving from the district leadership to the central government is not exactly what is happening on the ground. I am sure any visit to the ground will give us a disparity of the information, which the government has received.

We cannot be told that our LDUs misuse the guns to raid Kenya, when it is very strongly known, as hon. Dr Yekko has said, that some Pokot animals were collected by the UPDF during their operation and 129 remained in the district! Where did the rest go? They are no longer in Kongasis County from where they were got; they are not in other parts of the district; they are not back in west Pokot, they are not in Karamoja. They disappeared! Where did they go and who actually took them? That is what has forced the Pokot to come and raid massively, claiming we are the ones who cause their animals to be taken. 

So, what can we say is the way forward? I would suggest that the government goes to the grassroots - even bypassing the district leadership, and goes to see this person who is still weeping - some of the huts may even still be smoking by now - so that they get the truth from the people and see who is in the wrong. Is it the information to government from the district leadership? Is it the LDUs who are going to raid? Is it the soldiers who are actually causing all this trouble? Because if we just keep quiet like that, we shall not get any answer to that effect and it is hurting. Somebody is crying there, you are laughing at that person. Somebody has been pinched, he is crying, you are laughing! 

The 3rd Division Commander shamelessly went to the border at Swam sub-county headquarters and proudly said that as long as he is still the Commander of the 3rd Division, “however much you cry, even if you shed blood for tears, you will never get those guns.” Is that a consolation to a man who is mourning? Is that human? He is called Col. Sula Semakula.  

So, hon. Minister of Defence, the people of Kongasis constituency are saying that if the 3rd Division Commander is supposed to serve them, let him do it wholeheartedly. As hon. Dr Yekko said, the Movement level is dwindling. I do not know what will happen next, and all this is due to negligence. I do not know whether it is at the district leadership or government, because the President directed it in October last year that the Army Commander liaise with the 3rd Division Commander to arm and deploy the Kapchorwa LDUs, and no action has been taken. Why do I not justify by saying it is total negligence?  

Madam Speaker, as I speak, the anger is being turned against me as their area MP. I am told they are planning to recall me because of that raid. Now, is it me to provide security or it is government? Maybe the hon. Minister of Defence can clarify on that. I know if we say here that we recall you, you may have an appeal and may have a step behind to the backbench. But for me to be recalled by all those people, my exit is very near here, and I will go for good. 

So, hon. Minister of Defence, can you do something and save the lives of the remaining people of Kongasis Constituency and Kapchorwa as such, and also to protect me and I remain here - (Laughter). I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ATENG OTIM (Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed I am very happy today because the minister has tried his level best to be very open.  He has said now that the UPDF are returning from Congo, they are going to provide protection to the areas that had been left alone. And he mentioned even the numbers of people coming back, that is, 10,000 soldiers who will form about six or so battalions that will be deployed in the North, perhaps for the first time. They have been doing work elsewhere outside the country.  

Secondly, the Minister of Defence has given us a chronology of atrocities committed by the LRA dating as far as March. But in all that he has given, there is no mention of Lira and yet a lot has been going on.  

Recently, so many people were abducted from Lira but as usual, the state has tried to downplay what happened there, saying that only 25 people were abducted from Aromo, of which 20 have been reclaimed. We still have a problem there. When you read this statement, it is also very clear that the government knows that what is going on in Lira is the Karimajong rustling only.  

I would like to let you know again that we are not only suffering from the Karimajong; it is from both. The ten sub-counties that are being rustled are the very 10 Sub-counties that also face attacks from the LRA. Thank you.

MR AACHILLA: I thank my honourable friend for giving way.  I would like to inform the House and my honourable friend that just as she mentioned, the statement by the minister was that a massive operation supported by tanks and horrible bombardment was launched on the Karimojong and so many animals were impounded at Aloi, and only 1,600 were recovered. It is right to observe that the suffering faced by the people of Lango now was brought about by this kind of uncoordinated, unrealistic co-operation by using massive operation where the animals of the Karimojong were scattered and both peoples have been left to suffer at the mercy of nobody. I thank you.

MS ATENG OTIM: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving that information. You have done me a lot of service because I did not intend to narrate any story here, but just to state what I would like the government to do for us. 

I have seen a lot of mistrust from both government and LRA. That is the problem that is causing the dragging of the peace talks, or making it almost a dead thing. My question then is this: we have made several suggestions to the government as Lango Parliamentary Group, as Acholi Parliamentary Group and also as Acholi and Lango Parliamentary Groups. We said it clearly that why can’t we have these peace talks in another country rather than having it within Uganda?  

Here is a situation where you expect the LRA with their guns or with their ammunition to pretend for that day and then when fire starts, they are not supposed to use it, or the LRA expects Government to pretend also. So why do we have peace talks in such a situation? You dictate, let us meet in such a place, the other party is not sure of the other. Why don’t we have these peace talks in a place where both are not armed, that is, in another country?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for giving way. During our time when we were negotiating with the Lutwa Government when we were in the bush, we used to go to Kenya. But now, you are telling these guys to come here in the same country and they are not sure what you are going to do to them. I think it is time Government rethought of how to negotiate by thinking of a neutral ground elsewhere. Thank you.

MS ATENG: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala. On the issue of having discussions held outside the country, We have also been assured of third party intervention. Why don’t we make use of this? It has been said clearly that there are agencies that are ready to fund or to oversee; so why can’t Government take such a scenario rather than keep on playing hide and seek within the bushes where we do not know who is telling the truth?  (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ateng, do not respond to heckling.

MS. ATENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for protecting me.  Lastly, the only mention about Lira was implied in the name of a battalion.  The 55th battalion will be placed in Adwari.  So "Adwari" - I do not know what you had in mind, whether it was for the Karimojong or for the LRA.  

Then there has also been mention of the UPDF and LDU in the activity of cattle raiding. That one is very true and as I said before, I am not here to narrate any more stories because I only want to see redress of the problems. You said it clearly that investigations are going on. So I hope that you really do your best, so that we come out of this situation, now that we have the UPDF on the ground to protect us. I thank you.

MS JESSICA ERIYO (Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for his statement. I will make just a few remarks.

First of all, we congratulate UPDF for waiving the threat that was coming from Ituri and the Congo. I say this because in West Nile in December last year, we had a big threat from people who wanted to attack Uganda from that end and the whole of the region was in panic.  People shifted from their homes, especially from Okoro County to Nebbi town, and the threat was all over. It is even on record here that some Members of Parliament mentioned threats from their areas, especially from the Rwenzori region, where some people were even coming to steal cattle in that area. I think all that threat has gone down, and we want to congratulate UPDF for that.

However, Madam Speaker, I am amazed that 10,000 UPDF soldiers were in Congo and maybe that is why we have suffered in some parts of this country. I do not know why all the 10,000 were there. Maybe the minister can clarify. Is there a very, very big threat that every Ugandan should be worried about it? And if all these soldiers are coming back, is that threat waived off completely now? Otherwise, we are worried.

Madam Speaker, many of our people have suffered a lot and sometimes we have blamed the army for what is happening in areas, even where the army has been deployed. For instance, Northern Uganda is very sparsely populated, and because of people being put together in displaced peoples’ camps, there has been a wider area left open for the LRA, and maybe the Karimojong warriors, to penetrate through and disrupt people who are peacefully settled in their villages.

I know that the army cannot be planted like grass or trees to protect all of us, so I commend what the army is doing. But on behalf of my people, now that the army is coming back from Congo, please concentrate them in those areas where there are very big threats.   

As I speak now, the bus companies that have been sending their buses to Adjumani, Moyo and Yumbe have stopped, and there is no public transport going there. And they say that until they are sure of security on the ground, they cannot go there. Even some businessmen, especially, those who are not from that area have refused to send their lorries and other vehicles to take merchandise to our areas.  

Today I got a report that sugar in Adjumani has gone from Shs 53,000 to Shs 75,000 per bag at wholesale price.  That means that a kilo of sugar is at Shs 1,800 right now.  So what will the people of that area do if security is not assured for them and their property? People are stranded right now in Arua Park; they do not know how to go back to Adjumani! The only route they can use maybe is to go via Wanseko or whichever route, and that means spending another night on the way before you reach Moyo and Adjumani. That is even more serious and a really very difficult situation. It is even much easier for people to travel from here to Kigali, to Nairobi, than travelling to Adjumani, in our country! 

On Sunday night - maybe the minister had not received a report about it. I have just got the report from our security people in the district - the rebels came to Arinyapi sub-county where they abducted 12 people. When they were crossing Tete river, with these people, into Sudan - but I think God is with our people also, because as they reached Tete, there were a number of pigs which made some noise, and these people ran away in disarray and all these 12 people came back. So I want to thank the pigs that rescued our people because the army was not there. Yes, because if those pigs were not there, the army was not on the ground, all those people would have gone. Perhaps God placed the pigs there. So, I thank God for that.  

I also want to thank government because when this happened, it was immediately reported that some soldiers had been put along Tete River. And I think we should have a permanent group of army officers and men around that area because that has always been a loophole that the rebels use to come through and disrupt the people. On the 24th of December last year, in the same sub-county, they came and shot at a group of youth that were dancing and merrymaking. So we need more security around there. 

Around a month ago, two people were again abducted from Alirara in Adjumani and I did not see this in the report. But good enough, also those two people came back.

Madam Speaker, I now fear to go to Adjumani even by air, because if we do not have enough army presence on the ground, Adjumani is still very penetrable by these rebels. I fear because we have read from the newspapers that Kony has issued an order that one of us here, hon. Santa should be abducted for him as a wife. Since I resemble hon. Santa, I am actually afraid. I need some security around me; otherwise I could be abducted in the place of Santa.

MR KATUNTU: I thank hon. Eriyo for giving way. From what she has told the House, pigs saved some of her people. Do you not think it would be prudent for you people in Adjumani to rear more pigs so that you get enough security?

MS ERIYO: Well, I am not so sure that all the time the pigs could protect the people of Adjumani. However, I think that was just luck for the 12 people involved, and I thank God for placing those pigs there. 

As I have said, there is still fear in Adjumani and other parts of Northern Uganda. Much as efforts have been put in place for peace talks to go on, we have read from the report that all these efforts have been fruitless. Perhaps the LRA should give us an alternative to the peace process and also to the whole situation. I mean, if they think that what the Government has offered is not good for them, what exactly do they want? We are speaking here without information directly from them. We do not know exactly what they want! 

So, if there is any way for them to let us know so that we could speak from an informed point of view, that would be better for the peace process. Could, therefore, both parties find better ways than the peace talks? The Government should also analyze its own –(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order out of what hon. Abdu Katuntu has sought clarification about. He suggested that Adjumani could advocate for rearing of more pigs to protect the people there. Given the background of hon. Abdu Katuntu and also the hon. Second Deputy Prime Minister in that area, was the honourable member in order or has he changed positions today?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member merely noted that on one or two occasions the pigs had carried out defensive activities. That is what he was saying.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Madam Speaker, given the heroic act of those pigs, would it be possible for them to be brought to Kololo for recognition? (Laughter)

MS ERIYO: Madam Speaker, I am sorry if the information I have given here is causing a lot of fun in this House. However, I already said that it was perhaps God-made that these pigs were there. I now want to conclude my contribution. 

Many people have suffered injuries because of these problems of insecurity. I am wondering whether the minister, or the Leader of Government Business, has an answer to those who are suffering. For instance, there is one very prosperous businessman from Moyo who has suffered twice in these ambushes. Last year he suffered injuries because he was in a bus that was ambushed. His close friend, who was sitting next to him that day, was shot dead, and so was another person from the Office of the Prime Minister based in Adjumani. 

Recently this same person suffered very serious injuries. As a result his intestines are being nursed from outside the abdomen. He is right now in Gulu Independent Hospital, because he could not be handled in Adjumani. And from the analysis, it would even be difficult to treat him from Mulago. So, he is being handled there and he is so desperate. There is no money to help him out. Is there anything that the Government could do for him?  

Finally, our people are crying that we should increase security on the road and at least have one Mamba on that road for the convoy. Even if it is just one Mamba, plus the soldiers, the security will be better. Also, the areas that had detaches and soldiers no longer have them. They were removed but those soldiers should be brought back and the patrol team should do their work as they used to do. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR MICAH LOLEM (Upe County, Nakapiripit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine goes directly to the Minister. As he was saying, the recent cattle raids were from the Pokot of Kenya. I want to get clarification from him about why he has not talked about Kapchorwa raiding the Pokot. 

On the 4th of this month some of us went to Kitale with hon. Omwony Ojwok, hon. Peter Lokeris and some Members of Parliament for Kapchorwa, for a security meeting.

MR NANDALA: Thank you, my brother for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from my honourable colleague. Does he want to say that Karamoja is not the one raiding and it is now the Sebei who are cattle rustling in Kenya?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what he said is that there could be instances of raids from Uganda into Kenya. He wanted the Minister to address that. Is that not so?

MR LOLEM: Yes, thank you, Madam Speaker. That is clearly what I wanted to say. 

On the 4th of April, we were in Kitale, and around 11.00 p.m. my brothers from Kapchorwa raided a village in Kitale and took 257 cows - (Interjections) - precious cows, not these other local cows. They entered Kapchorwa. 

When the UPDF wanted to know how these people really collected the cows from Kenya, these LDU’s shot one UPDF soldier and he died. That was in Bukwa, in Kongasis County, on 4th of April - (Interruption).  

DR KAPKWOMU: Thank you, my brother, for giving way.  We actually attended the same World Vision meeting in Kitale, together with hon. Yekko. We were supposed to meet with the Turkana Members of Parliament and the Sabiny as a joint peace initiative programme.  

As we reached there, we were informed by one of the Members of Parliament of Pokot that the raid had taken place; and that was on Thursday night. By 10.30 a.m., there were still some reports that the animals had crossed to Uganda. By 3.00 p.m. the following day, the Kenya Police had not got any complainant at all, reporting to their police stations whether the animals had been stolen and who had done so. 

By the time we left Kitale on Saturday, I contacted the same Member of Parliament who reported to us that the animals had been taken. He said, as long as the police heard, that is enough; it is just like reporting. This is abnormal. There was no record in police as to whether the animals had been taken. 

About the killing of the UPDF, that one actually occurred. It so happened that the Sabiny LDUs had tracked the animals, which had been stolen by the Kenyan Pokot. So, after a successful mission of recovering animals, as they come back they normally jubilate by shooting in the air. That attracted the attention of the UPDF detach, which were there. So, they thought the Pokot had come. When one LDU who was still around saw the UPDF, he also thought that the Pokot had come. So, there was actually mistaken identity. There was a cross-exchange of fire and one UPDF soldier was actually killed. 

Some other information was that if those animals were truly stolen from the Kenyan side, they should have actually gone to Uganda and then gone back to Kenya, deep into Pokot. The Kenya Police have not released the report as to whether the animals were actually taken. The report came, fine, but by the time we left Kitale, which was on the third day, no report had reached the police.  So, to me, no Sabiny raided any cattle from just near the trading centre or across the border.

MR LOLEM: Thank you, Madam Speaker, My brother, facts are bitter. I wanted to tell my brother that on the same day, on 5th of April, a UPDF soldier was killed in the forest. When your brothers took the cows into the forest to share them, the UPDF wanted to intervene, but they said, “this man is interrupting us”, so they shot the man. 

So, the issue of saying that the Police really did not put a specific – when we were in Kitale Hotel, the OC/PD Tranzoia clearly gave a statement that the cows were raided, and they even heard the gunshots on the night of 4th of April. There were gunshots at Chepuchenia village, and the cows were taken. The only problem for the OC/PD was that, he did not know the exact number of the cows. So, my brother should accept that they also raid Kenya. 

I happen to come from a Pokot county in Karamoja. I know the other brothers of mine, because they are also Pokot like me. When activity is taking place in Pokot on the Kenyan side, it is the LDUs that the Government is re-arming who take that chance to go and raid the Pokot in Kenya. So, they should accept that they also do the same activity. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister, on page 11, paragraph (e), says, “The general situation in Karamoja is improving and other sectors of the government e.g. Judiciary, Water and road works are being put in place…” I want him to say, “are in plan”, but not, “are being put in place”. Because, as we speak now, there is no road from the detach in Chepsikunya to the detach in Karita. And on the other part, there is no road from Amudat to Karita. So, he should have said “in plan” -Interruption)

MR ACHILLA: I thank my honourable friend for such a very important point, and I would call this, Madam Speaker, a big lie. Last evening, I received a call form Kotido that Komosin valley tank, which was constructed recently by OMEGA Company, has broken its banks. 

Permanently, Kailong dam, which everybody is aware of, which cost government half a billion shillings, has never been there. The bridge connecting Kotido to Lira, and thereafter to Pader, was overrun by the waters. So, Kotido, as of now, is an island among the many rivers, where there are no bridges.  So, I begin to wonder which roads and what is really on the ground. 

Then on the Judiciary, there are the wishes of the President, in his letter of September 2002, that there would be a workable Judiciary and restoration of order in Karamoja. As we operate now, there is no magistrate in Kaabong. There is no chief magistrate in Kotido. Now, I think these are all wishes. 

To restore security, the 146 LDUs who are supposed to be deployed at the borders between Karamoja and Kenya, Karamoja and Ethiopia, and Karamoja and Sudan are not there. The detaches, which are supposed to be open, are not there. So, Madam Speaker, I think these are wishes. We expect them.  I thank them for wishing, so far.

MR LOLEM: Thank you, my brother. As I conclude, Madam Speaker, I will comment on the statement made by the Division Commander, 3rd Division; that is Col. Ssemakula. He was saying that if they re-armed the Sabiny, we would cause problems with our neighbours. This is true, because as I speak now, in one of my sub-counties called Karita sub-county, in a parish by the names of Lokalis near Girigi, there are no people because of the threat from Kapchorwa. Now, why do you say that you are vulnerable when you are also participating in this very thing, displacing some people from their area? Really, it is unjust! 

Another thing is, I want to plead with the minister to provide fuel for the UPDF, 63rd battalion. You have placed a 63rd battalion commander, called Maj. Toffa, but Maj. Toffa does not have fuel! How do you want a son of a poor woman to travel 97 kilometres to Karita, 48 to Loro, covering all that battalion, when he does not have fuel? Then when you call them to the Moroto Barracks for a meeting you order them! And you know that in the hierarchy of the army, you do not want to say, “no, I have no fuel”, but you just accept. 

So, can you also provide UPDF with fuel? I also have a commander in my place by the names of Maj. Toffa, he does not have fuel; you only gave him transport. At times when I go there, I give him fuel to go to Loro, to go to Kalita; I provide him with fuel. But what is the use of this money that you have? Provide them with fuel. Mr Minister, give UPDF fuel. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Odit, Anang, Amongi, and then we will go to Kapchorwa. Let us start with those. 

MR JOHN ODIT (Erute South, Lira): Madam Speaker, first all, I must thank the minister for this humble presentation. But as honourable members and leaders of this country, we must have some cause to be worried. Why do I say this? The government should be in charge; Government should take responsibility for maintaining law and order in the country. Now, what are we seeing in this report? 

On page 7, it says the UPDF is committed to its cardinal duty to protect the lives and property of the people. In fact, when you read through this report closely, you must definitely sympathise with this poor army. They are needed to secure our borders between Uganda and Rwanda, the Congo, Sudan, Kenya. We are only lucky that between Tanzania and us, there is a big body of water, otherwise this army would probably also be demanded to secure this border.  

In the country here, the same army has got to move all over the country, and it must be deployed. We are happy when we hear that a battalion will be posted in one district or another, and we clap. This is a big disappointment. Because, first of all, we do not know how big this army is. 

We are only applauding the 10,000 who are coming from the Congo, as if there was nothing left here. This same army is coming back on foot, and we have seen them sometimes on some of our television sets. They walk and they look miserable. They have lost weight, some probably are not healthy. By the time they arrive in the country, we do not know the strength they will have to be deployed elsewhere in the country.  

Now, if the minister had not stated his position on record, on page 12, I was going to re-affirm this. In my own constituency, there is a sub-county, which is permanently being disturbed. During Easter, we got some complaints from our citizens that the army is playing a very big role in getting these animals rustled. One instance was in Barr, which borders with Apala. 

In one instance, the local people, having lost 60 head of cattle, tried to get one miserable looking Karimojong, who was fronted as the one supposed to be behind the rustling. But when these people apprehended that Karimojong, people in uniform came to rescue him and they took away the animals. The animals were loaded at night in trucks, and this is a big disappointment. 

What is even more worrying, Madam Speaker is that there are some security agents who have disguised themselves in civilian dress. They go to the sub-counties, intimidating the wanainchi not to report the people who are loading these animals on trucks, and they know these are soldiers. They told me, “it is only you people who can talk now; who can report this thing to government because for us in the villages now, we are helpless. We do not know where to report this matter.” 

I am happy that the minister responsible for Defence has made this statement immediately after the Easter break, because we were wondering how to put this position to him. I hope he will be able to respond effectively.  

The other thing is that, in the past, the Karimojong never used to rape women in our place.  You know, it is also an abomination in their culture. Who has trained these people to start raping women now? Women are not happy in the villages; they are being raped, and we have got complaints and complaints. They are saying please, try to find a way of making the Government know this. Now we have reported to Government. 

This idea of saying investigations are going on is really terrible. It is not good; it is not consoling. How will these people who are affected get to know the action taken by Government, by Defence, by people in authority? How will they know that action has been taken? We want to know, because they know the people who are behind this rustling.  

There is this question of 1,600 head of cattle, which were rescued by the UPDF through aerial bombardment in Olilim. This has been a cause of serious problems in Lira District. The Karimojong believe that the soldiers have rescued their animals and they have disappeared in Lira.  Now they have also failed to go back to their home district because they want to get to know where these animals are in Lango. (Interruption)

PROF. LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and my colleague. The clarification I want to seek from you, since you come from Lango, is whether these animals that were rescued had been raided from somewhere. Because you only rescue what has been raided! Were these animals raided, or the Karimojong were merely grazing their animals?  And if they were merely grazing their animals, how do you carry out a rescue operation?

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, this thing happened in my constituency, and I would claim to be best informed, even more than the Minister of Defence is! First of all, the number is not 1,600.  That is a big underestimation. The number goes as high as 10,000 head of cattle. 

Those cattle, which were actually brought to Aloyi Government Farm in the constituency of my brother, Dr Alex Okot, were over 5,000. They were brought by the UPDF after an aerial bombardment. This is the information I am giving. 

Hon. Odit is now going to explain how the Karimojong have seen this, why it has caused terrible relations between the Karimojong and us. He will tell you how the Karimojong see this as a way of now raiding the Langi, and the way the deputy RDC has gone on radio to provoke the Karimojong to come into Lango. I leave this to hon. Odit.

MR ODIT: Thank you, my honourable colleagues, for enriching my points. But I still want to emphasise and make an appeal. The contributions given by way of information leave clear testimony that there is total confusion; a state of anarchy, where Government is not in charge of that part of the country. 

I want to tell the minister that sometimes the same God gives this life we have to us.  This God created you, gave you part of the life, which is being shared all over the world. Your security is as important as ours is, and we want to appeal to you. 

I see you sometimes with a very good motorcade escorting you. If the Minister of Defence has that kind of escort, and he is a source of intelligence information on the state of security in the country, these are symptoms to indicate that things are not very good! So, we need that same security, above all for our own people.  This is a very serious matter, Madam Speaker. 

I want to say that the information we have received is that, this is a deliberate attempt by some of the security agents to punish us, simply because attempts by Government to urge the people of Lira to settle in camps have been rejected.  So, they want to cause enough problems, so that we go to camps. But I want to tell you, Madam Speaker, nobody who is staying in a camp is happy. Even the Government should not be happy, because these are citizens who should be producing for - (Interruption)

MR ANGIRO GUTOMOI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I want to inform the honourable member on the Floor that the people of Lango have rejected the issue of camps because of the definition of the word “camp”. 

It was unfortunate that this coincided with the death of Brig. Smith Opon Acak. It was stated that he was forming a CAMP, which means Citizens Army for Multiparty Politics. This gave us a very bad image of some people in government, who can think of painting us, in the struggle for this country, in that manner. So, that is the reason why when you talk about camps in Lira and Apac, you are in trouble. Thank you.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There has been persistent insecurity, and what the minister has given is a description of events. If it is not Lakwena, it is Itongwa; if it is not Itongwa, it is Kony; if it is not Kony, it is Besigye, and the situation continues and continues. 

We would want the minister to give the House the cause, rather than describing the events that have happened. What is the cause? Is the cause in us? Is it in our stars? What is the fundamental cause of the persistent insecurity? That is point number one.  

The point I want clarification on is on page 17 of the report. If you look at page 17, you have the hostile objectives of Rwanda, and you have Rwanda airlifting weapons and soldiers. If you look at page 18, you read about Rwanda having hostile propaganda and Rwanda being dishonest.  

For those who are schooled in diplomacy, this statement would tantamount to being at war with Rwanda. The minister should clarify. A war with Rwanda will start in his bedroom, it will spread to his sitting room, it will go into a classroom, and it will go to places of worship. Mr Minister, a war in Rwanda is unthinkable, and we are pleading for tempers to be controlled and to let reason prevail.  

The Rwanda-Uganda relationship needs to be handled with very serious care. The clarification, Mr Minister, is, are we at war with Rwanda?

MR ODIT: Thank you. As I wind up my contribution, I hope members of the Executive have listened.  I know some of them do not take the contributions on this Floor seriously, and we are in trouble with some of them, even here in the House. 

If you analyse this report carefully, it looks like the rest of the leaders in this country have no role to play: The police have no role to play, even the local defence forces; Members of Parliament and Cabinet ministers do not have a role to play; only the army. If the army is not posted anywhere, nobody is confident of the security situation. 

This used to happen some ten years or so ago. It happened during Amin’s time, and it happened even during Obote’s time. Then, if there was no roadblock and you were passing at a point where you expect a roadblock, you felt uncomfortable. The story has changed. Now there are no roadblocks, but if the army’s presence is not in your area, you feel unhappy. This is one way of directly handing over the country to the army. You cannot do this kind of thing; it is very sad and disappointing!  

We urge the Defence Minister - you are a very senior person in this government, the soldiers can listen to you, Government can listen to you, cause some action in Cabinet so that we cease to make demands for the army to be everywhere in this country. 

We should now be talking about maintenance of law and order, not defence, because these soldiers have suffered enough. They are all over the country, and they are also securing borders that are too big. This country is too big for these soldiers. We need a contribution from every citizen of this country. This mentality of looking to the army for solutions of insecurity is a big problem. 

I thank you, and I urge the Government to think twice and revisit this strategy on matters of security. Thank you very much.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Madam Speaker, I would like clarification –(Interjections)- I can still get clarification from the Chair. I am addressing the Chair. 

If members of the Executive do not take some members in this House seriously, why shouldn’t members also take members of the Executive seriously and give them the explanation they need, if you want us to work together? 

The honourable member is saying that other members of our society must be given a role to play. I was going to ask the honourable member to help this House, and these people on the Front Bench, to know the contribution he is willing to make and we institute it tomorrow! That is the explanation I want from the honourable member. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Part of my concern is about the procedure in this House. You have made a ruling, but members of the Front Bench continue interfering with the work of this august House, intimidating us, calling us names and they expect us to reciprocate in terms of respect.

Madam Speaker, when the hon. Minister of Defence made a statement, he gave a disclaimer that he is only going to speak for Defence and not for Internal Affairs. But we know in this country, Defence by itself does not constitute the entire parameter of security. 

I am seeking guidance from you, Madam Speaker. The Chair made a promise to us that there will be a statement on the security of this country. Do we also expect a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs, or shall we assume this statement from the Ministry of Defence constitutes the entire picture of our current status?

Last but not least, again I am just wondering if that minister’s statement was not what we call in military terms, "a situation report"?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still expect one more statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs. I still expect that statement, maybe tomorrow.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Madam Speaker, I have no doubt that you have noticed the desire of almost every member to contribute on this matter.  Even when you go the other side, still almost half of the members would like to contribute. Having considered the first business, at this time some of us reach diminishing returns. I, therefore, would like to move, under 40(c), that we adjourn the debate to tomorrow, so that we come back fresh and we tackle this important matter. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have noted that on this side alone, 30 people would like to contribute. There are still others on the other side. I have tried to begin with members from the areas, which are affected, but this is a national issue, which goes beyond the affected areas. So, I am obliged also to give opportunity to members outside those areas to contribute. 

In the circumstances, the House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 30 April 2003 at 2.00 p.m.)




I 














