Tuesday, 25 April 1995

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

PRAYERS

(The Council was called to order.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT BILL, 1994

(Debate continued.)

DR BYARUHANGA (Buruli County, Masindi):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to make a contribution to this very important Bill.  The importance of the environment to the continue existence of the human race need not be emphasized.  However, we must debate this Bill we knowing that we have always had laws for the protection of the environment, what this Bill is trying to do is to compile them into one comprehensive law.  Now, as we debate this Bill, we should ask ourselves why in the past these laws for the protection of the environment have not worked, why we have continued to have environmental degradation despite the laws that we had had in the past?  

I wish to submit that in our concern for mother earth, in our concern for the atmosphere, in our concern for stratosphere, we must bear in mind what some philosophers have called the newsphere, the newsphere is a thinking layer and the newsphere on this planet earth is made up of a human beings. If we make laws that are not directed at this newsphere, we are wasting time, if we make laws that do not involve this person who actually degrades the environment and who can actually save the environment, then we are just wasting our time.  

I am, therefore, happy that the Bill before us makes an attempt at involving this newsphere because it creates the Environment Authority, it creates the District Environment committees and it also forms the Local Environmental Committee. Now, it is these Local Environmental committees if handled properly and if made to work that will save the environment of this country, so the challenge is going to be on those ladies and gentlemen that are going to be appointed on the Environment Authority, they must ensure that they go down and involve the Local Environmental Committee in the management of our environment.  

I also wish to say that, in managing the environment, the government is always in dilemma, in backward economies like ours government would wish to cause very fast development and yet government cannot cause fast development and yet it causes the people to exploit the nature resources.  Now, in this exploitation of nature resources, if you want to make good and fast profit and have the necessary capital accumulation that will cause development, you must exploit the resources cruddy without much regard to environmental protection.  This is the dilemma that any government finds itself in, it would wish to cause very first development but in doing so, it finds it is destroying the environment and therefore, both the masses and the government must try to ensure a balance in order to have sustainable development.  

But in the experience of other countries, we have found out that government because it is under pressure from the masses to cause development has not been able to effect this balance.  That is why in the developed world we have the Green Movement, you have heard in other countries where they have even formed green parties.  Now, this Green Movement shall work outside the government machinery for the - to put pressure on the government to ensure that there is always a balance between the government’s need for fast development and the need to save the environment.  

Therefore, although we should not register for it, for this law that we are making to be successful the Ugandans especially the elites in our society must be ready to form a very vigorous green movement in our nation.  So, the challenge is on us and the challenge is on everyone in this country to ensure that we have a green movement that will keep pressure on the government.  

Before I end, I would also wish to comment on one area, Professor Kagonyera here talked about our level of development that does not allow us for example to use safer forms of energy in our lively hood.  

But, one point I would wish to point out also is that in any ecosystem, in fact, even leaving out the human being even if you had termites, the issue of population pressure must not be forgotten however much we cry to keep our environment but if our population continues to expand at this rate, it is expanding however much we cry to conserve our environment definitely the population pressure will cause environmental degradation. (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, the fear or the so-called population explosion as shown by the Western countries, it is nonsense particularly in Uganda and Africa.  Why?  I give one example so that I do not take your time.  Britain has 60 million people, and they do not suffer because there greater people or population the more people you are, the better the market if you have less people there no market.

DR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I agree with the hon. Member partially, this population issue is very complicated.  One, if you have a very big population when your level of industrialisation is still very low, that very heavy population may cause you never to realise industrialisation.  But if you are lucky like Britain and you are able to industrialise when your population is still very small, you can then afford even a bigger population and with a bigger population you will get heavier industrialisation.

Finally, I wish to inform the House that this area of population pressure must also be kept in mind, but at the same time it is possible even with our means today for government to do something serious about environmental protection and this serious something must be in the area of rural electrification unless we do that very quickly, definitely our environment will continue to be grave area.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS BWAMBALE (Women Representative, Kasese):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for this opportunity to contribute on this important Bill.  Before I begin, Allow me to make two remarks.  One, the people of Kasese and myself are sorry about the incident that has happened in Northern Uganda resulting in several deaths of our people. We convey through you, Mr Chairman, condolences to these innocent people but it makes us worried all of us who are living on the borders, we find ourselves worried but we are firm that the National Resistance Movement is vigilant enough to convert any external aggression.  I wish to call upon my Members of this House who come from boarder areas to keep our people vigilant and prepared for any external aggression.

Second observation, I wish to report to you that, I have safely arrived at the back bench and I thank -(Interjection)- I want to thank my colleagues who are here and have welcomed me and we are ready to work together and also the Colleagues at the Front Bench for the corporation they gave me and the confidence I received for those two years.  Mr Chairman.  

I now come to the Bill.  I thank the Minister for this Bill as many of my Colleagues have stated it is indeed a timely and very needed Bill.  I would say this law has been long overdue, it should have come much, much earlier; but all the same, it is here and we are debating it.  

The Minister hopes to introduce a Monitoring Body - an autonomous Body in this Bill.  I support him that it is high time we have a definite body responsible for implementation and effective implementation of all laws on environment and land.  I am reliably informed that in Uganda there are not less than 60 statutes that have been made on natural resources management and the protection of environment.  

But the Minister in his earlier statement on the state of environment in Uganda categorically stated that although we have these laws and policies in place, they have not helped us to manage our environment properly and the reasons he gave in that statement is that there has been lack of involving the local community and indeed many Members have stressed this that this is a very serious practical omission and if you mean this Bill - if this is not well planned and provided for in this Bill, we are likely to face a big problem.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, it states in that book again that the failure for effectiveness of these statutes and policies is because of the formulation and implementation of these laws and policies being monopolised by the Central Government which is almost the same point and yet I see in the administrative structure as proposed to be established by this Bill.  Most of the functions and responsibilities are still centred with Central Government, so I have a fear that even with this law which has corrected all other together when it eventually becomes law, we may be facing the same problem of lack of effectiveness or the laws and policies because they are concentrated all the prerogative is in the Central Government.  I would have loved to see more functions and more financial powers pushed at the district level, I do not see any logistic provision in this Bill for the districts, for example; when you look at Clause 16 where the Minister is seeking to establish district environmental offices and officers and the respective district environmental committees and study the functions which have been proposed, this is where my fear lies.  

There is nothing I have not seen, it so far and those functions that is making the Decentralised Government mandatorily have a vote where they will be allocating money to the environmental issue.  And when I look at the Board which is also established at the national level, the Clauses like my do this and not saying shall do this, I was looking at the way the National Board will be raising its funds and how much of that would go to the Decentralised Committees as established in Clause 16, and I noted that there is still a lot lacking in this Bill to empower the Board to send direct funds to decentralised office to support this office.  Although this office is located in the district, considering the importance of environmental issues, I would feel more comfortable if there is a Clause making the Local Government compulsory allocating an item for this. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Concentrate on your Bill.

MRS BWAMBALE:  Thank you.  So, Mr chairman, to emphasize my point, I would like to see an amendment in this Bill where the Board which is managing the funds at the national level will be compelled to send some resources to the district so that the district can be able to implement the provision of this Bill.  If you look at Clause 16 (ii) of the Bill and I hope I am using the right one, the National Environmental Bill.  Clause 15, and I quote, Clause 15 sub-Clause 2, ‘when established that is a district environmental committee the functions of the district environmental committee may include the following and then they are listed.  The layers how do you interpret that?  We may do it, we may not do it, maybe, that is a drafting language but me who is not a learned colleague? I am disturbed by that word ‘may’ I would have loved to see ‘shall.’ (Interruption)

MR KAJURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, the condition of the environment is not uniform in the whole country, some countries have forests which have been cut, others have many trees, others are suffering from one problem to another and there must be flexibility in the law on how the district environmental committee formulate their policies, it is snot a uniform thing, the priority in terms of degradation are not the same, this is why the law does not look in terms of must.  Because, once in Kabale the draining of marshes or wetlands is an issue even of it is not an issue in other districts.  So, the district must have flexibility in order to make policies.  

Again on authority in the body, which is responsible for executing the policies on environment so it must be one, you cannot create many authorities at the same time, be it is going to be very heavily involved in assisting the district environment committee as long as those policies have been approved and supported by the District Resistance Councils.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS BWAMBALE:  I thank the Minister for that information, however, on scrutinizing Clause 15, the provision ‘may’ is relating to coordination of activities at the DRC level activities whether government needs are intensified in that district or not, but the activity of coordinating the issue of coordinating the activities of DRC by the District Environmental Committee should be a must.  The activity of ensuring that the environmental concerns are integrated; really integration really planning into the plans and the object of any district where it applies in my opinion should be a mandatory thing rather than leaving it to whom it may concern. 

Still talking about the involvement of the district or local authorities, I would like to specifically to refer the hon. Members to Clause 89, the financial provisions where the national environmental funds is established and sub-Clause (2), I quote, ‘this national environmental fund and the Board on the advice of the Executive Director provide -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Which Clause?

MRS BWAMBALE:  Clause 89 and I made it clear that I was using the Bill entitled the National Environmental Bill, I beg your pardon, I continue to Clause 90 because I have already covered 89.  I continue to Clause 90 sub-Clause 2, I quote, ‘the Board may on the advice of the Executive Director provide funding for any government department involved in the field of environmental conservation and natural resources management.’  

I am still following up on the issue of leaving an option for the Board to allocate resources this word ‘may’ I would again like to request the indulgence of the hon. Minister to try and make it sharp so that it is compulsory for the local authorities to receive direct funding from the national funds because the national fund will be getting government funds.

MR KAJURA:  The environment concerns are not going to be a Central Government matter, they are going to be decentralised right from the word go and we are going to have environment assistants in the districts and in the budget which is going on now provision is being made to make funds available to them as a decentralised service.  So, the Central Government will continue to assist but this will be a centralised service and this is why the word ‘must’ cannot be used.

MRS BWAMBALE:  Mr Chairman, I thank the Minister for the statement he has made but I said that in the same observation, it is because of over centralisation of resources that have caused the failure implementation of environmental policy.  I will take an example of the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme (NURP). I have been there, I have been on the ground and I am not happy by what has been implemented under the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme. (Applause)  

It is very unfortunate, I wish that in the conception of that programme the funds that have been already used under National Centred programmes had been sent to each district and they lay down their own priorities, they may have realised better results if it is a principle.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that, you are right that you have not seen anything, any programme, any development in the Northern Uganda Reconstruction Programme but there are plenty of pajeros here written on Northern Reconstruction running around in Kampala that is what development is.

MR BWAMBALE:  Mr Chairman, there is a provision for a private Member’s Motion and those who are interested by this subject can come up with the same, allow me to continue.  I am still on equipping and facilitating the local communities right to the grassroots.I think it is a very important practical point.  I come from an area and my neighbouring areas where there are a lot of mining activities and those mining activities have really caused a lot of environmental degradation.  I also come from a geographical place where the terrain of the land is a bit hostile, it is very stiff and, therefore, it has encouraged land degradation through soil erosion.  

So, my point here is to make the local government realise more resources to manage their environmental problems at that level.  Government should begin to think about royalities that accrue to government due to these activities such as mining.  All these royalties have to be shared between Central Government and Local Government so that the Local Government can have a way of income and rehabilitate those areas that are degraded through the mining activities in these respective areas because these mines are not available to the local community to produce local crops, yet they are degraded and left and may be after 20 or 30 years, the mining activities will cease but the land will have been degraded and the royalities will be no more, so if we can prepare for these environmental activities in local areas by sharing the royalities within the Central Government and Local Government, it would be okay.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  The royalities are centralised to the centre.  But if you look at the law concerning mining activities are so minimal that are not - to the land degradation after the minerals have got out, I think it is one of the area the Minister should now revisit the law concerning mining. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.

MRS BWAMBALE:  Thank you for the information -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, royalities are really essential to all the governments, the Central Government or National Government and Local Governments.  Why?  Because, it is a system of sharing the means with which to develop economically and social welfare.  So what the hon. Marwas the Member for Kotido or Dodoth said, whether it is too much to be shared or too little, but it must be fairly shared to develop all the country.

MRS BWAMBALE:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Members for this information, the concept is that the royalities must be fairly shared with the emphasis for more location to areas which are going to affect it.  

My second area of concern is the laws that affect the international labour organisation conventions that affect our operations here, that affect the environment in Uganda.  

Allow me to quote, Mr Chairman, the earlier Convention No. 148 and recommendation No. 156 of 1988 where it is provided that I quote, ‘protection of workers against occupation hazards in the working environment due to air pollution, noise and vibration is necessary, Uganda has not yet clarified this convention,’ I would like to know although it is being followed and observed, it is not yet ratified. 

 I would like to bring an example from our area of Kasese District where we have been affected by failure to implement this Hima Cement Factory which was established in 1952 long ago. What is happening, how in the design of that factory the workers’ quarters were put just next to the factory the senior quarters were put a distance away, they are safer, the managers and the senior officers, but these ordinary people, they just live daily under polluted air, heaven knows how much of their lungs is affected by now since it started in 1952.  I would like to know how much the Ministry is addressing that problem because we might still invoke that convention.  And it is privately owned -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, the Member’s task very important position, in fact, in Uganda many of the workers are exposed to bad environment just going to Jinja, you can see what it is, the people who are staying around Mbarara it is obvious people are really dying and in fact, -(Applause)- even if you go further and tour these industries, you will just shed tears; our people are never protected; the Convention quoted very, very clearly. I think the Ministry concerned should take note of that.  Thank you.

MRS BWAMBALE:  Yes, I am winding up, Mr Chairman, this subject concerns very much the people I represent and also this nation, it concerns sustainable development, allow me a few minutes.  To wind up on this point, Hima Cement Factory is now privately owned, now this is my worry, how will it be ratified now?  Having had the factory sold off, how effective can the District Environmental Committee supervise now and protect these workers, do they have any more powers to ensure that the lives of these people who are living here are protected?  (Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that access is easier for the workers to realise their rights in private sector than it is in a public sector, it is more difficult for workers to fight for their rights when they are fighting the State but it is easier because for every day, they do not work the private investor loses profit and he cannot afford that therefore, negotiations are much easier that way.

MRS BWAMBALE:  Thank you -(Interruption)

MR KAJURA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, if we look at Article 66, it says, the authority shall maintain a register of all pollution licences issued under this Statute and it means under this law we have the right not to issue a license and if any organisation individual is polluting the air at the countryside will not be issued a license and it will not operate, this is under this law.  So, there is provision for protecting the pollution whether be it individual or rivers etc.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS BWAMBALE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, it is unfortunate that for this factory it is a design problem, I do not know how much the private owner whether he will be ready to venture and start other workers quarters and abandon the ones that are just constructed, I do not think that is in his agreement, so it is a technical problem I think I will be going to the Minister’s office to discuss it further and see how it is addressed.  

The Public Health Act of 1969 empowers the Minister of Health, he is not here -(Interjection)- I am sorry he is here, empowers the Minister to stop operations whether they are on any economic activity for those areas or those activities that are causing pollution.  I wonder how much the Minister of Health is prepared to implement this in respect of these people.  

We also have Kilembe Mines deposits that are busy polluting lake George, where we get fish and the people of my area, of my constituency vary fish very much, but these pollution researchers have indicated that is has penetrated the fish in lake George and they are likely to be destroyed very soon.  So, I request the Minister to implement that Act and save the lives of the people who are living in the park and their only resource is this lake.  

I would, therefore, like to recommend in view of these two example and others all over Uganda that, when Government is making its contract especially those that are related to environment that a compulsory component compels the contractors or those who are interested in investment be put so that we can have accumulative resources of our environmental funds.  

Finally, I want to reinforce the point of Dr Byaruhanga who was talking about rural electrification -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up.

MRS BWAMBALE:  I am winding up, Mr Chairman.  Rural electrification is a resource which if it is ignored in this Bill may lead to more environmental problems  We have been looking through the Bill and I wanted to see a Clause where the Minister is repealing the UNEB Act, which is giving a monopoly to Government of producing, distributing and levying taxes and collecting revenues from electricity. (Applause)  I think if this was enclosed in this Bill, I would feel a little bit more comfortable knowing that our domestic fuel problems are going to be reduced.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I would like in the first place to recognise and pay tribute to the steering job which has been initiated and spearheaded in this part of the country by ‘Sabasajja Kabaka of Buganda’ in the conservation of forests -(Applause)- in planting trees and in making the public aware of their responsibility in this field.  

Secondly, I would like to say that, with the question of degradation by deforestation, cutting timber, cutting trees for firewood and all other forms and did we remedy that form of degradation by reforestation, there is no other way that I know of except to plant more trees. 

When I was in exile in Kenya, they used to have and I bear say they still have today a National Tree Planting Day.  On that day, the whole nation led by His Excellency the President of Kenya got out in the field and plant at least one tree per person or in respect of any other person who is alive in Kenya, that day who cannot plant a tree by himself or herself.  Now, that means if a child was born the previous night a tree is planted on its behalf, so that on that day over 20 million trees are planted in the Republic of Kenya. I thought when I was there and I still think that this is a good idea which could be and should be emulated by this country.  

As it is well know, I have been in the Government for sometime -(Interjection)- when I tried to share this idea with my colleagues in the Government, what I found was that, we could not carry out not start firing the imagination of our people by having a National Tree Planting Day, because we do not have sufficient number of seedlings to plant.  At least that was the answer that I was given on several occasions, the situation may have changed if it has - I am not aware but I am saying, especially after I had visited other parts of Uganda and if there was a very imaginative article in The New Vision of yesterday by that environmentally inspired journalist called ‘Ndyakira Amooti’ of something like that and he was talking about the policies of agro-forestry in Kigezi.  

We cut trees or they die; they are destroyed by all sorts of things, but we cut them for fire wood or people almost everybody uses fire wood and almost everybody misused firewood because we do not have efficient places where to cook or ‘amasiga’ so that a lot of fire go in this open places and a lot of heat is lost and is not concentrated on the cooking.  Therefore, it becomes necessary for us to really think about this question of reforestation of replanting, but it is not good for me as a Member of Parliament to go to Busujju and tell people to replant and they say, they have no seedlings or trees.  

So, I would like to pass my suggestion to the Minister that they should really conduct a massive campaign of nursery production of trees throughout the country so that when the President shall say, let us have a National Tree Planting Day or days, there shall be sufficient seedlings to go around to plant and they should be conceived in such a manner that those that are appropriate in different areas who could be planted in different areas.  For instance, in this area in Buganda, it is - they normally plant fruit bearing trees like jackfruit, like avocados and others -(Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, well as I appreciate the problem of Government having no seedlings, it is also very important for the hon. Member to take an initiated to mobilize the Banabusujju to get the seeds planted so that they can germinate the seedlings and that would be a beginning instead of waiting for Government to have the seedlings in place.  Now, it is you the politician who should mobilize the Banabusujju. (Laughter)

DR MAGEZI:  Point of information.   Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the point he is making well catered for on page 26, Article 17, this is in respect of Local Government system shall on the advice of the District Environmental Committee upon these Local Environmental committees which will take into account all he is trying to elaborate the functions.  

Secondly, is that this has been an environment day in Uganda observed over the last five years and in addition to that, in May this year which is within the next two weeks, the particular tree planting day is in fact, going to be a public holiday in Uganda.  But notwithstanding that, I think onus really is on us to spearhead development of the future within our own constituencies as a former hon. Attorney General and Minister of Justice, you know that actually the grassroots is looking at the national leaders to go ahead by example. So, I think the challenge is on ourselves first Government will do something but what have we done ourselves as individuals.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I gave way for information, I was expecting information not - of course, I myself have planted trees and I think of transplanting and the people of Busujju are also planting trees, but I am saying may be it was not clear, is that what I have noticed in Kenya they have a National Tree Planting Day and on that day everybody, nobody goes to do other work, they go to plant trees, what I am saying is, that we are not able to do that day nationally here in Uganda because I was informed there is no sufficient seedlings.  The National Environmental Day I have officiated even on one of them myself in the past in Luwero, what do they get there?  Mostly school children, you see children they come they sing very light songs which they have composed like, what shall we do when the rain goes and so on and so forth and there would be no trees planted at all.  I am talking about a national tree planting campaign throughout Uganda on one day set aside for that purpose.  

On these matters of environment, the problem in my opinion of my submission has not been really inadequacy of - the problem has been lack of seriousness, lack of leadership in implementation of the laws which are already there.  I would like to illustrate this observation by talking about the health environment.  

At the beginning of this century which also witnesses the beginning of modern administration under colonialism in this country.  There were outbreaks of really very serious health hazards; pledges, sleeping sickness etc, every disease from man and animal and these people in those days use your imagination hon. Members consider what resources, what logistic our fore fathers had at that time to enable them to cop or to deal with those problems, they had no motor cars, they had no telephones, they had no radio, but they went around saying, sleeping sickness like that they eradicated it, mice were hunted everybody had to bring pails full of tails of mice, they used to say, ‘emikira gye mese giliwa’ -(Laughter)- and the truth is, it is a shame to day there are no latrines, those in urban areas especially in rural areas.  In urban areas people use ‘obuvera’ it is because the drainage has broken down, the sewerage system has broken down -(Laughter) 

This is degradation but consider in 1910/1920 when Mugwanya was ‘the Omulamuzi of Buganda’, he decreed that everybody, and I have risked to say this, I thought his descendant would be here, but he is not, but the well-informed Baganda know that even today a pit latrine is called Mugwanya because he insisted that everybody must have a pit latrine. They named it after him and if a chief comes and says, ‘Mugwanya eluwa?’ and if Mugwanya could not be found, you would be taken away.  Now you are taken away and may be you get a few ‘kibokos’ and when you come and you dig one.  Mr Chairman, I did explain to my sister sitting yonder that Mugwanya was a name given to pit latrines - ebyoloni, kyoloni kyo -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I am sorry I have been told proceed.  When you go to the areas today where the hon. Members have been elected to come here; the other day I was ashamed, I had a very, very important visitor and he went to school; but even if at school the facilities were almost not there.  So, I am saying that, the laws are there, even this law will be enacted in the fullness of time which will not be very far; but if there is no will, and if there is no energy and if there is no determination, and if there is no rain - to go and see that this work - it will not work.  It will be yet another law which will be yet another exercise in futurity.  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member who is holding the Floor that as long as we make politicians to go and heap people, they will not.  We must have people in place like the chiefs, who can do this without thinking of votes.  But politicians, if one goes to tell people to do something, which is good for them, he will first think of his votes.  Like latrines, if you say politicians - we depend on politicians to go in their areas, to tell people to have these latrines, definitely most of us would not be here, if we were to join in.  So, we must have a machinery, the people who are not going to solicit for votes - yes, separation of powers.  That is the information I wanted to give.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform this House that Africa in general still needs dictators, if we are to develop.  Some countries in Europe and Latin America, develop - countries like China for example, developed because they had dictators.  People who can enforce laws and people who can put things in place, and people who can make things move.  Those are the sort of leaders we need in Uganda, not politicians. (Laughter)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Okay, Mr Chairman, I would ask the hon. Member to allow me to proceed and wind up.  I would like to talk a little bit about the political environment.  I have seen it somewhere that we have been described as an Island of peace.  So, if you look at our region; Somalia, Ethiopia, Sudan, Rwanda, Burundi, even parts of Zaire, and so on.  They are all sorts of you know, what is happening.  And in that kind of political environment in which we really need whether we like it or not, even we in Uganda, it is not easy.  I mean, it is not even - you cannot really stand out to be - as an island.  And we should try to think about these problems.  It was very sad when I was watching on television.  You know what happened with the ‘Interahamwe.’  They made us really ashamed to be Africans.  But now for government troops to go and surround a refugee camp of over 100,000 an armed people and open fire on them for three hours and killed 4,000 people.  Using claps, using arms, which they stole in Uganda.  

So, really, this is the total environment.  We should try to create environment of people, we should try to create peace solution.  My sister there who just spoke before me, talked about the pollution of the lakes.  But have hon. Members noticed as I have, that almost every other vehicle moves in Ugandan road today is carrying out smokes and fumes out of its exhaust pipe, poisoning the atmosphere, which is no longer acceptable and which is in fact, legally punishable in developed countries.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, it is not only the vehicles.  Even here in the House we get involuntary smoking from the smoke which comes from Members who go in the lobby and smoke.  So, I think, you should also protect us Members who are non-smokers from the fumes that come from there.  

Another point I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, is the protest in me when we were on the aeroplane going down South Africa, we were sprayed.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I wish the hon. Lady could promote an amendment to standing orders to require us Member not to walk anywhere within the proceeds of the House.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, through you, I would like to inform the House that, the hon. Member has raised a very important point.  Everywhere in Western countries, you do not find these smoking vehicles which are putting the lives of the pedestrians and all the people at risk.  So, I wish that this point is taken care of very seriously by the people who are going to handle this Bill, especially, in Uganda where you get these vehicles which are about 20 to 40 years old with all this smoke, still on our roads. (Applause)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  I thank the hon. Member for the information.  In fact, when government tried to deal with this matter by prohibiting the importation of vehicles of a certain age, which were too old, I think this was frustrated by wanainchi or by the politicians or by the what.  But these very old so-called reconditioned vehicles still continue to come to this country.  But in an event, when you go to Britain for instance, you cannot find a vehicle broken down on the road being mended.  It is not possible.  So, I do not know.  The problem of course is economic.  We may not be in a position -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that, those of us who are observant in our public roads, I intelligently want to use public roads we meet not only private vehicles, but mostly police vehicles; they are the ones that are old; because the old things are not correct.  So, he was saying that government of which he was recently the hon. Member, to implement the law. (Laughter)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like to clarify that, it is not only reconditioned vehicles that give that smoke on our roads; the pajeros start smoking before they are old, and they should be banned from being imported into this country.  Thank you.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member - far from microphone - has made provisions for all that.  If you look at the principles, Principle K, among those principles of this particular Bill, you will notice that that provision is meant to the effect that the cost of pollution will be borne by that one who pollutes.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I think all this has enriched the debate.  But I think the moral of all this is that, in poor countries, it is very difficult to implement.  Today, I heard in the morning, a ship, a British ship was carrying nuclear waste from France to Japan and those people there, the Governor of the Province where it was going to be dumped, refused the ship to land there and the ship did not land there.  Now, the beauty of the story that this nuclear waste came from nuclear materials which originated from Japan.  It was sent to Europe for refinement; it was refined and what those people wanted was removed and then the residue was returned back to Japan.  

Here in Africa for a few thousand dollars, the Europeans come and dump their waste on our shores.  Just anyhow or whatever, we do not know how to deal with it, we do not have the technology, we do not have the money, we do not have the political muscle.  So, what are we going to do? (Laughter)  So, these are matters which -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, the Member holding the Floor, when he was still a Minister, he went in Iganga and witnessed the spraying of tsetse fly by using a plane.  And the chemical used was banned in Europe; and he was praising Germany for helping Uganda.  Is the Member in order therefore, to talk about other countries matter when he himself was wrong?  Thank you. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is quite in order.  Proceed please.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, we have problems, we have a problem of the cars which would not move, we have a problem of dumping - but the fifth which we can deal with, we may not be able to deal with certain things, but, there is no reason why our city should have all these at the park, just on Luwum Street there is a permanent rubbish heap which stinks.  I think it is absolutely impossible.  It is full of flies; it is a poisoning centre for killing the people of Uganda.  Why cannot that thing be taken away?  Can anybody give me any good reason?  What do we not have?  Those things were not there when I was born.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  before the Africans occupied the city, it was very clean.  Because most Asians used to eat dry food like rice.  But when we entered the city, we carried our habits of eating matooke, potatoes, which has got a lot of garbage, and where City Council provides containers, some people are shy o dump the material in the containers.  

And you see, usually the City Council collects very early in the morning.  But these people sometimes throw garbage at night and in wrong places; not the gazetted areas of City Council.  Not that, I support the garbage being left on the street.  But you should learn to utilise these matooke peelings and make African salt instead of dumping it there, because it is very good for your bones.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Therefore, we should continue to live with those things? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up honourable.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  This question of the Africans; of course the Africans are being called so many things.  And one of the problems is that, we do not know how to maintain.  We do not know how to maintain; we wait until things are broken down.  We wait until pipes are broken down before we repair them.  We wait until roads are being potholes.  I have been having a sick child in Mulago, I, therefore, needed to drive from Kitante Road going to Mulago; it was repaired when we came, now it is so full of potholes; you do not know where to pass.  When I was in the hospital, I found that there used to be a telephone in the room, I found there was a line, there was no receiver. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to wind up please.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I have been terribly interrupted, but I will follow your instructions and wind up.  In winding up, I want to inform the Minister - actually I would call again the Government that, of course, this law will be passed and any other law you need.  But the proof of the pudding is in the eating.  You have the law and everything.  I hope you will be able to find the money and the personnel and get on with the job and we wish you well.  Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.  Thank you.

DR KARUGABA (Fort Portal Municipality):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman and hon. Members.  I treasure this opportunity immensely being my first time to address this House. (Applause)  Allow me, Mr Chairman, through you, to convey greetings from the people of Fort Portal Municipality and at large, from Kabarole District and particularly those of the Municipality, are committed to national unity, peace and democracy.  For those who do not know me very well, I have been practising at Mulago Hospital as a specialist of statution and gynaecology. (Applause)  

The principle of Environmental Protection revolves on balancing numbers and proper management of space.  In environment, everything else seems to be connected to everything else.  And, therefore, there is a lot of interdependency on one another.  With that in view, I entirely support a multi sectoral approach on which every Ministry or every NGO that contribute to environmental protection be mobilised as much as possible.  

Looking at the schedule number two, which has projects that will be used to monitor or to measure the impact of environment.  I see the list is quite enormous and yet not very exhaustive.  I have little comments to make that, I do hope that these projects that will at any one time benefit the majority of our population.  Secondly, that each of these components of the projects, there will be a component of self-sustainability so that the projects are not donor dependant.  In which case will be left in large areas, which are difficult to manage environmentally, when the donors pull out.  And this has of course happened in many other projects that are not necessarily environment related.  We have been left with white elephants, which we cannot manage.  I do hope and concur with other Members that, these projects will have no adverse health effects.  

To quote a few examples, large scale agriculture as mentioned in this schedule, in many other countries, has been associated with epidermic, even here at the rich scheme, there are evidence of Bilharzia, as a result of the Large Scale Irrigation that took place at Kibimba.  We had epidermic in South West, as a result of mining without taking care of the potholes which later on accumulated water, and were mosquito breathing areas.  

I do hope that the word research will not be replaced in this Bill; it would be very unfortunate if this Bill did not focus on research. (Applause)  Research can be eliminatory; it can be sophisticated depending on what the objectives for that research is.  And in my opinion, research in this case of environment should be geared towards continued quality assurance and surveillance.  If we are to detect any disasters that may be a danger to our community.  

I wish to make a few comments on spraying and use of insecticide.  And generally, insecticides are slow poisons.  Even the simple insecticides like doom, each time you spray, you should know that you are slowly poisoning our environment.  These insecticides unfortunately are not of the quality that are used elsewhere, because of market forces and members have already referred to the effect of dumping of commodities into the less fortunate and into the less powerful countries.  And that one, couples with the limited facilities to study the effect of these insecticides, renders our communities at great risk of suffering from use of indiscriminate use of insecticides.  

In my opinion, I would think in Uganda, our major environmental concern today is that of deforestation.  I know Members have deliberated at large on this subject and they have proposed tree planting.  Tree planting is a very good idea.  But tree planting alone would be like filling a bottomless pit.  I am of strong opinion that, while we plant trees, we must offer alternate measures to our community.  Because we know that even if we planted the trees, they do not grow at the same rate as they are being destroyed.  

And, therefore, the virtue of destroying the environment will remain unless we give our communities alternatives.  These alternatives must be built on the existing cultures and technology, so that we slowly improve on the existing technology, to allow our communities to readily accept the changes that we may make in the various alternatives.  It is not uncommon to introduce a very good technology and it is rejected by the community because one has not taken into consideration the social, cultural aspects.  Uganda has an average of about 7 hours of sunlight.  In the world today, about 15 percent of all the energy, is drawn from solar energy resources.  This is a resource that, this country has not taped.  This is a resource which would require minimal distribution and transportation vis-a-vis; the hydro-electric power which demands a large investment of capital, a lot of intricacies in distribution and transportation.  While a Member talked of rural electrification, we still have a problem of urban electrification.  To overcome the need for rural electrification, I would strongly propose that, the area of solar technology be investigated in this country.  

The other options, which I could talk about, is the option of bio-gas which everybody here knows and is just a sort of fuel produced from digestion basically of dung.  These are faeces.  It would be quite economical, but bearing in mind the social, cultural attachments to handling faeces and dung be it animal or human, I see a very long way for us to utilise this important resource.  

I wish not to now to turn to an important subject of waste disposal.  I know that in this country line any other country, we look forward that will also develop like our brothers in the developed North and we are likely to get more industrialised and to improve our technologies a little bit more with time.  To quote an example, Mulago will soon have a Radio Therapy Unit or it is already functioning.  There will be a lot of Radio Iso-top manipulation in the country and we do need to begin planning seriously where we shall dispose all this waste.  And with decentralisation, do not be surprised when one district says, you cannot dump in my district.  So, it is high time we begin seriously thinking of hazardous disposal in this country.  

It would be unfair for me if I ended without talking about disaster preparedness.  One, because I come from an area which has been hit by disaster.  And two, because on many occasions, I have been called upon to help on health issues of people either displaced or affected by disaster.  I do hope that, an effective functional or operative mechanism that will ensure early detection or early management of disaster in this country will be put into place, so that our people do not have to wait for many hours or days, before they can receive help when a disaster strikes.  I know many disasters do not give warning.  But if we have in place an effective  mechanism of handling disaster, will go a long way in helping those individuals that may be uplifted by disaster in the future.  With those few words, I wish to move.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. (Applause)

MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Motion.  In the first place, allow me to commend the NRM Government for the emphasis they have put on the environment.  The last time efforts were put on the environment was before independence.  This really had the effort because the control of erosion in the form of passipalamas.  Now, after independence, all efforts controlling environment died until NRM came in 1986 and the whole idea was revised.  

I also note and appreciate the efforts of the NRM Government towards the environment by introducing in Makerere studies related to environment.  These are studies leading to a diploma in environment conducted by the NRM Secretariat.  Now, this is a commendable job and I thank the government for it.  

I note under the 3rd Schedule on page 80 of the revised Bill that, the Minister in Section 2, talks about urban planning as being one of the activities of the authority.  This is a welcome development, because I have all along been disturbed by the lack of planning in our suburbs in the tows especially here in Kampala.  I have always been disturbed by the ugly site in areas like Katwe; which areas are supposed to be mirrors to our guests who come to Kampala.  Areas which are supposed to tell our guests what Uganda looks like.  But I have always wondered why serious planning of these areas has not been considered.  Instead of having proper planning in these areas, you are just greeted by coffins; as if you are trying to tell the visitors that in Uganda we die so much.  

At one time, I was wondering why the government has not taken the trouble rather the City Council has not taken the trouble to develop areas like Najjanankumbi, Zana, Namasuba, which areas are first seen by guests when they come to this country.  And indeed, I am also wondering whether this project which was rejected in Kawala; the project that was meant for Kawala could not be diverted to these areas? Because if the people of Kawala do not like it, let it be diverted to these areas so that we get a face lift like that one we had in this area of Wabigalo; when there was a project of that nature.  Like my colleagues, I also wish to support the idea of having research as part of the activities of the authority.  Because, we have been talking about this weed, the hyacinth.  Because, -(Interruption)

MRS MUGARURA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that, research has been thoroughly done.  What we need is to get closer to the people who have done it under different methods.  So, it is after government to positively observe this issue.  Otherwise, there are companies, which are willing to take joint ventures. Thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  I thank you the hon. Member.  It is good news if research has been carried out on the water hyacinth.  But then it seems the results of this research are not known to Ugandans.  At one time, I read in the papers that this plant could be very good food for pigs and I thought perhaps, it would really help us to rear more of these pigs; for some of our people who eat pork.  I am sorry, Mr Chairman, if I am offending you; but I must apologise, because my colleague here was -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I have been excited by that statement, Mr Chairman, so, I would like to inform the hon. Member that 99 percent of he plant is water.  So, I do not know whether we do not have enough water in Uganda to make water hyacinth any use at all to us.  Thank you.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, I am glad the hon. Member points out that 99 per cent of that plant is water; why can we not take it to those dry areas once you have harvested it out of the lake? I also know of seven lakes of this country which are now drying up.  We need to carry out research and find out why these lakes are drying up.  I have the example of lake Wamala which is part of my county and much of it has now dried up; it is filled with papyrus.  So, I hope when the environmental bill comes out, some research should be carried out to find out why these lakes are drying up.  

Allow me also to say something about the ‘buveras’ - the polythene bags.  I think we need to institute a law within the armpits of the Environmental Bill that, whoever uses the kavera, after use he should burn it.  Because if you go around Kampala, all these areas around here are littered with buveras.  And once you see buveras in an area that area becomes very barren and it is disastrous to our environment.  So, I really do not know, I think as part of this Bill, we should have a section which instructed every Ugandan to burn a kavera once he made use of it.  

I also note in Clause 4, page 16 that, every Ugandan should have a right to a healthy environment.  In connection of this, I have a complaint to raise against KCC; when they are disposing off the rubbish.  I do not know why they do not cover their lorries when they are removing the rubbish.  Because it disappoints me to see a lorry removing rubbish and instead of taking it to a dumping place, they leave it clot around off the lorry and they make the whole town dirty.  Now, that is hazardous to the environment.  And I feel the authority should approach the City Council and remind them about the necessity of covering these lorries, which remove the garbage.  

Allow me also to talk about wood; as a source of energy.  I do agree with my Colleague that in order to save our forests, we need to provide alternative sources of energy like cheap electricity, the use of solar energy at reasonably low prices.  But I am worried about one thing.  Do we have the means as a government to do this?  The idea is very good, but then our resources might be so limited that, we may not in the near future be able to do this.  

Now, as an alternative, I want to request the hon. Minister under the armpit of this Environmental Bill to look into the possibility of importing into this country certain species of trees which grow very, very fast and are able to provide wood, you know, an alternative to the need for wood - for fuel.  These trees do actually exist.  I was told that the species are already available in the states and if we could import them, this could save our forests.  

Indeed, I would like to inform the hon. Member and the House through you, that we do have such trees in Uganda.  Some of them native, others imported.  But to grow so fast a tree like any animal grows so fast needs a lot of nutrients.  The tree which is familiar is eucalyptus; is one of the fastest growing; but I am informed that it consumes about 15 litres of water a day.  And that itself can be very damaging to the environment.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, that is why I called for research in this Bill.  The research will take care of that.  But may I also inform the hon. Member who has informed me that while eucalyptus draws a lot of water from the ground, it eventually passes it into the atmosphere and it comes back as rain.  So, the water that is lost is eventually brought back in a form of rain Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up. Try to wind up please.

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Mr Chairman, allow me to briefly talk about fruit trees.  You will appreciate that we Ugandans have generally got a negative impression about trees.  When you ask a man to plant a tree, he will ask you whether he will leave long enough to see the fruits of that tree.  So, I am calling for an additional thing under the programme of tree planting.  That more emphasis should be put on fruit trees which grow very fast.  For example, we have certain species of mangoes, which start giving in mangoes within only three years.  These species are being developed in Kawanda and they are available.  But the only problem, these species are in a very, very short supply, and they are very expensive.  

So, I would request that government puts in more money into this programme so that such trees can be multiplied, given to our people, so that they grow these fruit trees, and the fruit trees can be exported for earning income for this country.  I also have in mind species like avocado which grows within a period of only three years.  These are fruits we can see overseas.  So, if you give such a seedling to a man who normally has a negative view about trees and he knows that this tree is going to grow within three years, giving avocados which can be exported, I think the results are going to be very positive.  

I also have in mind the idea of also encouraging the growing of more coffee.  Because coffee apart from giving us the coffee we need, when it grows old, the trees can be used as a source of fuel, so that even in those areas which do not grow coffee, some research should be carried out into the possibility of introducing coffee there, so that we sell off the coffee, we export it and then when the trees become old, they are used as fuel.  All these measures will help us to preserve our forests.  

I am also happy about this programme of incorporating primary schools into the whole system of tree planting.  In the rural areas, we have certain schools which have got very large pieces of land.  I have ever visited certain secondary schools and primary schools, which have got as large pieces of land as 150 acres.  And when you ask these people what they have done with this land, they will tell you, we are just having a small garden of just a few plants.  I am sure it is going to add a lot to our efforts in preserving the environment.  

Since I am caught up by time, I wish to end here; but then in ending, I want to tell my colleague the hon. Minister that, the programme we are embarking on looks a very, very big and ambitious programme.  If it is so implemented, I am sure it is going to transform this country.  But he must be prepared to put in a lot of work.  

And again, I do not know whether it will really help this programme to take off by introducing the Policy Committee, which is part of the Cabinet.  I am really wondering, because these people are so busy.  As my colleagues pointed out, the ministers are so busy, and they may not have enough time to attend to the provisions of this Bill.  If it is a fear that the authority will not have enough power, why does the Minister give the authority more power to implement the provisions of this Bill?  Therefore, I have a bit of doubts about the effectiveness of this Policy Committee.  With those few remarks, Mr Chairman, I beg to support.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Mover to wind up please. 

THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kajura):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like to thank the hon. Members through you, Mr Chairman, for the valuable contributions that they have made in the discussion of this Bill.  They have been made in a constructive spirit and I value them.  I would like to inform this House that, we have been working on the implementation of the Bill when it is passed into law.  And most of the issues which have been raised here, are implementable issues.  The purpose of the Bill here is to provide an umbrella legislation, which re-enforces existing legislation.  

Some hon. Members have been discussing the use of the existing laws.  It is true that hitherto, the laws that exist have not been implemented adequately, but they do exist.  If you want to talk about soil erosion, you find that, this is the department of agriculture or now the Ministry; you find laws on pollution, who is the Ministry of Labour and so on.  

The purpose of this law is not to enforce the existing laws.  And this is why if you look for special provisions within the law or certain detain within the law, you will not be able to find them. And as I have said, when it comes to implementation, various measures have already been rafted; they await Cabinet approval and it will not have been possible to get cabinet to approve them, without the law itself being - without the Bill being turned into law.  So, all these actions are waiting the passing of the Bill into law.  And at the right time, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members will be availed this copy after it has been amended to take into account the various changes which have been made to the Bill through a discussion in the House.  

So, various issues have been raised, perhaps to take one by one.  On the question of the Policy Committee.  The Policy Committee is the machinery for problem resolution.  Environment actually should be a very sensitive matter.  If examples that say, there was a move by say an industrialist to start a project which may have a negative impact on the environment, people in the Ministry will realise that this is so and say, would write to him.  Now, if for example, I did not respond to the question of the Ministry, what would happen?  Go to the Cabinet?  Now with this, the Policy Committee where the two ministries are represented, this would create a forum in which these issues at Ministerial level will be sorted out.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  That the provisions in this Clause 8, are not required at all.  Why?  First of all, you have got a National Executive Committee which is a system of the NRM Government; the type of Government we have now.  And even when we went to the Constitution for the next five years.  So, therefore, it is quite cheaper to utilise the National Executive Committee, which has every Member, from every constituency to advise the government so as not to use money anyhow.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mzee Obwangor, that is an argument please.  Proceed hon. Minister.

THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kajura):  When ministers attend meetings, they are not paid extra.  These meetings will be held in Kampala and no minister will be paid any more money.  So, the extra expenditure and vision by the hon. Member does not arise.  I believe we are together with hon. Obwangor that, no extra expenditure arises when Ministers meet.  So, if we realise that, in fact, this is an umbrella law, then we really do not have to try each aspect being provided in it.  It brings all these laws together and clearly it states that, any existing law, whether to do with pollution, or garbage, which is in conflict with it, this law will override, and it is for this reason that, it is a very important law when it is enacted in terms of conserving the environment.  

Pollution; pollution is well recovered in terms of enabling those who will be appointed Inspectors on what to do.  They will have the power.  And under the law, the authority may appoint anybody to be an Inspector provided what he is doing is connected with maintaining the environment.  So, it is a wide range of capability in order to gain agriculture and veterinary, Inspectors of factories; all these people, will be empowered under the law to act and this is why these people have been given extra powers so that they can execute the implementation of this law.  

Because one of the hon. Members did raise a question of imprisonment that, the judges should not be told that, anybody who commits a crime against the provisions of the law should be sent to prison, for not less than 12 months.  Unless we do that, this law is going to be like any other law.  People who are called upon to do every unpleasant jobs, because implementing pollution; even if you are telling a factory owner that he is going to do X, Y, Z, in order to reduce the pollution in the air.  

We have referred to vehicles.  May be it will be necessary to introduce measures when vehicles are being sold to ensure that they have certain equipment to reduce the amount of pollution.  They will need for example, if a farmer if having cattle to ensure that he does not over graze and so on and so forth.  These are not very pleasant jobs and those who do implement them need the law to be able to carry them out.  I think this is accepted because all the speakers have been warning us that, unless we are serious, unless we are committed, it will not be possible to implement this law and stop the enormous degradation that is going on.  

The water hyacinth; a lot of work has been done on it already.  So, I do not think I need a comment on that one.  

On the powers given to the Local Authorities.  As I have explained, the present policies in this country are not uniform.  In some places, trees have been entirely cut; now, priority number one in those places, we have got to plant trees.  Once in the places of water bodies or wetlands.  And we need this flexibility in order to make the programmes effective.  If you were to produce a uniform law in each and every aspect or to have the same implementation arrangements, then you would miss the point.  Because the produce are not the same.  so, we need that flexibility and the law does envisage consultations right from the grassroots.  

In the law, we read about RC.V but in fact, administratively, we intend to go further down to RC.III because environment cannot be protected but here we need the corporation of the people at the lowest level.  Now, I will urge hon. Members to really lead the example. Last year but one when I stood here to implement or to defend my expenditure, I did appeal to hon. Members to plant trees.  And some asked me, where shall we plant them?  I think it is very simple.  The recommendation is that, if you have land, you should devout at least one tenth that land for the planting of trees.  If you have ten acres, at least plant one, if you have 100 acres, plant ten, if you have 1,000, then plant 100.  

So, I thought that hon. Members will give the lead to the people in the planting of the trees.  There is a lot of work already being done by the wanainchi in establishing nurseries.  There are many nurseries now which have come up as a result of the initiative of the people themselves and they are doing this as a business.  One may not see the problem when you plant trees, they take time to come up.  But there is a lot of work which is going on in the planting of trees but it is not adequate to compensate for what is happening in the felling of trees.  

So, I fully subscribe to the idea of having a national tree-planting day as proposed initially by hon. John Ntimba and by hon. Mayanja.  So far, we have got an environment day bit may be we should be more specific by having a tree planting day and I hope when we have it and when it is declared Members will give it the backing that it needs in terms of leadership.  And I very much value, Mr Ntimba’s present for the competition.  I hope Members will be able to contribute in terms of a present for competition and also to participate in the actual competition.  

But the question of trees is a very serious one.  In places like Tororo and Eastern Uganda, the trees have been ferried to a very dangerous level.  Now on forests, there is a lot of ferrying of trees in the forests.  It has been an uphill task in trying to conserve the forests because that you need to conserve, you perhaps find they are the ones involved in cutting them.  You find the big shorts involved in cutting trees.  

So, I would hope that you would join us in trying to preserve particularly the high forests that still exist in the country.  These forests constitute a home for our animal and plant diversity.  If you clear the trees, you clear the forests, then all these riches of our fauna and flora is being destroyed in the process.  We have been able to attract some assistance to further investigate and study the biodiversity of our forests and in due course, when the reports are ready, they will be made available to the hon. Members.  But we must preserve the high forests because if they go along with them, are going enumerable species of trees, of animals and so forth.  

So please, let no hon. Member get involved in the illegal cutting of trees in the high forests because those, you cannot replace.  You can replace the acacias, you can replace the pines, but the environment we have in the high forests is peculiar and if it is destroyed, that will be very, very sorry for this country.  Now on wetlands, they constitute - another system which is peculiar in itself.  It provides also a home for animals, plants and a microclimate in that area.  Now the worst thing that can happen is to drain a mash.  You can plant a few things, you can harvest it for making baskets as many of our modern women do, but it is a different thing when it is drained because then it turns into something else.  

So, under the Bill, it is proposed to effectively protect the mash lands or the wetlands and I would hope that when this matter comes to the districts because what will happen is every district identify along with the authority and the officers will be appointed to identify those wetlands which must not be interfered with and I hope when this is done, Members will co-operate in maintaining the wetlands.  Because we need them, if they are dried, they have almost a similar effect like the cutting of or destruction of forests.  

Now references were made about garbage.  This is strictly a matter mainly for the towns.  Under this law, we will be able to go to the Town Councils and Municipal Councils and tell them to do the work.  If not, they put that in the law.  So, I hole when hon. Oker sees us in the City Council trying to get the garbage removed and prosecuting officials who do not do so, she will understand.  That is why I am saying the job under this Bill is not a pleasant one because all the time you are dealing with interaction with people who are not doing their work. 

Now toxic materials.  This country has been approached once or twice for us to allow toxic matters to be buried in this country and huge sums of money were offered.  We turned this offer down poor as we may be. (Applause)  One of the offers which was made to me - I do not want to mention the country, was to the extent of 600 million dollars if we let those companies bring and burry.  There had already been some contacts here and some of our people had been willing to listen.  We said the answer was no.  We need 600 million dollars for our infrastructure but not at the expense of we allowing in toxic materials because they would have a very big effect on this country.  So, this is why the law is very strong on importation of toxic materials here.  

So, on that one, I would again require your support by not encouraging anybody to bring toxic materials in this country so that we can keep this country safe for the next generation.  In some parts of Africa, I know of one, they did allow it, for five years nothing happened.  But now up to a radius of 30 miles, that country has dried up.  So, they are very, very dangerous and they should never be allowed in this country and we shall not allow them as long as we are around and we have the power to do so.  Now, to go back to the policy committee, let me emphasise once again that, the approach in fact, which you have appreciated that this is inter-sectoral everything is linking up and in linking up, it requires consultations at the highest level so that problems, misunderstandings at high level are solved there.  If you say they should go to Cabinet, Cabinet normally has a very heavy programme, it has many other urgent issues and environment is perhaps one of them.  

Now, we need to get a machinery which can quickly resolve these problems at higher level and because of their nature, some of them are so grave like a man coming to install say a factory here costing 500 million dollars.  But then the impact assessment of the Ministry points out that one, two, three, if this factory comes, there will be this problem, that problem and that one and these will be consequences which will ensue as a result of the establishment of the factory.  But these are very powerful people.  I think this does not require elaboration.  

Now, unless there is some strong machinery to resist pressures from such investors and this is left to the Natural Resources, I think there may be a problem.  So, we need that strong Body to stand up to such pressures and I think the Minister of Natural Resources will need that reinforcement which will come from his colleagues under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister or whoever when the new Constitution comes into being.  So, I would urge the House not to upset that arrangement.

MR OPIO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want o inform the Minister that Custodian Board had high powered committee of Ministers but they did not resist the suggestion to get rid of some of the factories and bodies which might have been saved if it were possible that more ministers would save.

MR ORYANG:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the informer that while the Custodian Board committees failed, the environment is so important.  In fact, the global concern has only just been consolidated and in fact, the leadership of a country should be the chairman managing it.  But because he is too busy, the committee that will contemplate and decide policies must have the necessary hammer and that is why I am one of those who worked on the Bill.  We feel very strongly that under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister, that hammer will be available.  Let us not wear a defeatist attitude that if the Custodian Board committees failed and others failed, we are not going to go ahead and determine to manage our environment.  Thank you. (Applause)

THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kajura):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am very grateful for the words of wisdom which have come from hon. Oryang and at the same time, I appreciate the views expressed by the hon. Member who stood before him.  Problems relating to the environment you will appreciate are very costly and they can involve big sums of money hence influence.  And we need to take a firm stand in dealing with these problems because many of them can have unpleasant, in terms of convenience, in terms of earning money.  If for example, hon. Member from Kasese was indicating that the factory at Hima was not properly constructed, now if you come and say, in order to license you so that you do not produce some so much pollution.  You will have to design your factory and this will cost you - well, this is up to them to determine because you will come back to us.  But you say it is going to cost me 100 million dollars.  Now, if this man can find ways of avoiding paying this amount by using 20 million, he will do so.  

So, we need some machinery, which will be able to operate beyond the Ministerial level.  It is not because the Minister is handing over powers.  I think the Minister appreciates that in order to effectively deal with big issues, he needs a Committee of the Cabinet and I will ask the hon. Members to back it and I did accept the arguments, which were made that the Ministry of Trade and Industry should be a Member of the Policy Committee.  I think this was a very good proposal, I do not know why we missed it.  

So, I do not think it is necessary to deal on other issues because most of them are implementation issues.  These will be made available to the Members when they have thoroughly been discussed by Cabinet and also in the light of the Bill which will have been passed into law by this House.  Then questions on how this will be done and how that will be done and so forth, will be more of policy and implementation and necessarily changes can be made to the policy.  It will be available to the Members and we shall be prepared to accommodate any recommendations that come up rather than looking for such provisions within the law.  The law does not provide for these details in which the Members rightly are concerned with.  

With these remarks, I would like to end and move that the Bill be read a Second Time and maybe depending on your time, we move to the Committee Stage.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that The National Environment Bill, 1994 be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

With that we have come to the end of today’s session. We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 26 April 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

