Wednesday, 28 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. In the gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers of Apac Model Primary School led by their headmaster. You are welcome. (Applause)

Yesterday, we prematurely adjourned but I understand some good progress was made in the consultations, which I ordered yesterday. In a few minutes’ time they will be here to report so that we proceed with the Bill. Meanwhile, let us move with the Order Paper as provided.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE UP TO US $567,000 SUPPLEMENTARY FINANCING FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO THE ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY IN UGANDA (IUIU) TO ENABLE THE UNIVERSITY MEET COST OVERRUNS IN THE CONSTRUCTION OF STUDENTS’ HOSTEL PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Finance? 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR DAY

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, 1st May every year is celebrated by many countries the world over as the International Labour Day. This day was declared as an international holiday by the Second International Conference of the International Labour Organisation in 1889. Since then, many countries celebrate the 1st May Day in commemoration of the historical struggle of the working people to have their conditions improved.

In Uganda, the International Labour Day is gazetted as a public holiday and ceremonies are organised at national level and at local government level. The importance given to the observance of this day in Uganda lies in the commitment of Government to recognise the dignity of labour and the important contribution that labour makes to the social, economic and political development of our country.

This year, the national celebrations will be held at Nyakasanga play ground, Kasese Town Council under the theme, “Entrepreneurship and Skills Development: a Prerequisite for Employment Creation.” The theme was selected because it forms part of the overall Government strategy to address the problem of unemployment and poverty especially among young people and other vulnerable groups. 

Government believes that a purposeful focus on the development of the workforce, especially the youth, is critical for the social, economic transformation of our country.

The day was presided over by a week of activities, which started on 26 April 2010. The activities include, among others, a one day workshop on skills development and employment creation, a public dialogue with special focus on occupational safety and health, a procession by workers, tree planting, voluntary HIV/AIDS testing and counseling and blood donation by workers.

In this regard, all actors in the various sectors, including political leaders, civil societies, Government departments and private sector, are expected to participate in the remembrance of this day.

I, therefore, call upon you, hon. Members, to show solidarity with the workers of Uganda and join us to observe the International Labour Day in Kasese District. For God and my country!

2.53
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. For many years now I have been wondering what Labour Day means to the people of Uganda. The workers we have in this country are really not labourers. They are slaves because they work for no pay. We have turned our workers into slaves. What they get is not a living wage. So, which labourers are we talking about?

In the past, particularly during the UPC Government, Labour Day was a very big thing to us because every Labour Day the salaries of workers would be increased without fail. Every year on the same day, increment in the prices of produce to the farmers would be announced. So, everybody would look forward to Labour Day.

But now I do not know whether anybody will take it seriously. Apart from staying at home because it would be a public holiday, Labour Day has become meaningless to the people of this country. 

So, I would like to urge the minister and the Ministry of Labour particularly, to do something about our workers. We are encouraging corruption. Actually, corruption in Uganda is Government driven because if you pay me a salary, which will take me five days, what do you want me to do with the remaining 25 days? We are encouraging our people to be corrupt; so that they steal time; they leave their coats in the offices and go away; they come late or they do not come back at all. 

Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MR WOPUWA: I would like to thank my senior for giving way. I am just seeking clarification. In the 1980s, I was an adult and we had many of our people going to work in Kenya; preferring not to work in Uganda because the payment in Kenya was better. Do you mean to say that during the 1980s, the UPC days, Government was paying a living wage and everybody was satisfied?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, hon. Wopuwa. You say you were an adult but I am not so sure. If you were an adult, you would know that in the 1980s, the first thing the UPC Government did was to get rid of “magendo”. “Magendo” was entrenched here like your corruption now. Nobody ever believed that it would leave this country. UPC got rid of “magendo” and started paying workers a living wage and increasing salaries every year. You should go and check the records. Because if we sit and look on, the country is actually running itself now, as if there is nobody in charge.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you. I just want to inform hon. Okello-Okello, that when you are looking at the way you pay your workers, you do not consider nominal wages. What you are looking at are nominal wages. Actually, the so called UPC Government you are talking about in 1980s used to increase – (Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is known beyond repute that UPC Government has ever been in charge of this country twice; UPC Government was in power when Uganda got its independence; and UPC party is still alive and kicking up to now as we speak. Is it therefore in order for an honourable member and a minister at that to call UPC “so called” even when it has Members represented in this House? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, the honourable member is informing you that actually UPC was not “so called” but it was a Government in the 1960s.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the good ruling. What I was explaining was that what we know, from the available data that actually the UPC Government used to increase wages and those were nominal wages. But when you look at real wages, you check the data, especially between 1981 and 1985, they were falling every year. 

Since we came into power, from 1986 up to today, real wages, much as the nominal wages could not be increased, real wages have been going up. So when we are looking at wages we do not look at nominal wages. We are looking at real wages. We are looking at the purchasing power of the money that you get. So really what are you talking about my friend?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank hon. Nyombi Thembo for giving that information but I would like to inform him also that the good English you speak was given to you by UPC. If it was this UPE business, you would not be in this House. (Laughter) You must consider yourself very lucky. 

We are not talking about real wages or nominal wages. We are talking about the living conditions of our workers. If your real wage is not giving the workers good living conditions, of what use is it? During the UPC Government, workers were accommodated and that was part of the real wage but you have sold off these houses to yourselves and abandoned the workers. Now we do not even know where our workers live, including judges. You people! (Laughter) Honestly, the country has gone down the drain. I thank you.

3.00
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Minister for the statement. We were unlucky he did not find time to make copies but all the same we have been able to grasp some of the aspects of the report.

I must register disappointment that Labour Day is an important day and workers are equally important to this nation but the way this subject is being treated leaves a lot to be desired.

You will bear witness that if this were the youth or women’s day, the statement would have been rather comprehensive. I have been sad that the minister was unable to tell us about the plight of workers at least by outlining the challenges or the positive successes so far attained but the minister simply concentrated on inviting us to go for an occasion. 

I think this is unfair to the workers. If they are attending to television and they could see us, we are just passing over their subject matter which is dear to them.

Second and last, is the issue of taxation. Two days ago I was invited to a meeting where workers from Makindye West had gathered in Munyonyo. They had a complaint over the way they are taxed. They said the taxes were hitting hard on them and they are left with “nothing”. They gave an example and I felt humbled. I was unable to answer and I said I would come to the Floor of the House and put this question to the House so that we could find a solution, so that we do not get embarrassed in front of them.

The question they posed was, “You are legislators, you were careful enough to discover that it was not very healthy to be taxed on allowances and emoluments. So, you are taxed only on salary, which is true and is a fact. So, what do you think is better for you and not better for us?” Mr Speaker, I was not ready with the answer and I said I would come here and place it before everybody present so that we find a genuine solution. We need a better answer for the future. 

It is also important to remind the minister that as he comes here to remind everybody about Labour Day, he should remind himself that there is the task of paying people who did their duty and were never paid. I have workers from the East African Community who have been crying for their money; their children have not gone to school; they themselves have not been able to go to hospital because their money was withheld. There are those in my constituency, from the Railways, many of them have been chased out of the houses; they were not given their money. It is better to mention some of these aspects, hon. Minister, before you invite us for an occasion and if these answers are provided, I can assure you we shall come in such big numbers than you will ever have in your future. Thank you.

3.04
MS BETI KAMYA (Lubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you. I also wish to thank the minister for his brief statement. I suppose brief because there is nothing really much to say. If there was, I am sure that the minister would have given us that information. 

As the minister said, we have been celebrating and we celebrate Labour Day every 1st May. We change the theme; we change the venue; we have a minister’s statement; we have match-pasts; and we have speeches and we wait for the next year to celebrate Labour Day in the same way.

This House needs more than match-pasts and speeches and brief ministerial statements. This House needs an improvement in the welfare of the people of Uganda. 

During the State of the Nation Address, which was quickly followed by the Budget Speech given by the Minister of Finance, we were told that 85 percent of the population of Uganda live in the rural areas while 15 percent live in the urban areas. 

That was the situation in the 1960s and in the 1970s and in the 1980s and in the 1990s. Now we are in the 21st Century and it is the same situation. The only difference is that the earning, the contribution to the economy of Uganda during the different periods is that the contribution of the 80 percent of the population of Uganda decreases very much. 

In the 60s, while 80 percent of the population of Uganda lived in the rural area, they contributed through agriculture, 80 percent to the economy of this country –(Interruption)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, hon. Kamya for giving way and thank you, Mr Speaker. For the record, when you look at the National Development Programme launched for 2010-2015, the percentage of the people living in urban areas is 12 percent. This means that of those who live in the rural areas is 88 percent. Actually in the programme, it is indicated that Uganda, as a country, is referred to as a rural economy. That is what I wanted to put on record. Thank you.

MS KAMYA: Thank you very much, hon. Lukwago for that information, which definitely enriches my statement. Otherwise, I wanted to use the President’s statistics and those of the Minister of Finance. According to statistics from the two, 15 percent of the population of Uganda lives in the urban and 80 percent live in rural areas. That was the status back in the 60s, 80s, and in the 90s. 

But as I was saying, the only difference is that their contribution to the economy continues to decrease. In the 60s, 80 percent of the population of Uganda lived in the rural area doing agriculture and contributing 80 percent to the economy of this country. In the 90s –(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: I would like to thank the hon. Member for Lubaga North, for accepting my humble information.

It is a well-known fact in economics that as a country develops; as the economy grows; as civilisation becomes better, the contribution of agriculture in the rural areas dwindles with time. So, if it is true that the contribution of the 85 percent of the people in the rural areas is dwindling, then that is an indicator that our economy is developing.

MS KAMYA: Mr Speaker, the minister has only made a partially correct statement. I am saying this because it is true that as countries develop, the contribution of agriculture to the economy reduces, but so does the labour or the people employed in agriculture. Labour migrates from agriculture to other sectors. 

Indeed in the USA, the most developed country, only one percent of the population lives on agriculture, but they also contribute only one percent to the economy. In Europe, only two percent of the population lives on agriculture and they contribute two percent to the economy. In mid-income countries like Brazil and Argentina, 20 percent of the people live on agriculture, but they also contribute only 20 percent to the economy. In Ghana, it is 65 percent, but in Uganda 80 percent lives on agriculture, but contribute only 15 percent to the economy. What should happen –(Interjection)– Mr Speaker, I think we should amend our rules to allow only those people who are fully informed to give information – when they are not, they should be ruled out of order.

Anyway, the point I am trying to make is that while in the 60s, 80 percent of those who were employed contributed 80 percent to the economy, now 80 percent are stuck in agriculture, but contributing only 15 percent to the economy. If in the 90s they used to contribute 40 percent, it means that only 15 percent of the population of Uganda now contributes 85 percent to the economy. This also means that the economy belongs to only 15 percent of the population of Uganda. This is terrible and that is why the majority of our population is poor. I would like to say that this is out of policies.

The good things that other countries have realised out of good and sensible policies; the bad things that happen in those countries arise out of reckless and insensitive policies such as the policies of Uganda, which are extremely reckless and where public administration is extremely high; where we are told that there is no cost to democracy making us spend money on the incredible number of districts, lavish expenditure by only a small percentage of the population, while we abandon the rest of the people to poverty!

Mr Speaker, if we are going to discuss the welfare of our people, which is the purpose of the Labour Day cerebrations, we would like statements here, next year and the years to follow, giving us statistics or policies on what is going to be done to improve the welfare of the population from A to B. 

We also would like to have reports on what will have actually happened. I am saying this because if you think that Bonna Bagaggawale means six people per sub-county –(Interjections)– if you want to give us that information that this year you are planning to improve lives for six people, then we shall know that we have such a plan. Otherwise, we cannot just be fed on ministerial statements that have no substance except telling us the venue of the match-past. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.14
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you very, Mr Speaker. The International Labour Day of 1st May is a very important day in the entire world and Uganda in particular. The history of Labour Day is known all over especially in countries which had a progressive system of government – they were more celebrated there than countries that had more exploitative systems of governance.

In the case of Uganda, we recognise the contribution of workers in this country to the economy. In the case of the venue of Kasese, it is really gratifying that this year’s 1st May cerebrations are going to be held in Kasese Municipality. You will remember that from 1954 to 1958 –(Interruptions)

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Members: Beti Kamya, Abdu Katuntu and Ben Wacha, to cover themselves using the same scarf in the House? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, let us proceed.

COL BUTIME: Mr Speaker, the discovery and the beginning of mining copper and cobalt in Kilembe Mines brought a lot of development in Western Uganda. Also the construction of the Kampala-Kasese Railway Line was because of the wealth out of the mining of copper and cobalt in Kasese areas and the developing town of Fort Portal and Mbarara. And all these developed because of the industrial and mining activities at Kilembe Mines and Kasese.

Therefore, to recognise Kasese to host the workers’ day of 1st May is not only just a mere town where to cerebrate, but also to remember the contribution of that area to the development of Uganda. Even Jinja owes its development to Kasese because the copper that was transported by railway from Kasese to Jinja for smelting is partially responsible for the vibrant industrial development that took place in Jinja Town. I hope the people of Jinja do recognise that fact.

Finally, I think Kasese deserves hosting these celebrations. Thank you.

3.19
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister for presenting the statement. However, I think the statement would have been richer if the minister had spelt out the achievements made between the last Labour Day cerebrations and today so that as we celebrate this year, we can be able to look at such achievements.

I also would like to mention two things that I will request the minister to respond to. One of them is about him telling this House how far Government has gone in ensuring that workers get a living wage and what steps Government is taking to achieve that objective.

In addition, we are all aware that labour services are part of a market capitalistic-oriented approach in Uganda. Therefore, the demand for labour determines the rate at which people are paid. But we should remember that in this country, much as we thank Government for having attracted a number of investors who have employed a number of our people, there is no minimum wage that has been set for workers. I know of a company that is employing over 2,000 workers but paying each of them about US $1 per day on top of being overworked from morning until night. How would you expect such people to survive? And yet such workers are not recruited and made to work from their home areas; they are recruited from different areas, put there and paid at such a rate. When one falls sick, there is no care about such a situation. 

So, I do not know what measures Government has taken to ensure that a minimum wage for workers is set. Much as we are interested in attracting investors to employ as many Ugandans as possible – if those issues are clarified, I will be happy to participate in the forthcoming Labour Day celebrations.

3.22
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to add my voice to the voices of the others in thanking Government for recognising and celebrating this day. Indeed, it is a day when Ugandans join the international community to recognise the efforts of the workers not only in this country, but also around the world.

I hope that this year, this event – and this is an appeal I am making to our Government – makes us rethink about what is happening to our workers. There is no doubt, as hon. Badda has said, that our workers need protection. This means we need to look at our labour laws much as we need the investors. While there is that need, we continue to see many investors importing people to work at the expense of our people. Honestly, we need to put laws and policies in place that are going to fix a minimum wage and improve conditions of our workers. So, let us use this opportunity to reflect on what is happening to our workers so that we can improve their working conditions. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Haven’t we sufficiently dealt with this subject? Remember, we have to complete that Bill that we partially dealt with yesterday. I think what all of you are saying is that there should be improved working conditions for the workers, but it is also unfortunate that by the time this statement was read, there was no Member of Parliament representing the workers. But I think you have done it. Let us give the minister chance to respond to a few issues that have been raised.

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Mr Speaker, I want to thank Members for the concerns they have raised about the plight of our workers. I would like to say that as Government, we have noted their concerns, but let me respond to a few issues. 

Hon. Okello-Okello said that in the 60s the labour force in this country was well paid. I agreed, but there are factors that we need to consider. In 1962 we had Independence where we inherited the labour force from the colonial government. In the later years; we have had a number of problems in this country, including a political crisis.

The firs years of the NRM looked at the recovery of the nation including the labour sector. You need to appreciate the historical background that we have gone through as a country as we continue to improve the working conditions of our workers.

He has also talked about fixing prices for agricultural products, but I would like to say that the global economy today talks about a free market economy. You can hardly say that Uganda can be living in isolation to talk about fixing prices when the global trend is talking about a free market economy. 

The issue of a living wage is under discussion and we want to assure you that at an appropriate time we will come up here to give you what Government has managed to do.

In terms of other conditions, we have given freedom to labour unions to operate and negotiate with Government on a number of issues. We think that is one good way to look at improving working conditions for our workers.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: The minimum wages are still on our statute books. Can the Minister tell the country why this is not being implemented?

MR MADADA: We have gone through a number of historical challenges as a nation and there are issues that we need to take on as we go ahead to improve our economy. The challenge we have today in implementing a minimum wage is unemployment. So, given the unemployment rate in this country, you need to consider employing people first before you consider the minimum wage. That is why Government is attracting investors to improve the employment situation. We need to attract investors first before setting a minimum wage.

MS NAMPIJJA: I would like to ask the Minister whether he is aware of what the President said two years ago. The President said that even if Uganda has no minimum wage, the economy will continue and it is continuing to grow stronger. I think this Government has no will to put in place a minimum wage because in the past the President told Members of Parliament that the minimum wage would discourage foreign investment in this country. So, do not tell lies to this House, just say the truth that the minimum wage will never be here.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I remember this issue of minimum wage has ever come before Parliament, the argument that I heard was that it may cause unemployment. This is because a person who has been employing 1,000 may cut down to 400 people because of the increase in the wages. That was the argument that I heard. I do not know whether it was correct or not but it is something that you may consider.
 
MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to agree with hon. Okello-Okello that the minimum wage has never been repealed but as to why it has not been is because it has been overtaken by events. The law is there but it provides the minimum wage as Shs 8,500. Does hon. Okello-Okello want Government to implement that?
 
MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, I want to wind up by saying that I welcome all the suggestions from the Member, in consideration of our economic development and other challenges that are facing this country. 

MR KASSIANO WADRI: I wish to thank the hon. Minister for giving me this opportunity to put what is happening to our workers in perspective. As a result of not implementing the minimum wage policy, there are many Ugandans who are suffering out there to the extent that once they are given employment whether by our investors or by fellow Ugandans, they do not give them appointment letters to the extent that they will dismiss them at will. You have no document in your possession which you can use for either legal redress or even to negotiate.

I do not know whether the hon. Minister is aware of this and whether as the minister who should be there to protect the interests of our workers, he has mechanisms in place as to how such unfortunate employees can be helped. This is because most of the time they cannot demand for appointment letters knowing very well that the employees themselves will know their rights if they have the letters. What do you say in such a situation, Mr Minister? 

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, as I was saying, these concerns that have been raised have been taken in good faith but I want to wind up by saying that the argument about agriculture and its contribution to the national economy will continue.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, we are concluding a very important matter. Is it, therefore, in order for the workers’ representatives, when matters are being concluded, to stay out deliberately and not listen to the minister’s statement? Are they in order to enter at such a time?

THE SPEAKER: I think the workers’ representatives trust that you can also take care of their interests.

MR MADADA: I cannot respond to all questions now but we have taken them and we will be answering. I was just concluding by saying that the issue of agriculture and its contribution to the national economy is a big debate the world over as you note that economics has been changing with time. In the 19th century when the industrial revolution set in, we had white collar jobs. Today we have the ICT changing the economy from the agriculture to service sector so the world is changing with time.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: As you remember, yesterday we adjourned when we were dealing with amendment to section 22, but there was an earlier one which we deferred. I do not know whether we revert to that one immediately or we continue and then we come back later? 

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Well, I thought that the Prime Minister would give a report of what transpired in the meeting before we could proceed. I think it will help us and bring other Members on board because he has been chairing the meeting. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Only to say that I chaired that meeting and we had a group of eminent people from that side and this side, and we made concessions to each other. When the agreed position is mentioned, I request you to support it with reasons. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: I must thank you because that meeting has produced results and I think that is the way we should be moving in the future. Let us proceed.

MR LUKWAGO: I am sorry, Mr Chairman, but before we proceed, I would wish to add that we have not concluded the negotiations on each and every amendment being proposed; we have fixed another meeting for tomorrow.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, are we not finishing this Bill today? Okay, let us see how we proceed.

MR LUKWAGO: I thought that in the report of the Prime Minister that would come out clearly – that surely we have stood over so many clauses. It was too much -  

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us move on.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. Earlier on we left on a note where we were proposing an amendment to section 22 which is on page 4 of the IPOD document, and the other contentious matters were in respect to clauses before the amendments to clause 1 and we have not touched them. 

On section 22, we are proposing to create sub-section (1)(a) to read as follows: “Notwithstanding sub-section (1)(a), the Electoral Commission shall consult a candidate on his or her security detail.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question - should I? I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Section 22, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukwago, proceed.

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. For those of you in possession of the IPOD document, we have abandoned the proposed amendment to section 23 and section 24. We are not moving those amendments.

THE CHAIRMAN: Although we are in the committee, in the distinguished visitors’ gallery, we have members of the African Parliamentarians Network against Corruption (APNAC). They include the following: 

Hon. Given Lubinda, President of APNAC, from Zambia;
Hon. Lazarus Chota from Zambia;
Hon. Josephine Chilufiya from Zambia;
Hon. Mwimba Malama (Zambia);
Hon. Dr Zainabu Gama (Tanzania); 
Hon. Suleiman Omar Kumchaya (Tanzania); 
Hon. Hamad Rashid (Tanzania);
Hon. Akindes Adékpédjou (Benin); 
Hon. Mushikari Kombo (Kenya);
Hon. Abdalla Skakila (Kenya); 
Hon. Prof. Patrick Olweny (Kenya); 
Mr Daniel Batidam (Ghana); and
Mr Jack Mariuki (Kenya).

Please join me in welcoming them –(Applause)- you are most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda - oh, hon. Beatrice Byenkya from Uganda -(Laughter)– order, Members! Let us proceed with our committee.

MR LUKWAGO: We are moving an amendment to section 27. For the record, I earlier on said that for those who have our IPOD document – page 4 - we conceded that we should abandon the proposed amendment to section 23 and 24. So, we have left it – 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, we go to section 27?

MR LUKWAGO: Section 27 – no, there is no amendment to section 25. We are moving to section 27 and we are suggesting the following, that section 27(1) be substituted with the following: “Except as authorised under this Act or authorised by law, a person shall not use Government resources for the purpose of campaigning for any candidate, party or organisation in an election.” 

And (b) by inserting immediately after sub-section (3) the following: “A person who contravenes sub-section (1) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.” That is an agreed position -  

THE CHAIRMAN: If I may ask, what do you mean by “person campaigning using Government resources?” What is “campaign”?

MR LUKWAGO: We are improving on an existing law. We are improving on Section 27 which already made it illegal for one to use Government resources for electioneering purposes. But there were no sanctions under that law for such a person. Specifically, this is what we are improving on and for the record, we have had extensive debate on this in the meeting and this was the agreed position. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no, I am just raising it because I see a problem of enforcement. This is because if somebody incurs expenses in a Government vehicle and his method of campaigning is to visit individuals in their houses; yes, house-to-house - by moving in a vehicle while campaigning. What do you do with him? 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, when we are talking about campaigning, you campaign for a purpose. The campaign we are talking about here is a campaign for an elective office. Assuming that I was a minister and there are elections and campaigns going on, if I am cited in my red number plate vehicle campaigning for my presidential candidate; that is what we are trying to say should be contained. (Interjections) Yes, that constitutes an offence; otherwise if we do not do that – of course we know very well that for the case of the incumbent President, he is entitled to all the facilities ordinarily available to him for doing his work. But we are saying that when the incumbent is working, we would not like to see a situation where the RDCs, the GISOs and the ministers are scattered out there using Government resources to campaign for that person.

THE CHAIRMAN: Just help me to understand what exactly you are saying. When do you say somebody is campaigning? Is it when he goes on a platform and starts campaigning? I am talking about a situation when somebody is using this facility and is going to hon. Kawanga’s house; he is coming to your house; he is going to so-and-so’s house campaigning; would you be able to say you are campaigning using a Government facility? What would be your evidence? 

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, we know there are many methods of campaigning. What you are describing is ordinarily known here in Luganda as “kakuyege” when you move from house to house, from church to church and from institution to institution, with the purpose of soliciting for support. That is campaigning. Whether you are distributing soap as has been ruled out in some electoral petitions; you are campaigning - soliciting for support for your candidate. That is what we are trying to legislate against.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you saying that the individual whom I have visited will be the witness of my campaigning? I am raising this example to show you that there are problems.

MR WADRI: I agree with you, Mr Chairman. Not all homes that you have visited in a “kakuyege” approach are surely won by your – I mean you surely win their hearts. You might as well come to me – I am a member of FDC; the NRM agent might come and think that he might be able to persuade me –(Interjections)- yes, he will be able to reach my family and talk to my family members, but the fact that he has come there does not mean that we are all in agreement. I might say that I am sorry, so that when a person comes, that person can even be a witness -(Interruption) 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Chairman, you see, the Shadow Attorney-General told the House that this was an improvement on an already existing law. What was the objective of putting that law there? Maybe that is where the reason is. If we debate it now, the way we are, we are going to make the other law redundant. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I think the section we are talking about is section 27(1) and it reads: “Except as authorised under this Act or otherwise authorized by law, no candidate shall use Government resources for the purposes of campaigning for election.” It is already an existing law. Unless we are now debating the logic; what we are actually providing for now are sanctions in case somebody has offended this particular clause.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I think let me put the question. But you have a big task of proof; unless you really tell us what amounts to a campaign. Is it when somebody talks at a rally? But there are other campaigns, which can never be proved. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, it is true that the amendment is to section 27 of the Presidential Elections Act. Supplementary to what hon. Abdu Katuntu is saying, the amendment in sub-section (1) of that section - because this section or sub-section was limited to candidate and we broadened it to include any other person that would use Government resources. This is why we changed it from candidate to: “person shall use Government resources for the purpose of campaigning for election.” The argument of course - but take heart, because there are exceptions for the sitting President in sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of that section.

The worry that the chairperson is expressing is of course real; but we have confidence in the Electoral Commission because under section 21 of the Act, the manner of campaign, the programme of campaigning and the activities of campaigns are determined by the Electoral Commission and it is against those that we should guard. 

But in any case, during the time of elections when it has already been encapsulated and clearly demarcated; and you are the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs in a procession of your Land Cruiser, and you are in Nakawa moving around saying, “I am not campaigning during an election period”, I think we, as candidates, should also take care of ourselves and guard against breaching the law during that period. In any case, it is not long. Do not begin moving around in Government facilities and using Government facilities and then say, “There is a demarcation.” The only exception during that time is for the sitting President.

THE CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Members, I think I have raised this unofficially with some Members including the Opposition and my friend hon. Wadri. There is a problem posed by our Constitution, because when we start these campaigns, Parliament is not dissolved until another Parliament is sworn in. What are you going to do with the Speaker? (Laughter) Yes, because my facilities are charged on the Consolidated Fund. I am entitled to transport from January to December; I am entitled to transport from Monday to Sunday - 24 hours. So, what will you do? (Laughter) 

MR WACHA: I think -

THE CHAIRMAN: I am not saying I don’t – I have my personal facilities; but at the same time, I am being realistic. I am entitled to the facilities they give me. I have my personal facilities and I can use them. But what would happen if I use them because I am entitled to them and nobody can withdraw those facilities from me? 

I also told hon. Wadri that the problem will be. What would you do when a Member of Parliament is a candidate in an election and he continues as a Member of Parliament? How are you going to separate his activities as a Member of Parliament and as a candidate? These are problems that are going to come in and you have to face them and solve them. 

MR WACHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Let me attempt to answer. My understanding of section 27 is that Parliament wanted to provide a levelled playing ground during the election period. The only exception which Parliament granted was in case of a sitting President, where he was allowed to continue using the resources attached to his office. That means that a minister, like my friend hon. Ruhindi cannot continue using the resources of the Attorney-General’s chamber for purposes of his campaign. Unfortunately, Sir, it looks like even you –(Laughter)– because there is no exception to that. 

But what we need to emphasise is that this is a matter of evidence. If the Speaker says, “Yes, I was using my official vehicle, but I was not campaigning,” then the onus is upon me, who says that the Speaker was campaigning to prove that he was using the official vehicle to campaign. It does not mean that the Speaker or Minister Ruhindi cannot use his vehicle during the period of campaigns, so long as he is not campaigning -

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, just to help you to develop your point. As Speaker, I am entitled to security, and I have a vehicle and wherever I go, they have to follow me. What is going to happen to that?

MR WACHA: It is the same really; if it can be proved that you are misusing those resources for purposes of campaign –(Interjections)– let me finish, please. If it is proved, then unfortunately you would have offended the provision without having to amend it; the provision as it stands now. But as I said, it is a matter of evidence; whoever alleges has to prove. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, I understand you as referring to maybe a sitting Speaker campaigning for a parliamentary seat. Because if you are using those facilities to campaign for president, then there is a problem. 

When you look at section 25 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, in fact it provides another exception; I will read it for the benefit of colleagues who do not have it:

Section 25(ii): “Where a candidate is a minister or holds any other political office, he or she shall during the campaign period restrict the use of the official facility ordinarily attached to his or her office to the execution of his or her official duties.” 

Section 25(iii) “For the purposes of enforcing this section, the Commission shall by writing require any candidate to state in writing the facilities ordinarily attached to any office held by that person to which sub-section (ii) applies and the candidate shall comply with that requirement”. So, I see no problem for the chair -(Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: You see I was not raising it for the Chair. I was only trying to say that it poses a problem. For instance, he will go to execute his duties in his constituency during the election time because he is a Member of Parliament. That is the problem; this provision in the Constitution does not dissolve Parliament during the elections and will cause you problems. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This clause should be put in its proper perspective. We are dealing with the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. We are talking about a person who is holding a public office, campaigning for a presidential candidate. Even if you are a minister and or a person in your official capacity and you have the facilities, you are not allowed to use those facilities to campaign for a presidential candidate. This is what we are trying to address.

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is – I am just trying to assist you. A minister of Government goes to his constituency with a Government vehicle; and while he is there – 

Anyway, let me put the question, since it was an agreed position. I put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. Lukwago on section 27, as supported by the Attorney-General.

(Question put and agreed to.

Section 27, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we are moving on to section 28(a) - page 4 of the IPOD document. We have agreed to restructure it as follows: We are proposing to insert a new section - section 28(a). Originally, we had intended to move the following provision, but now we have changed it, that: “Political parities, political organisations and independent candidates shall have a right to monitor the management, storage and transportation of election materials and shall be provided with serial numbers of ballot papers for each polling station.” 

We have agreed to change it as follows: “28(a)(i) Political parties, political organisations and independent candidates taking part in an election shall have a right to send representatives to the Commission at the time of packing and dispatching of polling materials.”

“28(a)(ii) Political parties, political organisations and independent candidates taking part in an election shall be provided with serial numbers of ballot papers within 48 hours before polling, and serial numbers of seals for the ballot boxes as soon as practicable after packing and dispatch of polling materials.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question -

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the Shadow Attorney-General I think is presenting his own draft. The principle was that after consulting the Electoral Commission, serial numbers of ballot papers should be provided to political parties, organisations and independent candidates at the headquarters within 48 hours before polling day -(Interjections)- yes, they agreed. They said that there is no problem with that; they can do it.

And serial numbers, because they can only be ascertained at the time of packaging; serial numbers of seals will be provided to the representatives of political parties at the time of packing, before despatch, and they can actually be present at the packaging itself, and the Electoral Commission says they do not have any problem with that. But the drafting that came out was not clear, but that is actually what was agreed upon.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, for the record, the drafting was not done by me. Even the handwriting here is very clear, it was done by staff of Parliament; not actually staff of Parliament but from the ministry, who were called for that particular purpose to help us with the drafting. This is not my drafting -(Laughter)- and the staff who drafted it are here with us in the House.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the policy behind it is very good. You get the serial numbers so that if other votes other than those provided are used, you know those are foreign and you discount them. So, the problem is the formulation which is causing problems, but the principle is acceptable. What do we do now? Do I put the question? But how are we going to improve the formulation?

Okay, you read it again.

MR LUKWAGO: Section 28(a)(i) “Political parties, political organisations and independent candidates taking part in an election -(Interjections)- shall have a right to send representatives to the commission to witness the packing and dispatch of election materials.”

Mr Chairman, it is practical; we even had a member from the commission and they said it is okay. The Electoral Commission agreed and they said it is okay. (Interjections) Why are you saying no? You can consult them.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, aren’t you really satisfied once you are given the serial number of ballots being sent to a polling station? Aren’t you satisfied with that? Because eventually what you will be checking on is, after voting, which ballots are counted and which ballots can be excluded? But to be there, may cause you a problem.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, last year during campaigns, the Electoral Commission in its own initiative invited persons who head elections in political parties to witness packing of materials; it has been happening.

During the meeting in the South Committee room, the chairman of Electoral Commission sent a staff; our request was that they provide us with the serial numbers of the ballot papers and the seals of boxes before 48 hours. They said “No, it will be impossible”, because it is after the packing that they know that this ballot box has gone with this seal. Therefore, they proposed that it is important that political parties participating in elections come and witness the packing and afterwards Electoral Commission shall issue a letter detailing that. It was their proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, hon. Members, it seems you agreed on the principle. The only problem I see is the formulation of the provision. Maybe, two of you are given time to go out and draft the provision. Can we proceed on the other?

MS MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, if we want to help people who are interested in this issue, you cannot separate packing from delivery. If the Opposition wants to see the packing, they should also witness the delivery of the packages -(Interjections)- yes, because the package can be distorted on the way. It must be seen on delivery that actually what was packed is what has been delivered.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I suggest that we stand over it, since we have another meeting tomorrow at 11 O’clock. We shall come with the proper, drafted provision. The principle is agreed. My technical staff are telling me that that is not the provision that was given. So, let us actually consider it tomorrow and we see what we can do.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we proceed to another amendment? We get some two or four people, to go and draft something. The principle is agreed upon. Who can draft? Hon. Kawanga and (Mr Lukwago rose­_) but then you are here to – okay, let the technical staff draft it and bring it to us. Now, can we proceed to another amendment?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman -

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, is it your view that they increase the AC? I have got an appeal here that it is too hot. Okay, Sergeant, deal with that. They are appealing that the temperature has gone up and they say the AC should be increased.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, as you remember, when we were feeling very cold, we had a scuffle around. Hon. Bintu raised a point of order. We would rather not have this AC increased. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Any further amendment, please?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the next amendment would be in respect to section 31, but we have a problem that it was stood over in our meeting. It is about thumb printing the voters register by each and every voter as well as the ballot papers. It was stood over; we had some - I do not know whether I can proceed to move it here or it awaits further discussion. I seek your guidance, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not know. Where are you going to get people to read the thumb prints of a thousand voters in a constituency? No. Really, where are you going to do that? 

First of all, you will be having a register of voters at the polling station. You will be having an agent there. Somebody comes and you definitely tick and declare his name; you tick and they tick. Isn’t that really - but thumb print? It requires an expert anyway. You cannot look at my thumb print and know it is mine or it is not. It is over-tasking yourself.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I was only seeking for guidance whether I should continue to present it or it awaits the discussion tomorrow.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think you leave it.

MR LUKWAGO: No, Mr Chairman. There are serious issues we have with this to justify it. We have valid reasons why we are moving it. So, the question is: should I move it now and we justify it or it awaits the discussion tomorrow?

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, thank you. In the meeting, we had lots of strong arguments for this position and from our side we felt so strongly that we needed to thumb print the register, prevent en masse ticking and people being turned down that they have already voted when they have not voted. But we did agree in the meeting, as a final position, that we will have technical advice tomorrow on the issue of thumb printing for all our voters. So, I think let us push it to tomorrow.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Let us move on then. Another amendment! 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I notice that the chairman of the committee is coming up because there is an amendment to section 33 that the committee is proposing. We also have our amendment before we come to this one. When I raised it in the meeting it was stood over. So, I do not know how we are going to proceed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Since you agreed, leave it. 

MR LUKWAGO: The sitting arrangement for polling agents -(Interjections)- no, it is provided for in the law here and it is there; we need to improve it. You have not listened to the proposed amendment, why are you opposing it? I do not know whether I should move it - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Do not move it but read it. What should it -

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, section 33 talks about polling agents of candidates and it reads as follows: “A candidate may be present in person or through his or her representative or polling agent at each polling station for the purposes of safeguarding the interests of the candidate with regard to the polling process.” That is sub-section (1).

Sub-section (2): “Not more than two representatives or polling agents shall be appointed by a candidate under sub-section (1) and the appointment shall be in writing addressed to the presiding officer of the polling station.”

Sub-section (3) - the one we are seeking to amend: “A representative or polling agent appointed under sub-section (2) shall report to the presiding officer of the polling station on the polling day.” We would wish to add the following, immediately after polling day: “… and shall sit at the table provided under sub-section (5)(a) of section 31 where he or she shall be allowed to crosscheck the names of the voters on the roll as against the voter’s cards presented by each voter.” 

The table provided in sub-section (5)(a) of section 31 reads as follows: “At every polling station, there shall be positioned a table where every voter shall report for identification in the voter’s roll and collection of a ballot paper.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Ok, you said you stood over it?

MR LUKWAGO: It was stood over. I do not know whether I should move it formally because I was reading it for the benefit of the Members. If I -

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. It is stood over. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that sub-section (4) of section 33 be deleted. Sub-section (4) reads as follows: “A representative or polling agent appointed under this section shall be paid an allowance determined by the commission.” 

The justification for the proposal to delete is that the Electoral Commission should not be concerned with paying allowances to representatives or polling agents of candidates. This should be left to the candidates themselves.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 33, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman -

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have another amendment? No, when it comes back we shall revert to it. (Laughter) Next amendment, hon. Lukwago! Have you got another amendment?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the committee is proposing an amendment to section 35 - because that is our next provision; but we also have ours.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR LUKWAGO: So, before the committee comes in I thought it would be proper for us to move ours.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, raise it. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. It is on page 5 of our document. We are proposing that section 35 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for sub-section (3) the following: “… where a person does not have a voter’s card but is able to prove to the presiding officer or polling assistant that his or her name and photograph are on the voter’s register, the presiding officer or polling assistant shall issue him or her with a ballot paper.” 

The justification here -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, if you looked at the original provision 35(3), it provides as follows: “Where a person does not have a voter’s card but is able to prove to the presiding officer or polling assistant that his or her name or photograph or both is/or are on the voter’s register, the presiding officer or polling assistant shall issue him or her with a ballot paper.”

We are removing “name or photograph” because if we are to go by this provision, even if it is your photograph, which is there without a name, you would be allowed to vote. So, the amendment we are moving is that both the name and picture should be there. So, that is the reason we are amending.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you have any other amendment?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the amendment I wanted to move is the amendment that hon. Lukwago brought up; it was in respect of section 35 to which we conceded. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 35 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The next would have been an amendment to section 38 but as we were in our meeting, circumstances could not permit us to debate it and so we had to skip it in the meantime and we went to section 39 in order to adopt the Minister for Security because he wanted to participate in the debate before going to attend to other duties. So we did not have the opportunity to go through section 38. So, I do not know whether I should move it here?

THE CHAIRMAN: You move it.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. Section 38 of the principal Act is amended in sub-section (1) by repealing the words: “… or the voter may, subject to sub-section (4), request another person present at the polling station to assist that voter for the purpose.” The justification is to prohibit an illiterate voter or voter with disability from requesting another person present at the polling station to assist him or her to vote. This procedure has been abused in the past but we are again adding a proposal to completely remove the element of illiterates being assisted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why?

MR LUKWAGO: We wanted to restrict it to persons with disabilities. With illiterates, the presiding officer conducting an election would be left with a wide discretion of determining who an illiterate person is and who is not and that process is being abused.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. If a voter comes and says he doesn’t know hon. Katuntu but wants to be assisted and asks for assistance, what is wrong with that?

MR LUKWAGO: The illiterates have an option of thumb printing the ballot paper. So, they should not be assisted.

MR WADRI: Mr Chairman, I would like to enrich this debate by borrowing a leaf from the parliamentary elections, which we shall shortly be considering after this. Saying that a person can only be assisted in voting by a minor, that is, a person who is below the age of 18, if we stick to that, it will address all these problems. For example, I was in Rukiga County, in Kasambya, as a polling agent -(Laughter)- and I saw professional aides; I saw and witnessed one person aiding every other person saying, “This one cannot write, let me assist.” (Laughter) I mean, we had all the reasons to object because it was not in conformity with the law. But here was a situation where there was that over zealousness. 

We are trying to safeguard against that so that even if a person has got disability, let that person be assisted by a minor and only one. That minor should only assist one voter but not to become a professional aide. (Laughter) Otherwise, he will not be able to achieve the objective. That is what we are trying to cure. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee considered this amendment proposed by the hon. Shadow Attorney-General whose essence is that a voter can only be assisted by somebody he has got from home. But we also looked at a situation where the voter may not even be having anybody at home -(Interjections)- yes, it is possible! We did not think this amendment to be practicable and, therefore, we rejected it. 

Mr NASASIRA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. By the mere fact that hon. Wadri had to come all the way from Terego to assist in Kasambya elections, in Kabale, gives the importance of assistance all the time. (Laughter)  

MS NALULE: Mr Chairman, I totally disagree with this amendment because from a historical perspective, all honourable members know that, for example, a person who is blind can only communicate by writing in Braille.
 
MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and my colleague for yielding the Floor. This amendment seeks to eliminate those who are illiterate but not those who are physically handicapped. 

MS ERIYO: Mr Chairman, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I would like to share my experience with my colleagues who are saying that after all the photos will be there. In 2001, I had my posters with a photograph with my ears on the side. So when I went for nominations, I was told to take another photograph with both ears appearing. So on the ballot paper, there was a different photograph from that which I had used on the posters. So if you have an illiterate person, they may not be able to identify the photograph and therefore might vote wrongly and I think the question of aiding the illiterates is very important. So, I disagree with the amendment, Mr Chairman. 

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Chairman, illiteracy is not disability. We have been voting like this since 1961 without this matter coming up. There are very many people who are illiterate out there and we cannot assist all of them. We use a picture and a symbol and however illiterate you may be, you must be able to identify these two. It is not by the ears that we are identified; we are identified by our faces. 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Chairman, do you need a degree to identify somebody’s face? You do not have to go to school to actually identify that this is hon. Ruhindi. These days we even have UPE.

MR MUGAMBE: I think many illiterate people require assistance. At senior four exams, there is picture interpretation but even those students at that level may not separate a picture of sorghum from that of maize or millet. So, in some cases there may be illiterates who want assistance even with the presence of a picture. So, I think we should leave the option of assisting the illiterate person. I wish to submit. 

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Chairman, I support the changes not to include the illiterates. Usually, there is supposed to be civic education to tell us exactly how the voting is going to take place. 

Secondly, as we go round soliciting for votes, we still talk to our people. Some people have got mock ballot papers and they help the Electoral Commission in the civic education. I feel that this illiteracy aspect is bound to be abused by politicians and that is why we are putting that safeguard there. I doubt that someone can miss the picture and most times, we know how we present our names and we even tell the voters that, “My name is going to be number so and so and this is how I am going to look like.” Therefore, I urge Members that you may think that it is good today but it can be used against you. 

MS BOONA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I wish to say that in this country, we have a higher rate of illiteracy among women especially our aged mothers. I have seen an aged woman who could not identify the pictures in an album and she was holding the album upside down and [Hon Members: “Even men.”] Well, I am giving an example of the old woman whom I saw. In such circumstances, a person who cannot identify a picture of her daughter or her son in an album is not likely to know the symbol of a yellow banana or a bus for that matter when it comes to electoral processes. So, I would like to ask that we still need people to assist the illiterate who cannot understand whether the picture is upright or upside down. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Chairman, thank you. I think as Members of Parliament, we should not abuse our electorate to that extent of describing them as illiterate and unable to identify symbols and pictures. This, to me, is an abuse. In any case, some candidates have modified themselves by wearing hats. They take pictures and say, “Go where there is the bus and the hat and tick that one.” I do not think a person can fail to identify the picture together with the symbol and together with the number. It is the responsibility of agents to alert their voters and say, “Our candidate is No. 2; our candidate is No. 3” and that can be done. My request is, let us not abuse our electorate the way we are abusing them today that they are illiterate. In any case, if we do not want them to vote, let us make a law here barring them from voting instead of abusing them. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give is that when we were voting in Parliament to lift term limits, everyone here had an A-level equivalent but still, there were two invalid votes. So, the issue of invalid votes is a political phenomenon worldwide, even in the UK. So, if you cannot tell that this is the head of a picture and this is the leg, then honestly speaking, your vote cannot take the country anywhere, with all due respect. (Laughter)

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, can I make a proposal? We seem to be having a very wide divide on this matter. May I propose that we stand it over so that your small committee looks at it? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Stood over. Hon. Baba Diri, we have abandoned it for the time being. It is no longer a subject of debate. Please, hon. Baba Diri, we are no longer dealing with the subject. (Laughter)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The person whom we consider illiterate is a person who cannot read and write. That means that she cannot distinguish numbers from letters of the alphabet. But if there is somebody who cannot interpret pictures and can only view it as if it is upside down, that person is a person with a disability.

There are many people with disabilities but they pretend to be able-bodied. If a person cannot identify a symbol or the pictures of the candidates, he/she is disabled and should be considered as a person with a disability.
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Do we have any other amendment?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the next amendment is in respect to section 39, page 6. We are proposing that the principal Act be amended by substituting for section 39 the following; the head note reads as follows: “Special procedure for voting for persons in institutions and restricted areas.” We would wish the head note to read as follows: “Special procedure for voting for persons in institutions and operations areas.” 

Sub-section (1): “The commission may make special provision for the taking of votes for patients in hospitals or persons admitted in homes, for the aged and also persons in operational areas such as soldiers and other security personnel. But the commission shall publish in the gazette a list of all operation areas referred to under this Act.”

Sub-section (2): “Subject to sub-section (1) the commission shall not create special or separate polling stations exclusively for the army or any other security personnel.” 

We beg to move. This was agreed upon in the meeting.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: It is true that we agreed on the amendment of section 39 but what we agreed was to retain section 39(1) and amend sub-section (2) to say that subject to sub-section (1) there shall be no special polling centres. 

We agreed that we should amend the marginal title as well but what I heard him read is amendment of sub-section (1) as well and that is not accurate.

We agreed to retain sub-section (1) as it is; we agreed to amend sub-section (2) as he has read.

MR WADRI: When we got ourselves holed up in a meeting from 11.00 a.m. to 3.00 p.m. it was not for nothing. I think that was the moment of truth when I saw the hon. Minister for Security for once very realistic. What we agreed on in the first place was to amend the heading. You remember what is in the principal law is, “Special procedure for voting of persons in institutions and restricted areas.” We held a lot of debate as to whether we should go by that or substitute “restricted areas” for “operational areas.”

When you talk about “restricted” that will include things like barracks but when we talk about “operational” areas it is wider than limiting only to the institutions like barracks and CMI headquarters. We agreed that we change that heading to read “and operational areas” and the chairman, Prof. Apolo Nsibambi was even there.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, first of all, I was the one chairing the meeting. Certainly we agreed on amending the subtitle and all I am saying is that we also agreed to retain sub-section (1). The answer for this is that all these things we agree on should be put in writing so that we bring written agreed positions otherwise we may have a problem. The way out of this is that we put all this in writing which we can do very easily and quickly so that we come with agreed texts.

MS ALASO: I would like to give our chairperson of the working committee the framing that we agreed on. When it came to section 39, we said that it is provided in the law currently, “Special procedure for voting for persons in institutions and restricted areas” and in the meeting we agreed that it should read, “Special procedure for voting for persons in institutions and operational areas.” 

Then in sub-section (1) it says, “The commission may make special provision for the taking of the votes of patients in hospitals or persons admitted in sanatoria or homes for the aged and similar institutions ….” We agreed that we will delete from where it says, “… and also for persons in restricted areas such as soldiers and other security personnel.” We substituted that with “operational areas.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Now what do we do?
 
MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I want to report to this House that we agreed on the changes and we are just disagreeing on what has been presented by way of formulation. That is why I said it is better that we go and formulate it as we agreed and we present to this House an agreed text.

MR LUKWAGO: Can I give you information?

THE CHAIRMAN: Can I give you another break? 

MR LUKWAGO: I want to correct the record - again, this is not my phraseology here. I sat down with the Deputy Attorney-General and the staff of the Attorney-General and we drafted this. This is not my handwriting –(interjections)-  I want to put the record straight; because it is being imputed as if – yes, like I went behind the back of the people in the meeting and drafted this amendment in my own words.

MR RUHUNDI: First of all, for purposes of the record on this amendment, in the meeting we observed that although this proposal is preferred – but practically everywhere in Uganda now, where there are security forces, they vote out of their barracks - that one was observed and it should be for purposes of record – they vote in the nearest polling stations to their barracks. 

Secondly, that is when hon. Amama Mbabazi brought in the concept of security personnel who may be deployed on operational grounds and the idea was that special arrangements should also be made for them to vote –(Interjections)- and yes, we agreed upon that in the meeting. I think he is a little bit not comfortable with –(Interjections)– I am reporting what happened in the meeting and the Members –(Interjections)– were you in the meeting? (Laughter) No one who was in the meeting is objecting. I think what is making the Minister of Security a little bit reluctant to go ahead with this proposal is that under that special arrangement, it can still be in a restricted area. 

Therefore, Mr Chairman, you need to bear with us and also the support staff we have to help us on this work; they rushed this draft and we did not actually sit to look at it as a team and, therefore, I think the best thing for us to do is that when we meet tomorrow at 11 O’clock, the first thing will be to look at the draft as a team and come back in the afternoon with a reviewed position.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us do that. The next amendment!

MR LUKWAGO: I would wish to report that the meeting ended on that note as we were discussing the amendment to section 42 - the role of security personnel, particularly the Army and other security agencies in managing law and order. We disagreed and had a heated debate and the matter was stood over until tomorrow. So, that is where we ended. I beg –(Interjections)– but I am reporting what transpired in the meeting and I do not want to move another amendment where we have disagreed and then you impute bad motive on my part. We have not agreed on the next amendment and that is where we stopped. The Prime Minister deemed it fit that we stand over all the remaining amendments until tomorrow at 11 O’clock.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Hon. Lukwago is correct. We are meeting tomorrow at 11 O’clock. I thank you. (Laughter)

MS MUGERWA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Given the importance of the law we are making, I am wondering whether we could have a complete draft of the work we have done so far, so that we see the sequence of whatever has been done –(Interjections)– yes, the amendments are so many and it is really very difficult for some of us to exactly follow what has been going on. I am trying to find out –(Interjections)– and I am serious -(Laughter)- I am seeking guidance from you on whether it is possible for you to provide us with a report of the progress of the work we have done, in writing. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I think the Hansard office is directed to give us copies of what has transpired since yesterday -(Laughter)- yes, this is the best way. The Hansard will give us that. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report there to.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill 2009” and deferred the debate for further consultations and – 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): I think Members should bear with the situation under which we are debating this Presidential –(Laughter)- they should bear with me that it is a complicated arrangement that we have adopted. It is unprecedented and, therefore, to go into details of what has been passed and not passed maybe problematic since we started. I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MR ODONGA OTTO: I seek your guidance. I appreciate the concern raised by the Woman Member of Parliament for Masaka District and the concerns also raised by the Deputy Attorney-General on the circumstances under which we are operating – where the amendments seem to be so many. During the Constitutional Amendment, 2005 - some time back in the last Parliament - I recall very well that Government had brought an amendment in the Bill that oil shall not be a mineral and yet we –(Interjections)- yes, we went ahead to delete that amendment en masse and the House voted over it. Now, I checked the Constitution under Article 254 and discovered that the amendment, which this House voted against as per the Hansard, was inserted into the Constitution. So, given that kind of behaviour where what we say may appear in the Bill or not, I recommend that since the Minister – I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker – since the Minister did not pronounce himself clearly on which ones we passed and which ones we did not, advise us how we shall begin tomorrow from that area. 

This business of doing things in a hurry; today there is a contradiction between what is in the Constitution and what is in the parliamentary Hansard. That means someone smuggled an amendment into the Constitution. So, Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance in such circumstances about how we will be proceeding because we may be debating a lot when some people are already planning how to insert their things into the mother Act. I know there are some people who are capable of that deal that side (Laughter) So, I seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: I think what we have adopted is what has been recorded by the Hansard. The amendments, which we have passed, the proposed amendments we have stood over, they are all recorded. What we have adopted is what the Hansard has captured. As far as the Constitution is concerned, I don’t know what happened. What you will do is to bring the relevant Hansard, I will look at it then we can make corrections.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, for the record, I will bring the Hansard, which shows we deleted a section that oil shall not be a mineral and I will also bring a photocopy of the Constitution, which shows that it was inserted so that we can see whom to discipline. I will do that immediately. Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you will do that. We can always make a correction.

MRS SEKABIRA: Mr Speaker, this time round many students in secondary schools have been registered within their school campuses. But we noted, for example in Kayunga that students come from different districts to study from our district. Now I am seeking your guidance on this so that this committee looks at it. What about if elections take place during holidays? Will these students have to travel to the district where they were registered from to vote? So, as they discuss the issue of institutions, I beg that the issue of students in secondary schools be discussed too, and a report be made. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You mean those secondary school students have registered as voters?

MRS SEKABIRA: Yes, they have been registered as voters in secondary schools; those who are 18 and above.

THE SPEAKER: If they have been registered as voters, it must be in boarding schools not day schools because you register where you reside or where you originate from. But if it is a day school, that is where you study from and you do not register where you study from. So, they should correct that. Therefore, if there is a problem with this, what they can do is to transfer their registration to their homes.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE AMNESTY COMMISSION FOR THE PERIOD 2002-2008

5.10
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Richard Sebuliba Mutumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I present to you the report of the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises on the Performance of the Amnesty Commission from 2002 to 2008. (Interjections) I know the copies are being circulated. 

Page 1 has got the introduction. It is the usual stuff. Article 90 of the Constitution of Uganda and rule 154 of our Rules of Procedure; that is the introduction. 

And then, 1.1 has got the methodology. Here the committee held several meetings with officials of the Amnesty Commission.

Then 1.2 has the background to the amnesty process. The Amnesty Commission is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs and was established under the Amnesty Act 2000 for the purpose of implementing the Amnesty Act. 

The Amnesty Act 2000 sought to give a blanket amnesty to reporters. “Reporters” in this context refers to people involved in rebellion who seek to be pardoned by the state.

It also provided for the Act to remain in force for six months unless this period is extended by the Minister if he deems it necessary.

The Amnesty Act has been amended twice. The first amendment was the Amnesty (Amendment) Act 2002, which provides for amnesty not to be granted again except in special circumstances. 

The second amendment is the Amnesty (Amendment) Act 2002 on page 2, which provides that a person shall not be eligible to be granted amnesty if he or she is declared not eligible by the Minister with the approval of Parliament. 

It also provides for the extension of the lifespan of the Amnesty Act to two years but extendable. As stated above, the commission’s tenure under the Amnesty Act 2000 was originally six months renewable by statutory instruments by the Minister of Internal Affairs. However, in accordance with the Amnesty (Amendment) Act 2002, the amnesty process was given a lifespan of two years from 24 May, 2006 to 24 May, 2008. The Minister of Internal Affairs has renewed the commission’s lifespan for another two years from 25 May 2008 up to 24 May 2010.

Page 2, 1.3 again has the set-up of the Amnesty Commission. It gives highlights – the commission is headed, of course, by the chairperson who is the High Court judge. It has five commissioners and seven demobilisation and re-integration team members. The secretary of the Amnesty Commission heads the secretariat. It has branches or reception centres headed by the Demobilisation and Resettlement Teams (DRT) in Gulu, Kitgum, Arua, Kasese, Mbale and Kampala. The commission also has a DRT for general duties and has established an office in Beni in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

The commission is governed by a committee of five commissioners and a secretary namely:

    a) Hon. Justice P. K. K. Onega, Chairman
    b) Hajji Bruhan Ganyana Miiro, Commissioner
    c) Hajati Amina A. Munuulo, Commissioner
    d) Magistrate Thomas Kisembo, Commissioner
    e) Mrs Ocitti E. Grace, Commissioner 
    f) Mr Damiano Kato, Secretary

However, the Amnesty Act provides for a maximum of seven commissioners. 

Part 1.4 spells out the mandate and functions of the Amnesty Commission according to Section 8 of the Amnesty Act, Chapter 294 of the laws of Uganda. They are the following:

    i) Sensitising the public about the amnesty law;
    ii) Demobilise, re-insert and re-integrate reporters;
    iii) Grant amnesty to reporters; 
    iv) Promote dialogue and reconciliation in war-affected areas; and 
    v) Perform any other function that is associated or connected with the association of the functions of the Amnesty Act.

Page 4, 1.5 has projects undertaken by the commission. 

The commission is implementing the Uganda Emergency Reintegration Project funded by the Multi Donor Trust Fund through the World Bank. The project is worth US $2.85 million. The project commenced in October 2008 and will last till June 30, 2010. 

The project is operated in all DRT regions in the country and aims at helping reporters to re-integrate into the community. 

    1. The project has handled the following reporters: Under the mobilization, it has handled the following:

    (a) 150 ADF and LRA reporters.
    (b) The following members of rebel groups who had returned to the community but had not been granted amnesty.
    i) 2259 members of West Nile Bank Front (WNBF)
    ii) 459 members of the Uganda People’s Army
    iii) 2 members of UNRF II

    2. Under re-insertion: The Project has handled 1743 reporters. 
    3. Under re-integration, the project has handled 1500 reporters by offering them information, counselling and referral services.
    4. Under dialogue and reconciliation, the project has disseminated amnesty process information for potential reports.

Achievements of the Commission

The committee was informed that since its establishment, the commission has been able to register the following achievements:
        1. Sensitization of the public about the Amnesty Law. Many Ugandans now know about the Amnesty Law.
        2. Promoting dialogue and reconciliation. The commission has been able to link fighting groups with the Government for reconciliation. It was that the Commission also participated in the Juba Peace Talks as observers. 
        3. Demobilization and granting of amnesty to reporters. The committee learnt that the Commission has so far demobilized 25,350 reporters as per schedule of fighting groups below: Reporters by rebel groups as at 16 April 2010. We have got the rebel groups on the left hand side, number of reporter and percentages. We have the Action Restore Peace; the number of reporters is on your right. Allied Democratic Forces; Anti-Dictatorship Forces; Citizens Army for Multi-party Politics, Force Obote Back/Uganda Patriotic Army; Ninth October Movement; Former Uganda National Army; Holy Spirit Movement; Lord’s Resistance Army; National Army for Liberation of Uganda; National Democratic Alliance; National Freedom Army; group thirteen is not specified, but it has at least registered 187 reporters and 0.74 percent; People’s Redemption Army; Uganda Freedom Democratic Forces; Uganda Freedom Front; Uganda Freedom Movement; Uganda National Freedom Movement; Uganda National Independent Liberation; Uganda National Rescue Front II; Uganda People’s Army; Uganda Salvation Army; Uganda Democratic Alliance/Front; Uganda National Democratic Alliance; Uganda National Liberation Army; Uganda National Liberation Front; Uganda Patriotic Democratic Army and 28 West Nile Bank Front. 

So, in total we have got 25,350 and when you look at the percentages, you can compare the numbers. For instance, you look at 20 – the reporting has been big, even for the Lord’s Resistance Army. 

The committee was informed that the unspecified reporters referred to as No. 13 in the table, refer to reporters who do not belong to any rebel group. There are individuals who have been fighting from one group to another but eventually came out singularly when they got tired of rebellion. The unspecified also include cases generally released by the Director Public Prosecutions under the Amnesty Act, but do not belong to any particular group. 

        4. Resettlement of reporters. The Commission has been able to reinsert most of the reporters into the communities by giving them an amnesty package which includes the following:
    • Cash package of Shs 263,000
    • Household items: One mattress, one blanket, one jerry can, two saucepans, one basin, two plates and a cup.
    • Farm inputs: three hoes, 5 kilograms of maize seeds and five kilograms of bean seeds.
        5. Translation of the Amnesty Act into various languages namely: Luo, Lugbara, Ateso, Luganda, Runyankore, Rukiga-Rutoro, Rukonjo and French in addition to the English version.
        6. Support to partners in the implementation of the Amnesty Process. 
        7. Capacity building of the Commission.

Challenges faced by the Commission 

The committee was informed that the Commission is faced with the following challenges:

    1. The mandate of the Commission has so far been limited to six months thus making planning and resource mobilization difficult.

    2. Funding: Inadequate funds and logistics to implement the function of the Commission, especially the integration on a long time basis. Information counselling and referral system requires a lot of funds for its implementation. A budget of about US $8.25 million had been made by the Commission but so far it has received only US $2.85 million. 

    3. There has been some mistrust between Government and the fighting groups and this has made the Commission’s work, of promoting dialogue and reconciliation, a bit difficult. 

    4. The Commission lacks elaborate, approved structures particularly in the demobilization and settlement teams’ offices. Those are the four challenges.

General Observations and Recommendations 

The committee made the following general observations and recommendations:

        1. The committee noted with dismay that the list of reporters provided by the Amnesty Commission includes 11 rebel groups of six reporters and below. It is thus difficult to believe that they were formerly fighting forces. 

        2. Some of the rebel groups named as reporters are actually defunct and others were part of the national armies of the earlier governments like UNLA. These categories of people should not have benefited from amnesty.

        3. The Amnesty Act does not clearly specify the nature of the person eligible for amnesty.

        4. Former rebel groups like Uganda People’s Army (UPA) and the UPDA signed peace accords with Government hence they do not qualify for amnesty although they are listed by the Amnesty Commission as reporters.
 
        5. Based on the package provided to reporters, the committee observed that the Amnesty Commission lacked a comprehensive needs assessment on what rebels need in order to be resettled and re-integrated properly. This may discourage reporting.

        6. The two-year tenure of the Amnesty Commission which is due to expire on 24 May 2010 is not suitable as it does not provide for adequate resource mobilization, planning and consolidation of achievements made.

        7. The committee was concerned about the apparent lack of approved structures particularly in the demobilization and resettlement teams’ offices. 

        8. It was noted that resettlement packages for reporters are handed to them from the Amnesty Commission Headquarters in Kampala as opposed to localities where reporters can be easily identified and acknowledged by the communities.

Recommendations

    1. The Amnesty Commission should deal with verifiable rebel groups that have been identified as a threat by the Army. 

    2. Resources should not be wasted by giving amnesty to members of defunct groups.

    3. Soldiers who previously served in national armies should not be considered as reporters on basis of belonging to those armies.

    4. The security institutions should prove without reasonable doubt that the named rebel groups exist before amnesty is granted.

    5. The Amnesty Act should be amended to clarify the legibility of a person who qualifies for amnesty.

    6. Groups which have signed peace accords with Government should not be handled by the Amnesty Commission but by the Peace Accord Agreement. 

    7. The Amnesty Act should be amended to increase the tenure of the Commission to five years which are renewable. This will give it an opportunity to plan, mobilize for resources and follow up and evaluate the progress made. 

    8. The Amnesty Commission should make use of the local government structures particularly in the demobilization and resettlement teams’ offices.

    9. Resettlement packages should not be handed to reporters from the Amnesty Commission headquarters in Kampala but should be localized from the district level downwards.

Audited Accounts

I am going to pick out the salient features as I wind up this report. 

On page 11; the committee examined the audited accounts of the Amnesty Commission and the financial statements thereof from 2002 to 2008. It was noted that in the Auditor-General’s opinion, generally proper books of accounts have been kept and financial statements represented a true and fair view of the Commission. However, the committee raised some pertinent issues highlighted in the management letters of the Amnesty Commission for the years ended June 2002 and June 2003. 

The salient issues raised in the management letters for the year ended June 2002:

    1. Payment of sitting and medical allowances. The Auditor General reported that two members to the demobilization and resettlement team who are also full-time employees in other public offices, namely, the Judiciary and Makerere University, are entitled to only a sitting allowance of Shs 100,000 per sitting from the Commission.

It was noted that the two members were instead paid Shs 100,000 each for every working day during the financial year totalling to Shs 23,600,000. Over the same period, the Commission sat only seven times meaning that only Shs 700,000 should have been paid to each of the two members. Therefore, the over-payment of Shs 22,900,000 to each of the two members totalling to Shs 45,800,000 is recoverable.

The Auditor-General observed that management of the Commission approved payment of medical allowance totalling to Shs 3.2 million to a member of the demobilisation and restructuring team whose terms of employment do not include this benefit.

Management Response

Management responded that when the Chairman of the Commission, Justice P. K. K. Onega and the DRT central Mrs A. Sekiboobo were originally appointed, it was assumed that they were going to be on part-time employment. However, it turned out that they became full-time employees due to the nature of the work they do. So, they had to be paid the daily sitting allowances for the days they worked. This case was, however, referred to the accounting officer to streamline the terms.

With regard to medical allowances, management noted that all commissioners and demobilisation and resettlement team officers get that allowance, except the Chairman, Justice P. K. K. Onega and DRT central, Mrs Agnes Sekiboobo. It was established, however, that the chairman’s medical allowance is paid by the Judiciary and, therefore, he is not paid by the Commission. It was also established that Mrs A. Sekiboobo is not paid that allowance by her employers at Makerere University that is why it is paid by the Commission. Her case was also referred to the appointing authority to streamline her terms on this allowance.

The Secretary to the Judiciary in a letter to the committee clarified that under Article 142(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, “A person appointed under clause 20 of this article to act as Justice of the Supreme Court, a justice of Appeal or a judge of the High Court, shall continue to act for the period of the appointment or, if no period is specified, until the appointment is revoked by the President ….”

The judge, therefore, continues to be paid by the Judiciary and other payments made to him by the Amnesty Commission only cover incidentals.

Observation

The committee considered the clarified position and could not proceed on the matter. If you look at the letter originated by the chairman at the end of - because the concern was about the dual payments. If you look at the letter written on 04 September 2000, you will see the concerns of the chairman, hon. Okumu Reagan, regarding the matter of Justice P. K. K. Onega:

“I write to seek clarification about the matter which arose from the Auditor-General’s report.

It has been a matter of concern that Justices Faith Mwondha and Justice Ssebutinde were also allegedly paid double payments while on secondment like Justice P. K. K. Onega. 

This is, therefore, to seek clarification from you on matters regarding emoluments paid to Justice Onega from the Judiciary and what he should be receiving from Amnesty Commission. The matter is urgent.”

And the response - if you go to next page – by the Secretary to the Judiciary to the Chairperson - was:

“I refer to your letter AB70 dated 08 September 2009 which you sought clarification on the alleged double payment to Justice P. K. K. Onega. The honourable judge is seconded to the Amnesty Commission and he continues to enjoy employment terms of a High Court judge.

Under Article 142(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, ‘A person appointed under clause 2 of this article to act as a Justice of the Supreme Court, a Justice of Appeal or the Judge of the High Court shall continue to act for the period of appointment or if no period is specified, until the appointment is revoked by the President …’

The judge, therefore, continues to be paid by the Judiciary and other payments made to him by the Amnesty Commission only cover incidentals as stated in his letter of secondment.”

But when you look at the so-called incidentals, it is almost double payment.

“Consultation was also made with the Amnesty Commission on the issue of his terms and conditions of service. It was clarified by the Secretary to the Commission that the Judge’s letter of secondment authorised the payment of sitting allowance of Shs 100,000 per sitting.”

And then of course there is another one from the Deputy Prime Minister to Justice P. K. K. Onega. I will just read it for the sake of records.

“I am pleased to inform you that His Excellency the President has, in exercise of the powers vested in him under section 8 and 12 of the Amnesty Act directed that you be appointed Chairman of the Amnesty Commission. 

You will continue to enjoy your terms and conditions of service as a judge. In addition you will be given a sitting allowance. The appointment is subject to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It would be appreciated if you would indicate to me in writing whether you are willing to accept the offer ….”

But the point here, hon. Members, is the issue of getting almost the same kind of payment from the Consolidated Fund. Even when we are talking ajon, we use one straw; we do not take two just as a by-the-way. That is the question; we leave it to you Members, since some of you are very good at law, you can help us here.

Observation

The committee considered the clarified position and could not proceed on the matter.

Funds not accounted for

The Auditor General reported that a total of Shs 7 million was drawn – I am going to read the observation.

Although the Auditor-General verified this payment and found that this amount had been paid, the committee noted that this action was improper. Shs 7 million was drawn on the cheque number so the payment was improper.

Recommendation

Management was cautioned to follow the right financial management procedures in future transactions, but still it was improper.

Subsistence allowances paid to non-staff

The Auditor-General was able to verify the payment. However, the committee recommended that the commission should institute proper internal controls at management level and avail documents for audit when required. These were also improper transactions.

Salient issues raised in the management letters for year ended June 2003

We have got unrecovered advances from the Ministry of Internal Affairs totalling to Shs 50 million.

On page 15, there is a management response but then we have recommendations. The payment vouchers were verified.

However, the committee cautioned the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Internal Affairs to desist from involving his ministry in funds meant for amnesty.

Here, they spent money meant for amnesty and they used it for other things without permission of the Amnesty Commission. It is as if they were carrying out the work of the Amnesty Commission because if you look up to where there is a management response, you find that the money was later released to the Ministry of Internal Affairs by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

However, the money was spent by the Ministry of Internal Affairs on furthering amnesty peace negotiations on behalf of the Amnesty Commission on the instructions of the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Internal Affairs. The vouchers relating to the payments are available for verification in the ministry. Each one has got his own vote; I do not now how the ministry came to encroach on this.

Recommendations

The Ministry of Internal Affairs should refund Shs 49,500,000 to the Amnesty Commission.

Accounting officers should clearly separate votes under subvention from those that directly fall under their ministries.

Unaccounted for payments of Shs 9,185,500 - the observation and recommendation on this is that the auditors were able to verify all the payments; and found that they were made for the intended objectives. Of course this one we have to leave it out. 

In conclusion, hon. Members, you will bear with the marathon I have taken you through.

A fully functional Amnesty Commission is an important avenue for the acquisition of peace whereby formerly rebellious individuals or groups are encouraged to receive amnesty in accordance with the law. 

The expeditious amendment of the Amnesty Act is a necessity that will enable the Commission to consolidate its efforts and acquire tangible results.

Further, the tenure of the commission if increased to more than the current two years would be a means of improving its overall performance, planning and resource mobilisation.

Finally, the amnesty law should be translated into various local languages so that it is easily understood by a cross-section of reporters who may desire to get back into the fold.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move and report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman and the committee for the report.

5.35
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the chairman of the committee for this report. I have two areas to address myself to on page 8.

As you know, the Amnesty Commission reports to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs where I serve as a member and I am fairly familiar with the issues that have been raised here. I beg to request the chair of the committee to admit that I add as a way of an amendment to the report challenge No.5 on page 8: “The communities complained over the packages to reporters without addressing the plight of the victims.” 

The communities where these reporters go have a legitimate complaint. You know we have a problem; we did not provide for a law that specifically looks at the victims and, therefore, when you give them packages to go home, the communities, especially those victims, find it exceedingly painful that they were law abiding citizens, they suffered at the hands of these victims, and they look at it as a reward for the suffering. These communities have that complaint and we have to find a way. So, I would beg that we put that challenge there.

And subsequently, on page 10, on the recommendations, I would beg that we add another recommendation No. 10 that Government should make prior effort to address concerns of victims before resettlement packages are handed over to reporters in those particular areas. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, Members, are you ready to debate this report? 

5.38
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report. I will first of all begin by addressing myself to page 15 whereby -(Interjections)- it is as if we had said yes and we were ready to proceed with discussing the report. That is why -(Interruption)

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, we were asked whether to debate today or tomorrow and the chorus was tomorrow. So, we agreed that it is tomorrow. Is it is procedurally right for the honourable member to continue?

THE SPEAKER: Apart from the outline which the chairman has given, have you read this report?

HON. MEMBERS: No. 

THE SPEAKER: Now, what is your position? 

5.40
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This report is a very important report because it touches the stability of Uganda. I would like to request Members that they heed to your advice that this report be read by Members for some time and at an appropriate time, as you will advise, we discuss it, other than discussing it now yet it is part of what will form stability in this country. I beg to request.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Study the report overnight and we shall start the debate tomorrow, hopefully after we have gone through the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON AMBER HOUSE AND UGANDA PROPERTY HOLDINGS

5.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Reagan Okumu): Mr Speaker, both reports were presented to Parliament and we are awaiting the response of the Executive, because there were certain issues that were raised and the Executive had promised that they would respond to those issues to allow debate. So, I am not sure whether the Executive has finally responded to the Clerk to Parliament to allow us to continue with debate on this matter. The hon. Minister of Finance, Prof. Kamuntu, was vividly present and he made a statement on that day. 

THE SPEAKER: Then I think we have come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. However, I am appealing to those who are involved with the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill to finalise that work so that tomorrow we conclude considering the Bill. I thank you very much for your time. 

(The House rose at 5.41 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 29 April 2010, at 2.30 p.m.)
