Tuesday 25th April, 2000

Parliament met at 2.28 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CIVIL PROCEDURE AND LIMITATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you will recall that before we adjourned, we were in the process of considering an amendment proposed by the hon. Minister. And because of that amendment, the hon. Karuhanga requested for an adjournment because he wanted to move further amendments, in addition to what the Committee had proposed. I gave that opportunity to him, but I do not see hon. Karuhanga around. I do not know whether the chairperson can tell us what transpired.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have not got any proposed amendments. No one has submitted to me any amendment since Thursday, not even hon. Karuhanga. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Can the chairperson confirm that.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Ogalo Wandera): Yes, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Nobody can tell us where hon. Karuhanga is, although much earlier, even before this matter came before this House, the hon. Karuhanga had asked for permission to be allowed to join a delegation, which was to have gone to Rwanda for some official duty. I do not know whether that duty is still going on, but it may be the cause of his absence from today's Meeting. Perhaps, in all fairness, we should give him another opportunity, maybe until tomorrow, so that we can at least hear from him or from one of his colleagues about his proposal.  

MR. KIRENGA: I want to support your adjournment, Mr. Speaker, because that amendment is very important, I would not like us to abandon it.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you part of it?

MR. KIRENGA: No, but let him come so that we can debate it, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, any objection?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, the policy of Government is as it is in the Bill; we have no amendments. But if hon. Karuhanga wants one, and we are adjourning because of his absence, I request that tomorrow, if he does not submit amendments by the time we come here, we move ahead on my Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I do not want to make a decision on that, we will cross the bridge when we get there. Is that al right?


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has met and has decided to adjourn discussion, at the Committee Stage, of the Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2000, until tomorrow. This is so that hon. Karuhanga, who had an interest to move an amendment to that Bill as indicated earlier on, can be given chance to do so if he still wants to.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SEK 16,600,000.00 FROM SVANSKA HANDELS BANKEN OF SWEDEN TO FINANCE UNIT 13 OF THE OWEN FALLS EXTENSION.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Finance here, neither do I see any of his Ministers of State. But I recognise the hon. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the former Minister of Finance.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I am a bit sure that there is a very important reason why the Minister of Finance is not here. I am glad his Minister of State is coming in, I hope he will be able to tell us what is happening.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister in charge of Privatisation, I would like to draw your attention to where we are now. Take your time, you do not have to rush. Item 9 on the order paper is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow Sek 16,600,000.00 from Svanska Handels Banken of Sweden to finance unit 13 of the Owen Falls Extension. That is where we are. But I do not know whether you are ready, I do not see your colleague from the energy sector, the Minister of Energy.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Speaker, I know she is coming, but I also realise that the chairman has not even come. But I am ready to move the motion. We were in a meeting up to very late, and that is why we have come late. I apologise, Mr. Speaker.  But if we are given about five minutes, we will be quite ready, as other Ministers come.

THE SPEAKER: I think we can stand that one over until the Minister arrives. Hon. Minister in charge of Privatisation, I wish to draw your attention to item 10, which reads as follows:“Motion that the House do resolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of the supplementary estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 1999/2000 (Supplementary Schedule No.1)” 

That is where we are. The Minister of Finance is not around, I do not know whether you can say something about that.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I am ready with this one.

THE SPEAKER: I have been advised that the Chairperson is not around. I will, therefore, suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes, to allow these hon. Members to join us. 

(The proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption_)

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR THE CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF THE SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 1999/2000 (SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1)

THE MINISTER OF STATE OF FINANCE IN CHARGE OF PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resolve itself into a committee of supply for the consideration and approval of supplementary estimates for revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year, 1999/2000 (supplementary schedule No.1).

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. I will now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, allow me to make some preliminary clarifications about the supplementary schedule No.1 of the year 1999/2000, which has been distributed to Members.

The total supplementaries, under recurrent expenditure, amounted to 36,723,000,000 shillings. Members will note that of the 36,723,000,000 shillings supplementary under the recurrent budget, 19.23 billion is for re-allocation within the budget estimates, either from one vote to another or from the development budget to the recurrent budget of the same vote. This does not result into an increase in budgetary resources. This type of supplementary accounts for 52.4 per cent of the total supplementaries, under the recurrent expenditure.  

On the recurrent budget, therefore, only 17.49 billion shillings is required as additional resources. Under the same budget, 3.588 billion shillings was subsequently distributed to the various Ministries, to pay outstanding dues to UEB, and VAT to URA, and shillings 2.938 billion was used to pay UTL arrears by Government. It should also be noted that 6.391 billion shillings was distributed to districts, of which, shillings 1.746 billion was to facilitate monitoring and accountability of the Poverty Alleviation Fund funds.  Shillings 2.515 billion was to facilitate district service commissions, while 2 billion shillings was for the equalisation grant and districts affected by the insurgency. This had been budgeted under the wage and other contingency in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, because the modalities for distribution had not been drawn at the beginning of the financial year.  This money has already been released to the districts.  

Under the development budget, a total supplementary of 7.148 billion shillings is being requested for. Of this, 4.094 billion shillings is re-allocation within the budget. Supplementaries due to re-allocation, therefore, account for 57.3 per cent of the supplementary budget. Therefore, under the development budget, only 3.05 billion shillings is required as additional resources. The total supplementary expenditures authorised for the period, November to March, is 43,871,520,000. And as I said above, 36.723 billion of this is recurrent and 7.48 billion is development. 

To a large extent, the supplementary expenditure for the period financed re-allocation within the budget and within the development and recurrent budgets. The resource basis requirements were financed through budget cuts across the board, due to poor revenue performance. When we come to the details, we shall note the offices that had higher recurrent budgets, including the office of the President. That office had 1.918 billion shillings, which was rent due to National Housing and Construction Corporation and Uganda Posts Limited, while 178 million was sought to pay outstanding bills to Uganda Electricity Board. I will hasten to explain that the reason the rent to National Housing is paid by the Office of the President is because the Office of the President is the one that manages all properties and rents for the Government.  

In the case of Foreign Affairs, where we shall find another big expenditure of 2.464 billion shillings, it was basically to pay the outstanding commitments at missions abroad, accumulated by the end of 1999. And 540.9 million shillings was used to cater for Uganda's contribution to the Joint Military Commission and the East African Co-operation. I will hasten to add that, basically, one of the reasons Foreign Affairs had a problem was because of the foreign exchange laws, which created a lot of shortage of funds.  

We shall come to the other Ministries as we go along, but I want to say that 6.391 billion shillings was for districts. Out of that, 1.746 billion was to facilitate monitoring and accountability of funds; and this is important, if we are going to make sure that funds in the districts are properly used. 
I beg to move, and I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I misguided you when I asked you to pronounce yourselves on the motion before it was moved and before the Minister addressed you. We can now have the chairperson to present her report.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE (Ms. Kiraso Beatrice): Mr. Speaker, I wish, first of all, to apologise for not being here when you called upon us. It is because last week, on the order of business to follow, the supplementary schedule was not mentioned. So, I thought that most Members would have forgotten or would not have carried along with them their supplementary schedule 1. So, we had to go and ensure that enough copies were being made for Members. I wish to apologise.  

The supplementary schedule 1 for the financial year 1999/2000 was laid on Table on the 4th March 2000, and thereafter referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration.  

The Committee met with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development officials on this matter, and the necessary clarifications were made, from which the Committee proceeded to make this report.  

Supplementary Schedule 1, 1999/2000: 
Recurrent Expenditure: 
The committee noted that the supplementary expenditure in this category stood at 4.1 percent of the approved estimates.  This is a decline of 45 percent, from an average of 9 percent last financial year, although it is well above the promised 3 percent. 

Out of the total supplementary of 36,826,719,000/= only, 45 percent is a result of increase, while 55 percent, as the Minister has already said, is a result of re-allocations.  

The Committee wishes to commend the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for this positive trend. We also wish to advise that the Ministry honour its debt to maintain this kind of trend, up to a time when the supplementaries will be minimised or at best, eliminated. 

The leading departments in this year's supplementaries, as you have noted, are the Ministry of Internal Affairs, whose supplementary stands at 3,049,930,000/= against the approved estimate of 3,107,335,000/=. The supplementary is 98 percent. The major reasons given were security, especially in Karamoja, and payment to Uganda Revenue Authority for UTL’s VAT. 

The other big spender under the supplementaries was the office of the Prime Minister, which had a supplementary of 1,320,850,000/= compared to the approved estimate of 1,999,984,000/=. This is 66 percent. The 1.3 billion shillings was said to have catered for relief assistance to victims of drought and other calamities, and 20.4 million was used to compensate 48 families in Bundibugyo.

The Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment has a supplementary of 1,139,760,000/=, which is 22.5 percent of the approved estimates of 5 billion. This was said to have paid URA for UTL's VAT obligations and to clear domestic arrears to Uganda Electricity Board. The rest was for monitoring the Poverty Alleviation Fund (PAF) programmes. 

The leading Ministries in supplementaries, during the last financial year, showed some discipline in this quarter, by maintaining their supplementaries at a lower level. The following are some of them: 

Ministry of Defence's supplementary stood at 4 billion, which was 2.1 percent of the approved estimate, and this arose out of the re-allocation from the development budget of the same vote due to the increased wage bill. 

State House also exercised some discipline, with a supplementary standing at only 12.1 percent of the approved estimate. This supplementary arose out of outstanding commitments up to the end of December 1999, a shortfall in their budget for the financial year and domestic arrears.

For the Office of the President, supplementaries stood at only 7.5 percent of the approved estimate. This is said to have been used to cater for rent, as the hon. Minister has already told this House. 

Under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, supplementaries stand at 5 billion. This was to cater for the shortfall in pre-shipment inspection fees due to ITS bills to SWIPCO and AVISTO. Costs for the Judicial Commission of Inquiry on the closure of banks amount to 72 million shillings under this Vote.  

On the whole, there has been some improvement in managing the budget by some Ministries.  This is reflected in the fall in the amount of supplementaries compared to the approved estimates. The last financial year’s supplementaries run at an average of 9 percent, and now this has come down to 4.1 percent. We hope it will continue going down.  

Supplementary Schedule 1 1999/2000: 
Development Expenditure:  
This component of the budget has been kept very close to the approved estimates, as not many Government departments have got this provision in their budget. There was a heavy injection in some departments by major foreign donors hence the need for counterpart funding. The major foreign donors provided $5,038,639, while local contribution to those foreign funds amounted to 15,702,808,000/=. 

Observations by the Committee:  
The Committee noted that Government is paying a lot of money in rent for Government Ministries. This contributes to the high supplementary on Vote 00l. It was also observed that the high supplementary for State House was due to hiring a plane for the President when the presidential jet was grounded. Negotiations for purchase of another one are said to be almost concluded, and the committee was informed that a new presidential jet will be in the country around November or December this year.  

The supplementaries for the Foreign Affairs Ministry were considered necessary, in order to salvage our national image abroad.  Hon. Members are aware about the effect on our image, when we cannot pay rent and other dues for our foreign missions.  

The Committee was informed that a team of auditors was due to go and assess the value of our assets in the closed missions, in order to find a way forward.  

On the pension reform and pension for the formers East African Community employees, the Committee was informed that 15,853,742,985/= has been released to date, since the financial year 1992/93.  For the financial year 1999/2000, Shs. 2 billion was provided, and all of it has been released. The problem, however, is that over 800 files are still with the Auditor General, for over six months now. And since auditing is not completed, the level of liability cannot be easily established.
  
On other pensioners, the Committee was informed that all pensioners on the payroll would have their pensions validated by the end of April 2000, by the Ministry of Public Service. A census has been arranged for mid June this year, to cover all the districts, to enable quickening of the process of pension payments beginning in the financial year 2000/2001. Out of Shs.32 billion budgeted for this financial year, Shs.27 billion has, to date, been released under the pension budget. 

The Committee observed however that, foreign pensioners, whose payments are pegged to the dollar, benefit much more than the local ones whose money has greatly been affected by the depreciation of the Uganda shilling over the years. It also observed that, because of the same reason, that is depreciation of the shilling, people retiring now are getting much more benefits than those who retired some years ago and are being paid today. 

The programme PAF funds monitoring is appearing in both the recurrent and development expenditure. It also appears in most of the Government departments. The Committee feels that this programme might be misused and abused, as there appears to be a lot of duplication of activities. Details were asked from the Ministry, and I would like to ask hon. Members to change this last bit in the report because the details were provided, though very late. So, the details have been provided.

From the details provided, the Committee observed that: 
There is lack of focus on PAF activities. 
There is duplication of work by the various Government departments, which are involved in PAF, which include: 
    • Ministry of Local Government.
    • The line Ministries, where PAF is being implemented.  
    • The Treasury Inspectorate under the Ministry of Finance.
    • The Inspectorate Department under the Ministry of Local Government. 

They are all benefiting from PAF funds for purposes of monitoring. According to the Ministry, the Auditor General's office, the IGG and the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament also benefit from PAF funds for purposes of monitoring.  

The Committee, however, was not convinced that the Auditor General and the IGG should get funds from PAF, to go and monitor PAF activities, because in the day to day work of the IGG and the Auditor General, they should also be able to cover some of this work. As for the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament, maybe the Minister may have to give an explanation to this House, why PAC should be given a provision under PAF, to go and sensitise the public accounts committees at the district level.  

The Committee recommends the following measures to reduce on the supplementaries:  

That Government should plan to have her own accommodation, in order to reduce on the amounts spent on rent for Ministries.  

The Community Service Act should be implemented, in order to reduce on the amount of money spent on maintaining prisoners in prison, even on very minor offences. The supplementary for this department is at 17.2 per cent of the approved budget in this quarter.  

Monitoring PAF activities is too amorphous and it is a programme, which may breed misuse of funds. It is, therefore, recommended that, since several Government departments duplicate activities under PAF, a central, single monitoring department to oversee the activities of PAF programmes should be put in place. This will also co-ordinate the work of other departments under the programme.  

Ministry of Defence should keep within the 1.9 per cent of GDP as a maximum level of expenditure.  

Government departments, which consistently have supplementaries, should budget properly and take the exercises seriously, to avoid reliance on supplementaries.  

Having noted that Government is carrying out a pension reform, the Committee wishes to recommend that the issue of parity in the value of money being paid to pensioners be seriously reviewed.  

In conclusion, the Ministry of Finance should maintain and strengthen the commitment control system, which the Committee considers as having contributed to this positive trend. The Budget Bill, 2000, which is not yet approved by this House, but which I hope will be considered sometime this week, also addresses this issue, and if passed, the trend of events will even become better.  

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, and I beg to move. 

MR. PINTO MANUEL (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First, I would like to thank the Ministry of Finance for the worthy credit that they have got from our Committee because of controlling the Budget. The supplementary expenditure stands at 4.1, reflecting a 45 per cent decline from an average of 9 per cent last year. I think this is a very good trend, and we must congratulate them.  

The other issue is to thank the Committee for what I consider a thorough report. I have a few remarks to make, before I get into the details of the supplementary. As you might have heard already, I happened to accompany the team that visited His Excellency the President, when we were trying to address the situation of imbalances in the education sector, particularly the closure of PTCs. We have a commitment from His Excellency the President that there will be subsequent re-dress in this field, with a budgetary allocation internally, of about 5 billion shillings every year. This will be done to bring the other group that was unfairly treated, at par with the rest, having spent 102 million dollars in what was an unfair allocation of resources to the PTC's and TDMS. So, I thought that for the information our friends, who are working on the budget, this is a matter that they need to deal with seriously. 

For the first time, when His Excellency the President was meeting the consultative group at Rwakitura, the report that came out was that, this time, the economic growth is not at 7 percent, it has declined to 5 percent. Could the Minister tell us what has caused such a sharp drop? And having said that, we continuously get reports regarding our population growth, which goes up by 3 percent. If you look at our population growth at 3 percent compared to our economic growth, are we really able to sustain and maintain the demands on our budget allocations? What strategies has the Ministry got in place? 

We hear that our population is going to double in the next 25 years, what has really been put in place to meet these deficiencies? With an increasing population, the demands are going to rise for food, schools, and health centres, have we really started investing in these areas, so that we cope with the population growth? 

In his presentation, the hon. Minister told us about the ability to transfer funds from the development budget to the recurrent budget. Here it says that, of the total supplementary of 36 billion shillings, only 45 percent is a result of the increase, while 55 percent is a result of re-allocations. I would like to hear a little more about these re-allocations. 

We want to thank the Prime Minister and his office for having intervened in the calamities and food shortages and so on, but year in, year out, we have disasters. Disasters are going to continue recurring, and one would expect us to have budgets for them. For example, do we have food in storage, do we budget for food to be stored in our silos, in order to meet these demands that come year in, year out? I think we get the weather forecast, but is it always going to be calamity? Can we budget for this, because we know that drought is going to occur at this time or heavy floods will come at a certain time? The patterns of the estimates are known, but are we always going to run for supplements. Could the Minister say something about this? 

As regards vote 21, Ministry of Defence, I would like to register my appreciation because the President has given his commitment to this country that our forces will soon be returning from Congo. Already, some of them have returned; so we want to welcome our soldiers back home. 

Regarding vote 008 of the Ministry of Finance and Planning, my original understanding was that our expenditure with SWIPCO was on the contractual obligations, but any money that they get is to be financed through a levy they charge on importers when they verify. How come Government is now paying SWIPCO? My understanding was that they were going to levy the contract with them. They levy a charge in order to inspect goods as they come into the country, and they levy this charge on the imports. Government is under no obligations, but now I see a huge amount that we are paying this company -(Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Member holding the Floor for giving way. I would like to inform the hon. Member that there is a report, which was Tabled by the Public Accounts Committee, which was supposed to report on the legalities of how SWIPCO was supposed to perform. But this report, which was laid on Table, has up today never been discussed. The Committee in that report, recommended to this House that SWIPCO be scraped from the list of those companies which are supposed to perform and do inspection.

MR. PINTO: I thank the hon. Member for that information. If you look at the details, we are spending 1.7 billion shillings for monies we are paying to inspecting services. We are spending 1.9 billion as additional funds - these are funds to clear the first verified bills of SWIPCO, which really indicates that we are going to spend more. Could this matter be resolved? What is the obligation behind SWIPCO, is it inspecting goods for services or is it inspecting goods for traders, to ensure that they meet international standards? I need to be clarified.  

The other issue is again on page 3 of the Committee report, and under vote 008. You will find a large amount of 1.5 billion shillings as additional funds to pay arrears of MS AVISTO Limited, on behalf of Uganda Air Cargo. Uganda Air Cargo has been a subject of controversy here. The costs of repair of the aircraft were grossly inflated, if anything this could be called fraud. This matter is being discussed by an appropriate Committee; and before that report is brought here, how come we are paying?  As far as I am concern, it was an issue subject to a big query. AVISTO, Uganda Air Cargo and the expenses related to it, were subject of a Committee of inquiry of this House.  How come we are going ahead to pay this? Did we discuss the Uganda Air Cargo report here? I am concerned, and I would like the Minister to be able to explain.  

I am very happy with the recommendations of the Committee, in terms of the observations on page 4. Indeed, why doesn’t the Government build its own offices? Just look around town at the buildings that have recently come up, UDB cost about 3 million dollars, and Conrad Plaza was less than 5 million dollars. If every year we started a new building for Government offices, we could achieve this. 

As you drive towards Masaka road and you look to your left, you will see a school owned by Mr. Mukiibi, called St. Lawrence Citizens Campus. It is a beautiful school, and I think he has got three there. Can anybody from Government stand here and say, we have comparably rebuilt such a school or we have erected such a building? Where are we! Why can we not take such decisions? Why can we not take such action? Here we are burdened with arrears in paying for rent on buildings, and the Ministry of Internal Affairs did not indicate at all, in their requirement for supplementary funds, whether they are going to pay people outside. They contracted people, who gave them houses for rent for policemen and Police stations all over the country, and all of a sudden, I think the Minister said he just did not have any money to pay for rent. But does that mean that this rent should not be paid? –(Interruption)

MAJ. KAZOORA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, hon. Pinto, for giving way. Remember that Government wanted to sell Embassy House, but because of the efforts of this House, that sale was stopped. Today Embassy House is housing Ministry of Education, Foreign Affairs and the Secretariat. I thank you.

MR. PINTO: I must thank my dear colleague for giving this information –(Interruption)  

DR. KASIRIVU: Thank you, hon. Pinto. Mr. Speaker, sometime back I complained about rent which is not paid to landlords who house Police, the Minister of Internal Affairs stood here and said that citizens give houses to Police and turn around and demand for rent. He said that was not a good gesture. But there is evidence of Police signing tenancy agreements with these landlords and they have defaulted. We are asking whether we can use force to evict these policemen. The Minister of Internal Affairs did give us a way forward, now it is a big deal there.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, in fact, the matter has been ignored, it has not been commented on. I wonder; are these debts just written off? People signed contracts with the Police authorities to give either offices for Police stations or houses to Police officers. You just cannot ignore that. If you start a new policy and say that you are not going to contract new accommodation arrangements for policemen upcountry, that is a different matter, but for those that have already been contracted, are you just going to wish them away? Are they going to be transformed into domestic arrears? There is nothing in this supplementary that is talking about this, and I wish the Minister could express himself on this matter.  

On page 4, regarding the East African Community employees, I would like to say that there are some former employees who are already approaching us in Parliament here. Former employees are approaching us and saying that they were left out on the list of those who are currently being compensated or computed for compensation. Will there be a further census of those employees so that they are included, or are they going to be forgotten?  I believe the list is out, I would like to get a comment on this.
	
The last comment I will make is on the question of duplication, from page 5, right in the middle of the report of the Committee. When I mentioned this matter the other time when we were briefly discussing valley dams, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister seemed to think that there was no duplication of duties in Government; and he was a bit irate. But here I can see that the Committee lists four different organs of Government, Local Government, the line Ministries of Agriculture, Health, and Education all duplicating the services of Poverty Alleviation Programmes. 

This duplication is not only pertinent in this area of poverty alleviation, it is a matter that you need to closely scrutinise. You are going to save money, you are going to improve on your control and administration of funds, but you are going to find loopholes. So, duplication does exist, do not simply come without any facts, and without having thought about it, because it is really clarified; there is a lot of duplication in Government. 

I am happy for the opportunity you have given me, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to stop here.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, may I remind you of two things. One is that the money is already spent, and what you are really trying to do is to recognise the fact that it was necessary to spend that money. Hon. Pinto was really going through the whole scenario, and if you have been following his arguments, you will get those other points, which you may come out with. One of those points is the fact that the Minister of Finance has done very well, by ensuring that the trend of supplementaries is going down. For as many of you as possible who want to speak, may I suggest that you pick on points, which your colleagues may not have dealt with, particularly the hon. Pinto. 

Secondly, I am going to suggest that each of you talks for five minutes so that as many of you can speak. Is that al right? And if you are a Member of the Committee, unless something is really burning, you should not be seen standing. Unfortunately, I cannot remember them. I think there is one who is being pointed out on my left, we shall hear from him at a later stage. Let us start with hon. Nkuuhe and then we shall come this way. Hon. Nkuuhe, five minutes, please.

DR. NKUUHE JOHNSON (Isingiro South, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to say that these five minutes should be observed, because there are many people who want to contribute.  

I will just go straight to the recommendations, because I think that is what our Committee wants us to do. The first point says: 
“That Government should plan to have her own accommodation in order to reduce on the amount spent on rent for Ministries.”  

I wish the Committee had been more forceful. I wish they had said if Government does not do this, then something would be done. It would be nice if they did that, but I think I would like to -(Interruption)  

MR. WERIKHE: Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Member for giving way. At one time we did inform the hon. Members that Government had identified plots of land, and the area space that is required for all the Ministries and Departments had been calculated. One of the sites is where Internal Affairs is located, another site is where the CID is located, and another is below Crested Towers. I have named just a few, but these areas are available. Once funds are given to the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, certainly we will do the needful, and the offices will be in place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. NKUUHE: I thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe we should give Government accommodation 10 percent per year, increasing every year until such a time as all Government departments are accommodated in Government buildings.

I will not say anything on the second recommendation concerning the Community Service Act, but I will say something on the third recommendation, which is on monitoring PAF activities. They say it is amorphous, and, of course, that is not surprising. There is a lot of money under the Poverty Action Fund, and it is administered by so many departments, I do not know how much poverty they are really alleviating, because, poverty seems to be biting deeper and deeper. 

I got a message today from the Internet, there is a discussion group on poverty by the World Bank, and anybody can enlist, it is called parliaments@list.worldbank.org. I will put this on the notice board so that people can participate, and give their ideas. At the end of it all, a report will be made. We try to solve poverty before we even understand what poverty is, I think that is why our efforts at alleviating poverty are just a scratch on the surface. 

Finally, recommendation 4 says: “Ministry of Defence should keep within the 1.9 per cent of GPD as a maximum level of expenditure.”  

Maybe they should have told us what the percentage is now; is it 2.2 or 3? This would be very helpful, because it is okay to have a very strong Defence Ministry, but if the defence spending is going to overcome the normal civilian economy, then you can run into the problems that Russia run into. They had a very good economy, but the civilian economy was not performing. It is like putting a new patch on an old pair of trousers, which is torn –(Interruption).  

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you for that, hon. Nkuuhe. I want to give hon. Nkuuhe and the House information with regard to the GDP percentage of the Defence expenditure of Uganda, in comparison to all our neighbouring countries and other African countries. 

The Committee is saying that the 1.9 percentage should be kept, but I want to inform you that defence expenditure depends on the threat rather than on the wishes of any country. The wish of the Ministry of Defence has been to keep it as low as possible, but while Uganda was having problems here, our neighbours were building up their defence capabilities. Zimbabwe, for example, in 1988, spent 5.7 per cent of their GDP on defence; in 1999 they spent 4.9 per cent, in 1990 they spent 4.5 percent, and in 1991 they spent 3.5 percent. In 1992, they spent 3.7 percent of their GDP on defence; in 1993 they spent 3.4 percent, and in 1994 they spent 3.3 percent. The least they have gone to is 3.2 percent. And you know that Zimbabwe never had any disturbances for all those years. 

I will pick another example from Kenya, our good neighbour. These are countries, which have never had any problems, in terms of disrupting their defence build up. In 1988, they spent 2.3 percent of their GDP on defence, in 1989 they spent 3.1 percent, in 1990, they spent 3.3 percent, and in 1991 they spent 2.7 per cent. It was in 1992 that Kenya started going a little lower; and the least they have reached is 1.5 per cent.  

I may give information about Uganda, but I want you to see the trend of defence capability and how it is being affected by the campaign to keep it low. What does it mean? Keeping it low means, do not build your defence capabilities, and then the percentage will go down. The percentage will go down as a result of deliberately trying to cope, but in effect, if you do not compare with your neighbours, if you do not relate it to your defence threats, then you will just be making a major mistake.   

Uganda has been reducing its expenditure in defence, up to 1.9 percent of GDP, but at the cost of its effectiveness! Efficiency has just been kept up by the sacrifice of the soldiers. So, this campaign of saying, ‘keep it low’ is not the best for our country. If the defence threat is higher than what we are trying to put it at, it should change.

DR. NKUUHE: Thank you, hon. Tumwine. I wish you had given me the trend for Uganda. So, finally, I would like to say that –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: You have one more minute.

DR. NKUUHE: Thank you very much, Sir. The recommended percentage of supplementaries is 3 per cent, but I think this should be in view of how much the Ministry gets. If a Ministry is getting 200 billion, then 3 per cent is a substantial amount of money, but if a Ministry is getting 1 billion, 3 per cent is very little. So, this recommendation of 3 per cent of the Budget should really be reviewed. It should be slightly higher for the Ministries, which get very small budgets, the so-called Mickey Mouse budgets, like 1 billion or 2 billion. Then 3 per cent should be for those, which get substantial amounts of money.  

With those few words, I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. AISU OMONGOLE  (Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the Committee for this report, but I must hasten to add that I am not satisfied with the way our supplementaries are always spent. 

I note, from the report, that most of the supplementaries went to areas where tangible results cannot easily be seen. That therefore, leaves me doubting about what the intentions of the supplementaries are. If you look at the supplementaries in the Ministry of Finance, Office of the Prime Minister, Defence, Lands, these are supplementaries where the money is spent on services where we cannot see tangible results, where we cannot see what the supplementary has been spent on. I would be happier if these monies had also been given to Ministries like Entandikwa, or Ministry of Health. 

Ministry of Health is actually big; maybe I could say it is a service provider to our population. If you look at the levels of health preparedness in the country, we are still at a very minimal level. I do not know whether the Ministry of Health has enough money to provide these services, because we do not see the services on the ground. As for the Entandikwa department, these Ministers are always wrangling left and right, saying that one Minister is domineering the funds. We are not told here whether they have also taken a supplementary for poverty eradication for the people of Uganda. Maybe I could get an explanation from the Minister –(Interruption).

MR. BAGUMA ISOKE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I could speak for the supplementary for my Ministry, the Ministry for Water, it went to tangible services like paying for electricity bills, and pumping water in towns. As we all know, our towns are not cost effective, as far as water services are concerned, so they have got to be subsidised. This is a bill, which we have been paying, and we shall continue to pay it for the small towns of Uganda.

MR. OMONGOLE: Thank you for that information. But, Mr. Speaker, paying for a bill is not a tangible service. If the Minister said they used the money to construct a pipeline for water to Kumi town, maybe I would be happier because that would be a tangible service, but I do not see paying for a bill as a tangible service. This leaves me questioning; can’t we draw up a system where supplementaries first pass through some kind of Commission or Committee to vet the usefulness of these supplementaries? The moment we come to this House simply to sit and pass a supplementary, as we usually do, we always encourage these supplementaries to pile up, because they will be approved anyway. So, if we do not pass them through a certain committee, so that they are vetted before they are approved, we will always do this country a disservice –(Interjection).  

THE SPEAKER: What about her Committee, I thought that was its purpose?

MR. OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, her Committee sees these things after they have been spent.  Maybe if they came through the Public Accounts or -(Interruption)

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, I want to inform my colleague that the Budget Bill, which I had already talked about, which we intend to present to this House this week, addresses that question. What my Committee does now is to approve what has already been spent; even if it was 90 percent, we would still pass it, because it has already been spent. And this is just like a ritual. But now, the Budget Bill will put in place a Budget Committee, and we are trying to give a ceiling. If Government is to go above that ceiling, it should come to the Budget Committee and they synchronise the position. That will be the intervention before these supplementaries are spent. Thank you.

MR. OMONGOLE: Thank you very much, hon. colleague, for that information. I think my point will rest, because Members you will note that this question of just spending on services really gives these accounting officers a leeway to do what they want with taxpayers’ money.  

On Vote 022, Ministry of Internal Affairs, they say that the supplementary was for reasons of security in Karamoja and then for the payment of UTL. I do not know whether there is a sufficient explanation as to what this money did in Karamoja and in the neighbouring districts. Maybe it was just to see to it that the Karimojong use their guns properly. I really did not see the role the Ministry of Internal Affairs played in this affair of the Karimojong; maybe I will be given a satisfactory explanation.  

In the same paragraph, it is also mentioned that the money was used for payment to Uganda Revenue Authority for Uganda Telecom Ltd’s VAT. Maybe I need some explanation here; what does Ministry of Internal Affairs have to do with UTL VAT? Why did they have to pay it?  

And then on the PAF programmes, which most Members have talked about, I just want to ask why we have to spend a supplementary simply to monitor the activities of PAP. Is it necessary? –(Interjection)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, your time is up.

MR. OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, just one last point. This question of re-allocation of development budget to a recurrent budget; should it tantamount to a supplementary? I thought that is just shifting funds within a particular Vote in Ministry of Defence. Can the Ministry of Finance give me an explanation as to why this one is called a supplementary and yet the Committee brings it out very clearly that the four billion was simply shifting from this allocation to another allocation? Should it amount to a supplementary?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ADOME LOKWII (Jie County, Kotido): I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I join my other colleagues in thanking the Committee for a job well done.  

Because of time, I will just mention a few areas. I would like to start with this area called ‘Karamoja’, where I come from.  

It is really very sad to see that so much money has already been spent in what I do not see. Up to today, the Karimojong are disturbing their neighbours. Just last week, I came back from Olilim in Katakwi District, I was there with other Members of Parliament from Teso and we were returning cows, which were stolen by Karimojong from just one county, that is Pian. The people who were returning these cows were not policemen, but they were vigilantes or warriors. One of them actually died, because the rest of the criminals were following these fellows while they were returning cows of their enemies back to them. And I commend the work of those people. Nobody gave them food, nobody gave anything. Actually, the cows themselves were dying because they had to walk from a place with no water and no grass. By the time they reached Olilim, they were actually even eating soil. Where were the policemen, where was Ministry of Internal Affairs, where the money has already been spent?  Where was the money?  

It saddens me when a Member of Parliament runs there, with these old vehicles, and yet Internal Affairs has spent the money; it is terrible!  Some of us narrowly miss bullets there. I wish I would be given 10 guns, I would be happy to have escorts or at least vigilantes, whom I can pay 10,000. Three billion is painful. It is terrible! It will be even more disturbing, if the neighbours get to know that some money has already been spent. It has been spent to monitor what? Is it to oversee the Karimojong carrying out all atrocities on these people? Is it to see them raping women and looting food? These warriors are armed, but they have no food and the money has already been spent on food. One of the reasons they are terrorising the neighbours is because they have food. If you go to Katakwi, you will find empty granaries, because these warriors have taken some food. 

I am sorry that my time is gone, but it is very painful to mention some of these things. I will not support such supplementaries if they are spent on nothing, when people are dying in Uganda and yet they are supposed to have been assisted. I will be very sorry, but let this Budget Bill come and save us -(Interruption)

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I thank you, and I thank the hon. Member. I do not think it is correct of Members to debate for the sake debating on. I would like my Friend to come with me and we will go together to the Ministry in Charge of Disaster. We will quantify all the food that was bought with your money and that was taken to that region to feed the people. If he is not satisfied that we spent that money on the food we delivered and there is evidence that the food was delivered, he can charge Government for misallocating the money. It is not right for him to come here and debate on a position from lack of information.  

When it comes to security, we have allocated money to spend on security activities in the region, and everybody who cared to find out, knows only too well that the situation has substantially improved. It is not correct for Members to come here and simply want the world to know or to think that Government does not do anything with the money that belongs to the people. We may have some problems, but it is incorrect for a Member to come here and stand up and say that the Government has done nothing with the money that has been provided for in this supplementary. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ADOME LOKWII: Mr. Speaker, if it was not for the football team of the Parliament of Uganda going to Kenya, I would go tomorrow and bring dead people here. But to leave that aside, I would like to say that we simply need to be serious. 

If you look at page 21, and you look at Kumi District, it has been given 210 million shillings for additional funds to facilitate monitoring and accountability of PAF funds by the district administrations. On Vote 6060, other transfers, under the equalisation grant, the same district has 135 million. I wonder how you can monitor this money with 210 million shillings, when you are giving an equalisation grant of 135 million? This is the same with other districts. And apart from this, I think that there are also other flaws in other Ministries concerned, including that of Disaster Preparedness, and Internal Affairs, which I have referred to. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I still want to remind you that the money has been spent and that the Minister of Finance has reduced the percentage of supplementaries. Other than that, what are you talking about? Hon. Members, that is lamentation, yet we have other serious business concerning money to deal with. We are just lamenting. You have also been told that there is a Budget Bill coming, which is going to eliminate this problem, or at least to ensure that the supplementary is checked before you get involved in some kind of post-mortem.  I think that is the good news. 

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT (Kween County, Kapchorwa) I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Because of time constraints, I am not going to spend all the five minutes that you have allotted to me. 

First of all, I would like to commend the Government, as you have rightly put it, for reducing our supplementary obligations from 9 per cent to 4.1 per cent. But we are reaching out to discuss something, which has gone through the drains, and through the toilet. I just hope that the Budget Bill, which is due to be presented to this House by the Committee on the National Economy, will be our only hope in ensuring that in future, this House will have a hand in controlling the expenditure by various Government Ministries.

I would like to raise about two concerns. One concern is to the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development. I would like him to clarify to this House what the Ministry has in place to motivate those Government departments and Ministries that have disciplinary control over their budgetary estimates. What incentives are in place to motivate them? (Interjections) Because it seems some Ministries are continuously being punished at the expense of those which are fond of always incurring supplementary estimates. 

Secondly, I would like to find out, again from Government, either the Minister of Finance or somebody else will answer, what policy Government has in relation to our foreign missions. It has been observed in the report, and particularly relating to hire of premises, that there is need for Government to invest in capital for construction of premises for offices locally. I would also like to find out what measures are in place to invest in our missions abroad. I am reliably informed that our mission in New York is fetching not less than 100,000 US dollars per month; I think this is substantial income for the mission and maybe for the country.

I would also like to find out, from either the Minister of Finance or the Minister of Internal Affairs, whether it is possible to build in the element of utilising the funds under Internal Affairs, particularly when the question of the Karamoja neighbourhood is mentioned. This is mainly about the losses incurred by the neighbouring communities - (Interjection)- I know there is a separate vote, but I think they are all related to insecurity. In some of these areas, the local communities have also been mobilised to participate in the security pacification against the problem of raiding in the region.

My last question is about the seeds, which the Prime Minister's Office secured from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, worth 1.3 billion shillings. Recently, when we were tying to make contacts with the Uganda Seed Project to get seeds, we were informed that Government took all the seeds, worth 1.3 billion shillings, and that the project has never got any single coin to enable them start on their activities to produce seeds for the farmers in this country. I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, should we really continue lamenting? 

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion in accordance with Rule 63(1) of our Rules of Procedure, that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are right to apply that Rule, but since the hon. Members who have so far spoken have raised some pertinent issues, I suggest that the Minister and the chairperson respond to those issues, if they wish to respond. The Member has moved a motion, but it is at the discretion of the Speaker. In this case, I think that the Members have raised some pertinent issues, and I think the Minister should respond. You will bear with us.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the Chairperson and the Committee for the recognising that the Minister of Finance has done some work and has improved on the management of the Budget.

In general terms, I want to say that managing a small budget in a poor country is extremely difficult. I am sure hon. Members also know that, when they have got very few funds in their homes, it is equally difficult to manage. That is why I really appreciate that acknowledgement by the Committee.

Is it necessary to provide the Public Accounts Committee, at Parliament level, with logistics to talk to the public accounts committees at district level? It is because we are starting new systems and new institutions. We are talking about councillors at the lower level starting public accounts committees without experience. So, it may be worthwhile to have other people give them capacity, and therefore, help them to understand what they have got to do.  

I want to say that the reason we have generally succeeded - not 100 per cent - with the management of the Budget is because we have started a commitment control system. Each department utilises money within its own budget and ensures that it spends within that, every quarter.

I will be very brief, Mr. Speaker. Hon. Pinto raised very pertinent issues. For instance, he asked why economic growth has gone down from 7 percent to 5 percent.  We all know that we have had problems with our exports; they came down. And we also know that the terms of trade, internationally have been against agricultural products, and that is why we have had a very serious depreciation of the currency. Once the shilling depreciates, it has got an effect on the economy.  

He talked about population growth at 3 per cent, I am sure hon. Pinto will be part of the group that will help the population to be sensitised. We must have smaller families, and we must use all means available to stop having big families in our situation. I am sure he knows what I mean.

On disasters, I was asked whether we could really budget for disasters. Yes, you can budget for some disasters, which are probably anticipated in some way, but you cannot know the extent of the disasters so that you prepare adequately for the disaster. For instance, if you expect some drought, you may think it will last for one month, but if it lasts more than three or four months, then you will not have prepared for it.  However, the limited resources that we have, actually, do not enable us to prepare adequately for all the disasters all the time –(Interruption).

MR. PINTO: Could the hon. Minister give us concrete plans; are there silos in the central region, in the northern region, in the eastern region, where they are keeping some food out of this year’s harvest in preparation for a disaster next year?  Is there any concrete action, or are we still talking about something that is going to be done? Has there been some money in this Budget specifically for buying food and storing it because you are anticipating shortfalls?  Is there such a plan?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr. Speaker, I want to submit that we do not have enough funds to stock food for all eventualities, and that is why we provide supplementaries at the time when we get disasters.

On the issue of Ministry of Finance having a larger supplementary, Finance keeps the funds for areas which are not budgeted for. We keep the contingency in Ministry of Finance, and it is that contingency that goes to various Ministries at the time when we have got some of these unexpected events; and we call that a supplementary. I agree with hon. Members when they ask whether that is really a supplementary. Yes, it is a supplementary because when Parliament sits here to pass the Budget, they pass the Budget vote by vote and item by item.  So, if you spend money from one item on another item, which was not budgeted for by Parliament, then you have rearranged what Parliament passed. So, you call it a supplementary, and you come back to Parliament and say, ‘yes, we know you passed 1000/= for item one and 1000/= for item two, but we spent the 2000/= on item one, and item two remained with zero’. So, it is an approval that actually we have rearranged the items.

On the question of the East African Community employees, we have released all the monies that we had budgeted for.  However, for those who are not on the list, there are two ways of doing it. If we get all the lists from the Auditor General’s Department, we shall pay, but if people are not on that list, they have their own committee, which they can go to. The East African Community employees have got a committee which vets the names and actually organises for who should be paid. I am sure those gentlemen and ladies can be advised to go to that committee and get themselves included, so that they can be budgeted for.

On monitoring PAF, suddenly you have to monitor these monies when are sent into districts, because if you do not, then you will never know what is happening. On the issue that was raised, as to why we are monitoring them under different programmes, it is because we are monitoring different aspects of PAF.  For instance, if you sent money for health extension, the best way to monitor it is through the Ministry of Health.  If the money is for feeder roads, then the best way to do it is through Local Government. If it is water development, then best way to monitor that money is through the Ministry responsible for water. Otherwise, you would have to create a Ministry, which is charged with monitoring of PAF projects. We have got to strengthen each Ministry, in its own way, to monitor the things that are happening in its own sector. If we are going to monitor UPE programmes, we have got to monitor them through the Ministry of Education. That is why we have got monitoring in every Ministry.

There was an issue raised as to why we are not spending money on tangibles. My understanding is that, after restructuring of the Ministries, the Ministry headquarters actually remain basically as policy formulators. It is I think -(Interruption)

MR. AISU OMONGOLE: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister has just said that it is not possible to create one Ministry to monitor some of these activities. But, I believe that most of the PAF monies are released by the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of Finance has a monitoring and evaluation unit. Could not all the monitoring be done by this unit, other than spreading all these activities to various places?

MR. MANZI: Mr. Speaker, let me go back to that item. If Ministry of Finance sends 10 million shillings to district A, for example, the Auditor General has got to audit the accounts to ensure that this money was spent. We would create a giant of a Ministry of Finance, if we would also expect them to go down and do everything related to auditing of accounts. Are we going to have Finance find out whether boreholes were done by Ministry of Water, or whether the feeder roads were all done, or whether UPE money was used for primary education, or otherwise? What kind of Ministry of Finance will you be creating? You will create a problem, and it will be a bigger problem than you are trying to solve!

The Ministries are policy formulators, and they have organised policy. Therefore, the implementation is at the lower levels. In any case, generally, as a policy, the economy is liberalised. So, we have got to give a policy framework and an institutional framework for our people to operate.

On the question of why Internal Affairs should pay VAT, and how this is related to VAT, I want to remind the hon. Member that, for every UEB bill he pays, if he reads that bill carefully, there is a line which says VAT. Even on telephone bills, there is also a line which says VAT.  VAT is a tax and the bills are a service. The Ministries pays for the bills, and Finance holds that tax element, we actually hold the line. If you look at the recurrent and development expenditure document you have, there is a line for taxes, and this year, I think we provided 50 billion. We transfer money from there and we pay URA, but on behalf of a Ministry's expenditure. If you look at URA, those are collections of URA, which are actually book entries and not increased resources. Those are provided for on the first five pages of the recurrent document; as soon as you get it, you will see them there. 

Hon. Adome said he does not see anything tangible on the ground. I want to remind him about a mathematical formula of summation. If you have 1000 vigilantes, and you paid each of them just 1000, you are talking of one million shillings immediately. Now, if these vigilantes worked for 30 days, and you were paying them 1000 per day, you are talking of 30 million shillings. Now, I want him to go back and see how many vigilantes have been paid in Karamoja, and how many soldiers or policemen were brought in. What type of uniform did they get, and what kind of vehicles are they driving? Do they have fuel? If you sum up all that, the money is incredibly high, and that is the problem of budgeting.

Hon. Chebet, I agree with you that the Budget Bill will solve some of the problems, however, I hope that the Budget Bill will not complicate issues further. Supplementary estimates mean that something has urgently come up and you must handle it. If you are going to go back to Parliament in order for you to handle a disaster, by the time you pass the money, it will be more of a disaster than you had started with. However, in the cases like that of SWIPCO or AVISTO, that money was not budgeted for, for reasons beyond our control. 

You will remember, and I do remember, that at the time of the budget, SWIPCO was a controversial issue under investigation, and so was AVISTO. The Committee on Privatisation was still discussing that issue. By the time they finished in November, we had already finished the Budget, and yet if AVISTO took us to an International court, they would win, because they did a job. They would have as well probably attached our House in New York, then we would have a bigger problem than we were trying to solve by not paying the bill- (Interruption)

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister makes me nervous. Are AVISTO or SWIPCO's bills more urgent than the domestic arrears? Are these more urgent, so that they have to be taken care of in a supplementary, and could not wait because we had not taken care of them in the regular budget?  What is the urgency behind this? There are other cases, which we know are urgent, and you promise to handle them next year or the year after. Why could not these people also be settled with say, IOUs? Are they the only ones with capacity to sue? As I said, the matter is controversial and is still controversial, why are you hurrying to pay them?

MR.MANZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to sincerely tell hon. Pinto that we budgeted for 120 billion shillings for domestic arrears for this year, and we have been religiously releasing 12 billion per month for the domestic arrears. I am aware that the total domestic arrears were 261 billion shillings, and that after finishing that, we will remain with a total backlog of 130 billion. We are providing for 60 billion shillings for this year, and we are providing for 70 billion shillings for the following year. So, SWIPCO and AVISTO are all part of the domestic arrears, and we are actually doing that.  

Maybe now I can talk about the arrears from the Police rent and others. As long as the Ministry of Internal Affairs verifies and accepts that these rents are due and are varied and have been audited, we include them on the domestic arrears bill, and we pay them; on that one we have no argument.

On the Missions abroad, I do not see ourselves investing in building new Missions abroad. But if hon. Chebet wanted to know whether we are going to rehabilitate them, the answer is yes. That is why we have released very significant sums of money under Ministry of Foreign Affairs to rehabilitate them. Secondly, we are going to return the Foreign Affairs’ staff, from the 10 Embassies that are being closed, and also three others, to be able to cater for that foreign exchange loss, which was incurred as a result of the depreciation of the shilling.  

Finally, I want to thank hon. Members for the overwhelming support they have given us on supplementaries. I also want to say that certainly, in future, we hope to do even better because most Ministries are now abiding by the budget as approved by Parliament. We hope that all the few remaining Ministries, which have generally been a little bit out of line, will now come into line and shape up, so that we all able to live within the budget as approved. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Before the Chairperson rises to say something, I can see that our colleague, hon. Rwakoojo, has got a burning issue, I want to give him the opportunity, because I do not want him to go home with it.

MR. RWAKOOJO: Mr. Speaker, I will not have a bad night tonight. The Minister has answered the question I wanted to raise, so I will sleep with a peaceful heart, but I thank you for the opportunity.

DR. NKUUHE: Mr. Speaker, there is a point, which I raised, but he did not comment on it. This was the point about the seeds, which hon. Chebet raised, and which we have an interest in. The issue was raised that the money, which was initially given as seed money, to be distributed to the sub-counties, was finally diverted. This money was said to have been given to the seed project and then given to NARO and other organisations. Later on, a letter came from the office of the Prime Minister, saying that this seed should be bought and given as disaster relief. Now, that is okay, but our interest is; was this money refunded so that the original beneficiaries could actually get benefits from this seed, which was supposed to be distributed? That is the question we want answered.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you ready to answer that or maybe the chairperson could answer it? Consult between yourselves and see whether you have an answer. The question was on whether the seed money was diverted and used for something else and whether more money will be found in order to replace it, so that the original intended beneficiaries do benefit.

MS. KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, I do not think the Minister is in a position to give an answer. I am sorry to talk on his behalf, but the Committee of Finance raised the same concern. The Minister asked us for some time to go and get answers. When he came back, this answer was not among those that were given. So, we have still asked him to go and bring us these answers, and we did not want only that issue to hold our report. But you can see even now, as we were consulting, he has not yet got the answer - (Laughter).  

I agree with hon. Pinto on economic growth, but I think, as people's representatives, we should also join the campaign of family planning, although there are some religious leaders who are discouraging the use of some devices, which may be useful. I think we should encourage any possible ways for family planning.  

There is a question, which I think the Minister did not attend to, which was asked by hon. Omongole, on technical transfers. He talked about technical transfers within the Ministry of Defence. These technical transfers are not only in the Ministry of Defence, but even in other Ministries. And if you may note, on page one of our report, we said that the total supplementary was 36.8 billion shillings but only 45 percent was as a result of increase; 55 percent was just internal - they call it technical transfer.  This is because of an archaic law that we are using, the Public Finance Act of 1969. We have not yet improved on that law, and it provides for technical transfers. In other words, money from one vote to another or from one Ministry to another, under the same budget, is categorised under supplementaries, and yet it should not be a supplementary in the real sense. 

On the planning by Ministries, the Budget Bill, once again, if passed, will address this issue. Parliament will have an early intervention in the budgeting process and the prioritising on items where there are Ministries. In the absence of a national planning authority, we believe we are more on the ground. We may have better input when it comes to prioritising. 

On the PAF monitoring, the Minister has laboured to give an explanation. I know that I should not stay longer on the Floor, but I would just like, for hon. Members’ consumption, to give you an idea of what we are talking about when we say there is a lot of duplication. Local Government carries out monitoring of PAF activities being implemented within the districts, preparation and submission of quarterly progress reports and preparation of annual and quarterly work plans. Then the line Ministries, under which the project is being implemented, carry out analysis of district reports, periodic monitoring, and visits to all districts to look at the progress and value for money activities in decentralised PAF programmes, focusing more on the technical aspect. That is agreed, but then now the Treasury Inspectorate of the Ministry of Finance comes in. It also carries out periodic monitoring visits to all districts to look at progress and value for money of decentralised PAF programmes. Then comes in the Inspectorate department of Ministry of Local Government, mind you Ministry of Local Government has already been there, but now this is the Inspectorate department. That one carries out general monitoring and evaluation of PAF programmes at districts. Then there is the Auditor General, the Inspector General and PAC.  

So, we are saying, even if it is a department under the Ministry of Finance, can’t there be a nucleus somewhere, where all these people take their information, so that it can be condensed at any given time, and can be produced for us to look at. That was our argument.  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion reads: “That the House do resolve itself into a committee of supply for the consideration and approval of the supplementary estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 1999/2000 (supplementary schedule No. I)”

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 001 - OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of 1,918,021,000/= under vote 001 of Office of the President be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 002 - STATE HOUSE:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of 2,817,318,000/= under Vote 002 of State House be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 004 – OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of 1,320,850,000/= under Vote 004 office of the Prime Minister be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 005 - MINISTRY OF PUBLIC SERVICE:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of 523,023,000/= under Vote 005 of the Ministry of Public Service be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 006 - MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of 3,009,147,000/= under Vote 006 of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to).

VOTE 008 - MINISTRY OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.5,060,045,000/- under Vote 008 of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 010 - MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.201,990,000/- under Vote 0l0 of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 012 - MINISTRY OF LANDS, WATER AND ENVIRONMENT:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.1,129,736,000/- under Vote 012 of the Ministry of Lands, Water and Environment be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 016 - MINISTRY OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATIONS:

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.639,970,000/- under Vote 0l6 of the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 017 – AUDIT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.300,000,000/- under Vote 0l7 of the Audit Department be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 021 - MINISTRY OF DEFENCE 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.4 billion under Vote 021 of the Ministry of Defence be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 022 - MINISTRY OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.3,049,930,000/- under Vote 022 of the Ministry of Internal Affairs be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 023 - MULAGO HOSPITAL COMPLEX 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.419,777,000/- under Vote 023 of Mulago Hospital Complex be provided for.

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 024 - MAKERERE UNIVERSITY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.588,124,000/- under Vote 024, Makerere University, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 028 - MINISTRY OF TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.318 million under Vote 028 of the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry be provided. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 029 - MINISTRY OF ENERGY AND MINERALS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs.80 million under Vote 029 of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 030 - MINISTRY OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.40,557,000/- under Vote 030 of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 033 - MASS MOBILISATION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.42,894,000/- under Vote 033 for Mass Mobilisation be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 036 - UGANDA MANAGEMENT INSTITUTE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.11,977,000/- under Vote 036 of Uganda Management Institute be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 037 - LAW REFORM COMMISSION

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.7,409,000/- under Vote 037 of the Law Reform Commission be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 038 - UGANDA POLICE

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of Shs. 2,802,6l0,000/- under Vote 038, Uganda Police, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 039 - UGANDA PRISONS

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.2,146,325,000/- under Vote 039, Uganda Prisons, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 050 - ARUA DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.220,971,000/- under Vote 050, Arua District, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 051 - GULU DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.94,472,000/- under vote 051, Gulu District, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 052 - LIRA DISTRICT

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.122.148,000/- under Vote 052, Lira District, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

VOTE 053 - MBALE DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.177,265,000/- under Vote 053, Mbale District, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

VOTE 054 - TORORO DISTRICT 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that a total sum of shs.100,107,000/- under vote 054, Tororo District, be provided for. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, we still have a long way to go, and if we go on like this, we will not finish soon, but with your concurrence we can do something else. I think we are allowed to do this under the Rules. But if you object, then we shall go through the whole list. If you want me to try, I will put the question on the votes not yet considered, then the total amounts of the votes outstanding, as reflected therein, be provided for services specified. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: So, the others are all passed.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report there to.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Speaker, the Committee of the whole House has considered the supplementary estimates, schedule number one, of 1999/2000, and approved the supplementary estimates as presented. I beg to report, Mr. Speaker.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.  
                
(Question put and agreed to).

THE SPEAKER: This means, therefore, hon. Members, that you have duly passed the supplementary estimates.  I congratulate the Minister for his presentation and the discipline in reducing the supplementary expenditure.  I hope you will reach a stage when you will get to zero.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SEK 16,600,000.00 FROM SVANSKA HANDELS BANKEN OF SWEDEN TO FINANCE UNIT 13 OF THE OWEN FALLS EXTENSION.

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow from Sweden 16,600,000.00 Sek, equivalent to 1,940 US dollars, to finance Unit 13 of the third power project. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? I notice it is seconded. Hon. Minister, proceed.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, Whereas a Swedish grant aid and an export credit facility agreement for Swedish Krona 82,600,000, which is approximately 9.7 million US dollars, is to be concluded between Ms Svenska Handels Banken AB of Sweden as a lender as well as agent for Swedish International Development Corporation Agency (SIDA), and the Government of the Republic of Uganda for purposes of financing Unit 13 of the Owen Falls Extension Power Project.  

And whereas, under Article 159(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Government is authorised to borrow money from any source, subject to other constitutional provisions.  

And whereas, under Article 159(2) of the said Constitution, borrowing by Government has to be authorised by or under an Act of Parliament.  

And whereas, in line with the above stated Constitutional requirement, Government has laid before Parliament the terms and conditions of the stated loan for approval and authorisation.  

Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament that the Government is hereby authorised to secure the said grant aid and export credit facility of Swedish Krona 16,600,000 equivalent to 1,940 million dollars from Svanska Handels Banken AB of Sweden upon the terms and conditions therein stated.  

I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.  

The purpose of borrowing this is to enhance power generation in this country. By getting these funds, we shall be able to go a long way in the completion of Unit 13 of the hydro power station at Jinja.  And as everybody knows, we need more power so that development can take place. With more power, even our fight against poverty would be able to take place in an orderly manner and very fast. 

This is a mixed credit, which is partly a grant and partly export credit. We are getting 80 percent as a grant and only 20 percent as a credit; the two are related because they are intended to do the same job. I do hope, therefore, that with the passage of this resolution, we can access these funds and be able to provide power to our people and to our industries, and therefore, be able to increase the development process of this country. As you are all aware, Unit 11 is about to be ready and will be commissioned soon. It is important that we should work very hard to be able to have more units and to be able to increase the power supply in the country.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr. Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  

The Committees on National Economy and that of Natural Resources have had time and opportunity to review the request by the Minister of Finance, for Government to borrow 16.6 million Swedish Krona, from Svanska Bank of Sweden, to finance Unit 13 of the Owen Falls Extension. 

The Committee has sought appraisal on the status of the Owen Falls Extension project from the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development and we have been informed as follows:

1. Owen Falls Extension is substantially completed. The first Unit, 11, of 40 MW will be commissioned on 19th May 2000, and the second Unit, 12, will be commissioned in July this year.

The Committee has also been assured that once the second unit is installed, Uganda Electricity Board will be in a position to contain load shedding to a bearable level.

We have also been assured that Government would now like to source part of the financing for Unit 13, the third turbine. The Norwegian Government has extended financial assistance in the form of a grant to finance the turbine for Unit 13. SIDA has extended this mixed credit that is being sought, to finance the generator and the other associated equipment in order to make unit 13 operational. The Minister of Finance has informed the Committee that SIDA has accepted to extend a mixed credit to Uganda Government, totalling SEK 82.6 million.

The Terms of the Mixed Credit.
The mixed credit is composed of a grant and an export credit facility, which is actually the loan component, amounting to 80 percent and 20 percent respectively. In effect, therefore, the grant is SEK 66.0 million and the loan is SEK 16.6 million.  

The loan component, for which authorisation is being sought, carries interest of 7.4 percent per annum, with a repayment period of 13 years, including 3 years of grace.  Repayment is expected to start six months from the date of issue of the take over certificate, but in any case, not later than March 30th, 2002, unless it is otherwise agreed upon by the two Governments.

The Minister of Finance has also indicated to the Committee that Government has found the whole funding package very attractive. The total grant element attached to the export credit from Sweden is 80 percent, and hence, this makes the loan concessional.

Other considerations:  
The Committee has been informed by the hon. Minister of Finance and the Minister of Energy, that the Government of Sweden is willing to extend a grant of SEK 180 million to support the Government for rural electrification. This facility will be extended to Government if the mixed credit to expand power generation at the Owen Falls Dam is authorised. 

We were further informed that the SEK 180 million will finance construction of the following key transmission and distribution lines:

Soroti to Katakwi
Masaka - Bukakata to Kalangala
Nebbi - Okollo - Bondo to Arua;
Corner Kilak to Patongo;
Rugombe to Kyenjojo;
Lumino - Bukasaba to Majangi;
Katine to Kalaki;
Kasenyi to Kasensero; 
and it will also be used to finance several system improvement schemes on the existing network.

The above grant, for rural electrification, has to be utilised within this calendar year, short of which, we may lose it.

In conclusion, the Committee has considered the request of Government on the enormous benefits the country will derive from this project. We wish to recommend to this House that authority be granted to Government to secure the loan of SEK 16.6 million, equivalent to 1.94 million US dollars, from Svanska Bank of Sweden, to finance Unit 13 of the Owen Falls Extension.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs. Syda Bumba): Thank you, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members.  I want to start by thanking the joint Committee on Natural Resources and National Economy for the expeditious manner in which they have handled this Resolution.

When we were passing the Electricity Act in November, I promised this House that Government was going to do everything possible to enhance power generation and to expand distribution. I am happy that we have started demonstrating what I promised.  The commissioning of the civil works of the Owen Falls extension is due next month, and the commissioning of the first turbine is also going to be done next month.  

This 3rd turbine is very important. It has been partially funded by NORAD, and the money we are seeking for Parliament to approve now is for completion of the funding package. This turbine will enhance the capacity of the Owen Falls extension by another 40 Mega watts, and that would bring the total output from the extension to 120 Mega watts.

I am also happy to report that funding for Units 14 and 15 has been secured from the World Bank. Very soon, we shall come to the Floor again, seeking approval from this august House for that borrowing.

Of course, when we talk of increasing capacity, the hon. Members and the Ugandan population would want to know what impact it is going to have on the load shedding, which everybody is disgusted with. The peak demand now stands at 260 Mega watts, and the supply, if the current facility is operating at full capacity, is 180 Mega watts. But it never operates at full capacity because the turbines and other parts keep breaking down due to the age of the plant. So, we never achieve 180 Mega watts, we are always operating at 160 Mega watts, at most, which gives us a shortfall of 100 Mega watts; and this is what we load shed almost on a daily basis.

When the first turbine is commissioned next month, the load shedding is going to be reduced from 100 Mega watts to 60 Mega watts. That would translate to a reduction, from the current load shedding of every other day to once in three days.  

The demand for power is growing at a very fast rate, at about 30 Mega watts per annum, using a conservative figure. So, by the end of the year, even after introducing Unit 11, our load shedding will be still at about 90 Mega watts. When the second turbine is commissioned in July, it will be reduced to about 60 Mega watts. When the third turbine comes on board, this is when we are likely to see a substantial decrease in the load shedding. Instead of the three and a half days per week, it now be reduced to about one day or a few hours per week.

We shall not completely get rid of load shedding at peak hours, but the day load shedding, which has been a hazard to our industrial operators, most of whom do not operate at night, will be completely eliminated. By the time Unit 14 and 15 come on board, even though the demand will have substantially gone up, I think that is when we shall start talking about near completion of eradication of load shedding.  So, I think we have now started seeing light at the end of the tunnel.
  
Having clarified on load shedding, I want to go on to the criteria for rural electrification. SIDA has offered the Government of Uganda a grant of SEK180 million, whose success is contingent upon approval of the loan for which we are seeking Parliamentary approval now. This grant is going to be applied for rural electrification. I am sure the hon. Members and the people of Uganda would like to know the criteria being applied for expanding distribution or for choosing which lines should be constructed first.

As we all know very well, this country is under electrified, mainly in the rural areas where coverage is only 1 percent. So, the rationale we are using is first and foremost, restoration of the existing infrastructure, which was vandalised over time, mainly because of the insurgency. The other criterion is connecting the district headquarters. Under the proposed loan, we intend to connect the district headquarters of districts like Bundibugyo, Sembabule, and Kibaale. And this is the first time we shall be getting electricity to Sesse Islands, Nebbi, Arua and Katakwi. All this will be done with the funds from this SIDA facility. That will leave us with only two district headquarters in the country, which are yet to be served, these are the districts of Kotido and Moroto.  Moroto is connected to a diesel plant, but our next criterion is the elimination of expensive diesel plants. I know there is one in Arua and there is one in Moroto, but we want to get rid of these and replace them with the cheap hydro sources. That is another criterion for choosing the area to be served.

There are some parts of this country, which have not been served, but where there are critical services, like hospitals, schools, communication centres, and places with high economic potential. These are also some of the considerations for choosing a location.

Another criterion is technical, and this is meant to stabilise the system. For example, we now have system losses from the line from Lira, Apac and Masindi. So, systems improvement is one of the criteria for selecting areas to be served. 

I have talked about the removal of the diesel generating units, but there are some areas where I want to put emphasis, like the West Nile electrification, which has been pending for a very long time. We are looking at the SIDA facility to address this area, right from Nebbi through to Bondo up to Arua.

With those few clarifications, I wish to request the hon. Members to approve this resolution before the House expeditiously, so that we can access the money to increase the generation capacity and to put up these distribution lines, which are badly needed in the rural areas. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ABURA KENE  (Moroto, Lira): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me start by thanking the chairman of the Committee on the National Economy for his good report. 

When I look at page 11, I get very disappointed to see that Tiriri-Aloi and Lira line is not included in this report; and I wonder when it will be included. For the last 14 years, we have been requesting for these lines, and we have always been told that they are going to be restored, but up to now, I do not see them. In this report, it is not even considered among the lines, which are going to be restored. The Minister has actually pointed out that she is considering restoration of connection with district headquarters, elimination of power plants, and stabilisation; here we qualify for restoration of the line. The line is there, it just needs restoration. It can also help to stabilise the line that supplies Lira, because that was the purpose for that line. 

This line used to help us.  We used to have a Ginnery, we used to have a milk cooler plant, and we used to have a citrus farm, which we could have progressed into an agro-processing industry. All these things are not functioning now. It is very unfortunate to see that the Ministry is insensitive to the requests of the people from Moroto. For 14 years now, one would at least feel guilty and think seriously about the people of Moroto.

The line was surveyed, it just needs restoration; we do not need to survey again. So, my question is; when is this line going to be considered? I know it is not going to be among these ones now, but let us hear when it is going to be restored. There may be other reasons for this; maybe the Minister can give us the reason why she is not considering the line. I want to know, so that I can tell the people of Moroto that they are actually part of this development. 

We are now moving to the information age, where electricity is required. We are also talking of starting agro-processing industries, where electricity is required. I am surprised that with all this produce we get from Lira, we are not considering this line for restoration. We have a hospital, we have got equipment from Britain, which we need to start using to operate people, but there is no line, we cannot even get a generator to operate some of those machines. So, I would like to know when this line will be restored. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. OWINY DOLLO (Agago County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is true that I come from Kitgum, though I should be coming from a new district quite soon. I support this motion, and I urge my colleagues in this House to support this motion with one heart. 

I would like to thank the Minister for Energy, and the chairpersons of the two Committees that considered and recommended the report before the House, for the good work done. I have very good reasons for supporting this motion, and for thanking the persons I have mentioned. We are talking about funding, which in reality is a grant, except for about six per cent; the entire funding is a grant. Of that, SEK 16 million is a loan payable on the terms set out. I would like to thank Government, and I would really want the voice of this Parliament to reach the taxpayer of Sweden. I want this House to recognise the role the NORDIC countries have played in the recent years in the development of this country.  

This funding, and the loan enclosed therein, is what I would call user friendly. It will not break our backs, it will not break our necks, and the benefits are enormous. 

I will only comment on that aspect of rural electrification, which is at the bottom of my heart. For a long time, there has been a rivalling debate on whether there is justification for electrifying the rural areas. I have always belonged to the school of thought, which argues that electricity will wake our people up and will allow them to rise beyond their present level. People are not supposed to rise first and then electricity goes to them. I really want to thank Government for whatever they have done today for those belonging to that school of thought that says electricity first and then the people will hearken to the call of electricity. 

I am a beneficiary of the rural electrification programme mentioned here. The 50-kilometre stretch, from Corner Kilak to Patongo, passes through a big chunk of my constituency. We have been crying for this electrification for quite a long time. 

I want to add on to what my Brother, hon. Abura Kene, said. In the age of information technology, in the age of microwaves, in the age of mobility, when we are talking about modernising Uganda, we can only afford to talk with parity, if we introduce electrification to all areas of Uganda. I want to take the example of Kitgum; until NRM came to power, as many people might know, there was no electricity between Lira and Kitgum.  But in that short period, the Lira-Kitgum line has now been connected with electricity. You should travel along that route and see the variety and magnitude of economic activity. People have risen to add value to their agricultural produce. And this is why I really urge my colleagues to support and strengthen the hands of Government to promote rural electrification. This will strengthen our people not just to sell raw materials, but it will also add some value to their goods and they will get better returns from these values.

When I went to primary school, we used not to study at night because of lack of power. Those who are going to primary school and secondary school today in my area can only afford to read meaningfully during the day, because at night there is no source of power. Solar power is beyond them and hydro electrification has not yet reached there. But in spite of that, there is some semblance of good performance. I have tried to imagine, and I am asking my colleagues to imagine how many much more our student's performance could be enhanced with the electrification of the schools in the rural areas of Uganda.  

Because of lack of time, and because I really want to be fair to others, I want to say again that I support this motion, and I ask my colleagues, without much ado, to give it the support it deserves, so that we can proceed to other business. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think it is only fair to give an opportunity to those of us who only see electricity here in Kampala. I think it is only fair. Those of us who see electricity only in Kampala should really be given an opportunity.  The hon. Member for Buhweju.

MR. BANTARIZA FRANCIS (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support the motion because of procedure. When I read number 11, I was expecting something, because I have moved so many kilometres to the Minister's office on several occasions. 

We have a tea plantation for our farmers, and it has been around since 1962, but up to today, they have to take their tea to be processed over 30 miles away. We managed to get somebody interested in our tea to come and invest, but one of the conditions he gave us was that we must make sure that power is available. And the Minister is aware, and even the former Minister was aware of this problem. I am sure even the President's Office is aware of this problem. But now, when I start seeing the cake being shared by other people who even never showed interest, I really start getting disturbed. I would like to ask the Minister of Energy to think about the people of Buhweju. We cannot manufacture tea without power. This is our only hope; we had been looking forward to this scheme. If we are now not included, I think we are now going back to dark ages. I hope the Government is going to do something about Buhweju.  Thank you very much.

MR. ERESU JOHN ( Kaberamaido County, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister and Members of the Committee that approved and produced this report. I support this motion and I would like to encourage all Members present to vote "Aye" for this motion. 

For almost 22 years, Kalaki County, which neighbours Kaberamaido, has been without electricity. That place has a population of about 100,000, and we have institutions of learning, we have medical facilities, we have agro-processing plants, it is only lack of electricity that has made them sub standard.

It is quite encouraging to hear that a sub-district is being served with a new line for electricity, which, for almost 22 years, has been non-existent. But more so, we have to look at the loan itself. To me, as hon. Owiny Dollo has already stated, it is a very good loan, because much of it is a grant. More importantly, however, this kind of loan is actually going directly to the rural population, who will pay it back. It is not going to be the kind in which money will be wasted around in the middle of the streets, but it is going right to our people. This shows the greater concern that this Government has, as it applies this to the ordinary person, to improve him and lift him from the position where he is. We all know that electrification is a modern method of uplifting the standard of living of anybody in the country. Therefore, to oppose this kind of arrangement is to merely push this country back to the dark ages. 

In conclusion, I would like to ask one thing; although it is only going up to Kalaki, which is only about 10 miles to Kaberamaido, may I know from the hon. Minister when the power will actually reach Kaberamaido?  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for your brevity.

MR. EGOU CHARLES (Kalaki County, Soroti) Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to strongly support this motion, and to thank the Committee for having done a tremendous job. I think this is one of the best reports, that I have heard so far, that affects my constituency.

Having said that, in 1986, I wish to remind this august House that the Movement Government ushered in what was known as ‘the fundamental change’, in the governance of this country, in the politics, in the economics, and in the infrastructure. Some of us have been looking at the fundamental change in a different light in our constituencies. In Kaberamaido sub-district, the fundamental change that we saw the Movement bring in was darkness. It was the year that the fundamental was ushered in that Kaberamaido was plunged into darkness. 

Having said that, I must say that we strongly support this motion, because we think that a stitch in time saves nine. It is never too late to thank Government for having come to the rescue of the people who have been crying for a long time. For somebody who has been living in the darkness, I will support this motion and urge all rightful thinking Members of this House to authorise the borrowing of this money. We have missed our share of the national cake; we believe that the restoration of electricity is part of the service delivery by this Government, and we are going to enjoy our share of the national cake.

However, I want to caution and perhaps get clarification from the Minister responsible for Energy. If this august House authorises the borrowing of this money, what guarantee do we have that this money is going to be implemented according to the schedule? Previously, this House has authorised money and up to now nothing is on the ground. For example, during the first Session of this House, the Government convinced the House to accept them to borrow money for tarmacking or resurfacing the Jinja-Tororo road. I passed that road from the Easter recess, and I had about three punctures along there. What has happened?  

I know that this House has also authorised Government to borrow money for the construction of health facilities. One of those facilities, I think, was supposed to be in Kamuli, but I do not know what has happened to that. And as my Brother, hon. Eresu, has said, this line that goes to Kaberamaido passes through my constituency and ends in Kaberamaido. Kalaki and Kaberamaido are actually twins, and traditionally, you cannot appease one twin and leave the other. What time framework are we talking about; when are we going to get electricity right up to Ochero in Kaberamaido?

Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to support this motion. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let me have hon. Kajara, and then we shall have the hon. Pinto, and we shall see how to proceed from there.

MR. KAJARA ASTON (Mwenge South, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you are well aware, so many Members of this House mistakenly think that my own constituency, in the Town of Kyenjojo, has power. In fact, hon. Kazoora wrote to me a chit asking me what I wanted to talk about when there is power in Kyenjojo and even in my house. That is the statement of the millennium! For long, we have expected Kyenjojo to have power, but unfortunately, Kyenjojo does not have power. It is still in the dark ages, unlike Kashari and many other areas of this country.  

I do not want to re-empathise the importance of rural electrification, nor do I want to re-emphasise the sadness that load shedding brings to this country. Time and again, we have said that power is an engine of growth and without power we cannot talk of a programme for modernisation of agriculture. Without power we cannot talk of industrialisation or even modernisation, as is the policy of this Government. Without agro-processing and without adding value to our products, we shall work, but the proceeds will be in vain.

The Minister has just told us that electricity coverage in this country is only 1 percent. It is therefore, imperative that we get this money and put into operation unit 13 of the Owen Falls Dam extension, so that power can reach some areas. This grant is only in support of the Government policy of rural electrification. You have heard that this SEK 180 million, which is equivalent to about 22 million US dollars, is a grant and it is only contingent upon our approval of a loan of only 1.9 million dollars. That is why we should respect the good gesture of the donors, by approving this loan. If we do not pass this loan, we have also heard that it is limited for utilisation by the end of this year. Thus, I implore the hon. Members to really consider this very seriously.  

I have also noted the concerns of the Members, but I think for the first time, there is a very good criterion being followed; that is restoration of the existing infrastructure. It is a very good criterion.

Being broad-based is also another good criterion; just look at the areas that are going to be covered; Soroti-Katakwi is in the North/East, Masaka-Kalangala is in the South West, Nebbi-Bondo-Arua is in the extreme North West, where the Speaker hails from. They also talk about Corner Kilak-Patongo, and of course, at the end they talk about Rugombe-Kyenjojo, which is in the mid-west. When you talk of Lumino Majanji in Busia and Tororo, Kashenyi, Kasensero and other areas, these were some of the areas that were not served for a long time, and they deserve this electricity.

I would like to re-emphasise what my colleague said, because time and again, this Parliament approves money, but the Ministry of Finance, in all its wisdom, goes back to the drawing board and diverts money to their own use. This is the point that must be re-emphasised. Assurance must be sought from the Ministry that once this money is approved for this project, there will be no diversion, as has been done before, depending on the political muscle of the day. With those few words, I beg to support the motion.  Thank you.

MR. PINTO MANUEL (Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too support this motion. I also thank the Committee for the good job done, but I have two questions for the hon. Minister.  

The first question refers to item four. The Committee has been assured us that once the second unit is installed, Uganda Electricity Board will be in a position to contain load shedding to a bearable level.  

Our Committee has had representation, and I think the country had been fed up with reports, that Madhvani was able to produce some Mega watts of electricity. All they want is this Ministry to move and get the Power Purchase Agreement. They possibly do not even need a loan, but they can provide ten Mega Watts to the national grid, and improve on the capacity of power.  

The Ministry has been dragging its feet. Could the Minister stand here and tell us what is happening, because they have not responded to our inquiry. Kilembe and others already have a Power Purchase Agreement with the Ministry. What is happening? Why is the Power Purchase Agreement with Madhvani not being pursued?

Secondly, Sweden is willing to extend a grant of SEK 180 million to support Government’s programme of rural electrification; nothing could be better news! The Minister of Energy, the Minister of Finance and Minister in charge of General Duties could assist us here.  We need tax concessions on solar power and on wind power to serve the people. Right now, when equipment, which can facilitate solar power generation is brought, it is heavily taxed. We go to an extent of getting billions in loans with World Bank. Here is an item, which you can use, to enable you give services to your people, by giving tax concessions. 

Could the Minister responsible for taxation assure this House that this is a matter that they are internalising and that they will be able to respond to so that they can increase availability of power for rural electrification. I know that the Committee on Natural Resources has recommended this ever so much. 

I support the loan, otherwise, and I thank the Committee for this. I hope that we move forward, as my colleagues have said, to ensure that there is equitable distribution of benefits accruing to all parts of the country, as many others have been mentioning. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we are be-labouring a point, which is already well taken. First of all, not a single one of you has opposed this motion; you all have praise for it. This is also directed to the Minister. I think you are being requested or asked to make an undertaking to ensure that this money will be used for this purpose. Otherwise, the whole thing has been praised. This is just to guide you in your summary. I do not intend for you to speak for 30 minutes. Though you are taking notes profusely, the Chairman seems to be content. I will give an opportunity to the Minister of Energy and then to the Mover of the motion.

THE MINISTER OF ENERGY (Mrs. Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Members for their complements, concerns and comments. All of them have been very well taken.  

We have got a rural electrification programme, which we have named, ‘Energy for Rural Transformation’. In February, the World Bank Management Board approved a facility of 375 million US dollars, extendable to 500 million US dollars, for rural electrification. Uganda is the first country to benefit from this facility. When this facility becomes operational, it is going to go a long way in addressing hon. Members’ concerns. I think that answers most of the concerns.

While we are waiting for that to be finalised, however, Government is continuing in its efforts to source for money. Having started so late, we want to move very fast to rectify the situation in this country. We are discussing with agencies like JICA, NORAD, French Development Agency, the Italian Agency, to help us expand coverage, and all of them seem to be very positive. I am sure next time when I come here to present the strategy for rural electrification, I will have very good news for most Members of this House.

On the assurance that the money will not be diverted, I just want to say that loan money is never diverted. The problem we normally get is lack of counter-part funding. But in this case, this problem will not arise because rural electrification is now a priority programme of Government. So, it will not be one of those to be affected whenever there are budget cuts. We even think that the contribution from the Government, after you have approved the Budget, will be forth coming, and we shall be able to move with this facility very fast.  

On the question raised by hon. Pinto, as to why Government is dragging its feet to sign a Power Purchase Agreement with Kakira Sugar Works, I wish to say that Government is being misunderstood. Government is the prime mover in the implementation of the Kakira Sugar Works Power Project. It is Government which sourced the grant for Kakira to carry out a feasibility study for this project. Recently, we sat down with the World Bank group - Global Environment Fund – together with Kakira Sugar Works, and Government gave them overwhelming support to access a facility from the Global Environment Fund. It is not true that Kakira Sugar Works does not need a loan; that is misinformation. It is going to be funded mainly by a loan with a grant component, and this is as a result of the Government support and recommendation to the Global Environment Fund, which is the World Bank arm for funding such projects. Of course we have to go through a process to get to the point of signing a Power Purchase Agreement.  

When Kakira Sugar Works approached Government to sign a Power Purchase Agreement, they did not know even where they were going to get the money. They did not know what the cost of the project was going to be. So, we could not sign the Power Purchase Agreement without numbers. They did not even know the tariff we were going to charge! So, Government is moving and is supporting Kakira in its efforts to sign the Power Purchase Agreement. Recently, together with Kakira, we even solicited for a grant from the World Bank to carry out a tariff study, so that we come up with a fair tariff for the Ugandan consumers for the power, which will be produced by Kakira sugar works.

I now want to move to the next question raised by hon. Pinto, on the tax concessions on solar. Already, apart from VAT, all the import taxes and import duty was waived on solar panels. We have a problem only on items, which are convertible, and which are multipurpose, like the batteries. There are no batteries which are solar specific now. The batteries used for solar panels are the same batteries used by cars. So, if we just say there are no taxes on the accessories, we are going to have a problem. But we are selectively picking out those items, which are solar specific, so that they can be exempted from import duty. But VAT is a consumer tax and it is charged on all consumer items. 

On the equitable distribution, I think the presentation today speaks for itself. In the criteria used for choosing sites for electrification, it is clear that they are based on equitable distribution.  

Before I conclude, I want to say one word about Tiriri-Aloi line. This line is already under rehabilitation. We were using UEB money initially, but because UEB went almost broke, they could not move fast. On realising that using UEB money was going to take us a very long time, we decided to source for money from funding agencies, and we hope to put this under the JICA line. It requires 4.8 billion shillings, which cannot easily be sourced, but I want to assure my hon. colleague that we are doing everything possible.  

I want to conclude by assuring the hon. Members that Government is concerned about the electrification of this country. We know that it is the engine of development, we know that it is what is going to transform the lives of our people and combat rural-urban migration, which is a problem in Kampala here. 

With those few clarifications, I would like, once again, to thank the hon. Members, the Committee and my hon. colleagues for their contributions on this important subject. I thank you. 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank you and I want to thank the hon. Members for the overwhelming support they have given this resolution, which is a very important resolution in a very important area of our development.  

I want to agree with hon. Members' concerns and requests, and I want to assure them that Government will do everything possible to keep infrastructure development as number one on the priority list of development projects. I am glad to realise that everybody agrees that infrastructure development, especially power, should be supply driven and not demand driven. I am convinced that is the way forward.  

I have taken hon. Pinto's request very seriously, and I will consult to see what can be done in terms of tax concession on solar panels, to help the ordinary person access power in the rural areas. However, when the import duties were removed from the solar panels, the prices did not change, and we had a problem. Initially, the duty and sales tax was removed, and we thought something would be done, but the prices of the panels remained the same.  However, we shall see whether it was VAT that created the problem or whether there were other issues involved. We are actually discussing with them to see how best we can help people get access to power, especially in areas where you cannot have a national grid. 

Hon. Members may want to know that in taking one kilometre of power, which is not 132 KV, just the ordinary 11,000, you are talking of about 15 million shillings, and that is without a transformer. So, you can imagine what it costs to electrify the whole country. Even the 500 million we are likely to get will probably increase on the maximum power generation to 12 per cent of the population; and that means we shall still be very far from where want to be.

I want to thank everybody for this consideration. I believe that everybody will look around to see how we can increase power in order to increase production, so that we can increase exports, and therefore have a wider economic base, better taxes and more money to actually develop this economy.  

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I hope we are going to pass this resolution with a resounding yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow SEK 16,600,000,000 from Svanska Handels Banken of Sweden, to finance unit 13 of the Owen Falls extension. In spite of what has happened, I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)


THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Finance and that of Energy, I wish to congratulate you on your presentation, although I was surprised that you were not applauded. I was surprised that the Minister for Energy was not applauded especially when she said that, after financing unit 13, this matter of load shedding will be completely reduced to the minimum; I was surprised! But of course, that shows that most of the people who are here only see electricity here and not at home. But all the same, I congratulate you for your performance.  

We have been here for some time. I very sorry for our Friend, hon. Nabutaala, I would like to assure him that tomorrow he will future prominently on the order paper. Accordingly the meeting is adjourned until 2.00 O'Clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.02 p.m and adjourned until Wednesday, 26th April, 2000).
                  
      
