Thursday 20th April, 2000

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to seek guidance. For the last two months or so, all Order Papers published have been bearing an item now mentioned under notice of business to follow; and this is the Political Organisations Bill, 1998. After seeing it throughout the last Order Papers for two months, can I assume that this item may never come up at all for discussion?

THE SPEAKER: I really do not know whether you would be right to assume so just because it is being reflected as business to come. Supposing it comes? I would rather you kept waiting until the persons who are responsible are ready to proceed.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

MISS KABASHARIRA NAOME (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to ask the following question to the Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development in charge of Privatisation: Many taxpayers in the country have been asking questions on privatisation which have either remained unanswered or been answered unsatisfactorily."  
Could the hon. Minister explain to the House:
(i) What is the status of the privatisation process? How much money has so far been realised from the process?
(ii) Which investors (by name) have finalised payments for enterprises sold by the Privatisation Unit?
(iii) Which investors (by name) have not finalised payments for enterprises sold by the Privatisation Unit?
(iv) What enterprises are remaining to be privatised and what is the way forward?

I would have also asked (v), Mr. Speaker, but since this question was asked last year, it has taken a long time, and it has been answered and I am satisfied with the answer. So I will ask only up to (iv).  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN CHARGE OF PRIVATISATION (Mr. Manzi Tumubweinee): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I want to thank hon. Kabasharira for this question, because it will help all of us to clarify and answer issues that have been contentious in the Papers, and seem not to be understood by many people.  

Following the overall economic and reform policies that were adopted by the NRM Government in 1987, the reform and divestiture programme for public enterprises, that commenced in 1992 under Ministry of Finance, became the central part of the programme. The divestiture programme started in earnest. The only institutional framework, at the time, for the implementation of the reform and the divestiture programme comprised DRIC, a sub-committee of Cabinet chaired by the Minister of Finance, and the Policy review working group, comprising of Permanent Secretaries of the relevant Ministries. The implementing agency was PERD Secretariat.

Hon. Members, you will remember that the programme was suspended from March to October 1993, to enable the enactment of a supporting legislation. The PERD Statute, number 9, came into effect in October 1993, and established the institutional framework and other guidelines for the implementation of the programme. There were also subsequent amendments namely: Statutory Instrument number 12 and Statutory Instrument number 14 of 1997, to streamline the process. To date, the implementation of the programme has been carried out through the Enterprise Development Project, initially by two units, the privatisation unit responsible for divestiture, and the parastatal monitoring unit, which monitors the financial flows between the Government of Uganda and the public enterprises.  Subsequently, the utility reform unit was also established in January 1999 to handle utilities.  

The EDP, which is an IDA funded project, came into effect in 1992 and had four components. The technical assistance component was to support the implementing agency, through training and consultancy services. The second was a line of credit investment term credit finance fund or ITCRF, for implementation and expansion of both public and private enterprises implemented by Bank of Uganda Development Finance Department. The funds are lent through participating banks, which carry the full risk of lending to the private and public sectors. 

Three was the technology and management fund, and four, the restructuring fund. Both number three and four were later abolished, following the review of the credit, as they had become irrelevant. Therefore, only two components now remain.  

As at March 31st 2000, divestitures completed were as follows: Those enterprises, which we sold through asset sales, were 21, there was only one concession of Second National Operator, which was the only one. 

Repossessions were seven, pre-emptive rights were seven, and other sales were 25, making a total of 61. Liquidations or write-offs or strike-offs were 31, giving a total of 92 enterprises so far covered as at March 31st, 2000.  

Of the 92, three, namely Printpak (U) Limited, Uganda Motors Limited and Uganda Hardwares included management buy outs, while three, Nile Hotel International, Steel Corporation of East Africa and Agricultural Enterprises Limited were through joint ventures. Three divestitures had to be cancelled and are now subject to further review, these are Uganda Commercial Bank, Nile Hotel International and Apollo Hotel Corporation.  Masindi Hotel, which had been cancelled, has since been re-privatised.  

The PERD Statute 1993, as amended in section 21(3), provides that all proceeds from divestiture are banked in the divestiture account, to be maintained in commercial banks and development banks designated by the Minister responsible for Finance, with approval of DRIC. The way funds are to be used after divestiture is given in section 23(a) and (b), and section 21(4) of the Statute. When the programme started, everybody believed that probably we would raise something like five hundred million dollars. These high hopes have not been realised because they seem to have been based on the book value of the enterprises. The size of debts had not been thought to be as high as was finally established. 

Most enterprises had hitherto survived on both indirect and direct subsidies. The liberalisation of the economy and reduction of the subsidies destroyed the enterprises, and their only lifeline was Government subvention. The sales enterprises, therefore, in many cases, yielded much less than was anticipated, and in some cases got negative receipts. This state of affairs has led the public to ask, including the question of today, where is our silver? Where is our money? Why are we giving away our wealth?

Hon. Members, very few enterprises have been sold for enough proceeds to cover all the liabilities. It is with this background that I want to answer hon. Kabasharira's question, and also take advantage to up date the Members, and through the Members, the country, on the status of the programme. I will in future, at intervals, up date you so that we all move together. In the next few days, or hopefully one or two weeks, we shall present to this House the statutory biannual reports.

In the divestiture process, we have had sales, which on the face of it looked unfavourable, but for us to appreciate the total impact of the sale, it is necessary to look at the total benefit to the economy. In many cases, employment has gone up, production efficiency has been improved and there are higher tax revenues from the enterprises, and certainly divestitures of enterprises. This means that the subsidy from Government is automatically reduced to zero. These are the important economic issues we should be looking at. 

I wish to say that in few cases, the process was bungled up and there was no focus, but these have been the exceptions rather than the rule. And indeed, as in the case shown above, the deals had to be cancelled.  We believe we have learnt from that experience, and we hope to do better in future. The many advantages of the divestiture programme, therefore, have been the forward and backward linkages in the economy, rather than the direct, immediate monetary benefits after sale.    

The financial flows are the result of the divestiture of 92 enterprises, 31 of which were re-graded as follows:
Total receipts up to March 31st 2000:  
Sales  Shs. 139,709,737,425.  
ITCRF reflows  Shs. 14,060,000,000.  
Interest on money banked in various banks - Shs. 3,320,149,659 
Total in-flow  Shs. 157,880,887,086.  

Expenses on the account:
Care taker costs - Shs. 35, 200,260,994.  
Loans receivable  Shs. 1,000,000,000
Professional fees and other expenses  Shs. 14,941,486,623.
Creditors assumed  Shs. 49,631,146,413.
Terminal benefits  Shs. 30,824,244,376. 
Recoverable advances  Shs. 10,876,612,436.
Total expenses: Shs. 142,473,516,847.

Therefore the surplus available in Privatisation is Shs. 14,615,372,039 as at 31st March 2000.

This money is available in UCB Accounts: 
Account one  Shs. 874,614,000. 
Account two, redundancy account  Shs. 164,261,000, 
UCB dollar account  Shs. 10,076,473,000. 
UCB fixed deposit account  Shs. 1,100,000,000.  
Stanbic Bank  Shs. 2,400,000,000 
This gives us a total of Shs. 14 billion as stated above.

As the records above show or indicate, the total sales for divestiture enterprises amounted to Shs. 157.1 billion, including other income with liabilities assumed by enterprises at 55.1, as at March 31st. Therefore, the outstanding balance, the unpaid balance of the total sales, was Shs. 12.6 billion. Of the outstanding balance of 12.6 billion, 91 per cent relates to African Textiles Mills, Nytil Picfare Jinja, UFEL, which is under receivership, Printpak, whose assets have been mortgaged to East African Development Bank, and Lira Hotel, which is under receivership. These outstanding cases have now been referred to the Attorney General's Chambers, who has appointed private legal counsels to handle them.  

Although we have, as I have indicated above, a net balance of Shs. 14.6 billion, the outstanding commitments, which should be paid by the Privatisation Unit, actually total Shs. 17.8 billion. Meaning, therefore, that technically if we pay all the outstanding bills as of today, we shall have a deficit of Shs. 3.3 billion.

It is evident, therefore, that as we divest the larger enterprises, the commitments are much higher after restructuring. It is projected that there will be no net surplus to be distributed at the end of the entire process, especially, as most of the larger enterprises will involve massive debt restructuring. These debts will have to be recovered from the divestiture account or taken over by Government, which guaranteed them in the first instance. 

Let me give you an example of a debt as it stands. We have already advertised for the sale of Uganda Telecom Limited, but we must assume a debt burden of 50 billion shillings in order for it to be sellable.

Another example is Kinyara Sugar Works, which was almost running down. We have taken over 58 billion shillings in order for it to be clean enough to be sold. Otherwise, the lenders, PTA and other banks, were putting it under receivership.

In Uganda Electricity Board, whose law you have recently passed, we have to assume 360 billion shillings in order for it to be sellable.

In Uganda Railways, although there is some dispute at the figures, the figures are known approximately at 115 billion shillings. It is important to note that the divestitures to date have mostly been for enterprises that have had a very bad track record, and therefore, it was essential to get private entrepreneurs, who would turn around these enterprises.

Hon. Members should note that, since the stock exchange was launched in 1987, we have been able to divest one enterprise through that exchange, and that was Uganda Clays Limited, which was a big success. We are aware that the divestiture through the stock exchange is not only transparent, but also spreads the ownership of wealth. To this end, a collective ownership scheme law will soon be presented to Parliament, so as to allow the establishment of schemes, such as unit trusts, as a mechanism by which regulated collective schemes can buy into some of these enterprises.  This will give a chance for a wider cross section of the people to participate in the ownership of enterprises.

We have also recently adopted a policy that promotes Employee Share Ownership Plans (ESOP) and will be selling a stake to employees every time a divestiture is undertaken, and either a strategic equal partner is acquired or the company is sold to the market for listing. For instance, Government Central Purchasing Corporation will soon be sold to employees under the management employee arrangement.

I want to take this opportunity to inform hon. Members that we have now streamlined the divestiture process. We now have a very comprehensive procedures manual, which has been designed to further streamline the divestiture process, to improve the quality and transparency of the divestiture process. The procedures manual also has a listing criteria for enterprises that would include their selection. This manual can be given to you at your request.

We have also established a utility reform unit that will be specifically handling utilities, notably Uganda Electricity Board, National Water and Sewerage Corporation and Uganda Railways Corporation.  

Following the recommendations that were adopted by Parliament, we have since passed amendments to the PERD Statute to address the institutional framework and the changes to DRIC. We have included measures not only to avoid asset stripping, but also to refine the use of the divestiture process. These amendments are incorporated in Act No.1 of 2000, as you will all remember.

In conclusion, I would like to assure Colleagues that we have a focused, streamlined and transparent divestiture process that will see the earlier set objectives achieved. I intend to keep in touch with the House in this exercise, so that we can keep in harmony in regard to the divestiture programmes. I will give a copy of my response to the Clerk of Parliament, so that the Members can get copies and be able to internalise the Schedules, which I have referred to, and which are attached.

I will also give a list of schedules of enterprises that we have divested and the amount of money that we received from each of those enterprises.  

Question No.3: which investors have not finalised the payments for enterprises sold? I have already indicated them, but for purposes of clarity and emphasis, they are African Textiles Mills, which is owned by P.S. Patel, was divested in March 1996. The total sale price was Shs. 1,700,000,000; collections to date are Shs. 100,000,000, the outstanding debt is Shs. 1,600,000,000.

Lango Development Company was sold to Sunset International Limited on October 1998 as follows: 
The total sale price  Shs. 100,000,000; 
Payments to date - 75 million shillings; 
Balance to be paid - 24.4 million shillings.

Nytil Picfare Limited was sold in March 1996, for ten billion. Payment to date  Shs. 2,134,000,000 
Balance outstanding  Shs. 7,868,000,000

The other enterprise sold, which has not paid all, is Uganda Fisheries Enterprise Limited. It was sold to NODICA African Fisheries Company in May 1995. It was sold for Shs. 1,100,000,000.  
Payment to date  Shs. 105,000,000 
Unpaid balance  Shs. 995,000,000.

The other is Uganda Hotels, Acholi Inn, sold to Lau Limited. It was sold in May 1995 for two hundred and thirty million shillings.  
Payment to date - 50 million shillings 
Balance unpaid - 180 million shillings.

The other Hotel is Uganda Hotels Hill Top Hotel, sold to Three Links Limited. It was sold in May 1997 at 35 million shillings.  
Payment to date - ten million shillings 
Balance unpaid - 25 million shillings.

Next to be sold was Uganda Hotels Lira Hotel, sold to Showa Trading Company in January 1995. It was sold for 250 million shillings.  
Payment to date - 50 million shillings 
unpaid balance - 200 million shillings.  

The next enterprise was Uganda Phamarceuticals sold to V.V. Holdings in July 1996. It was sold for Shs. 1,501,000,000. 
Payment to date  Shs. 1,184,000,000  
Balance unpaid - 316 million shillings.

The other unpaid for enterprise is SAIMUCO in Soroti, it was sold to Steel Rolling Mills in September, 1999. It was sold for 202 million. 
Payment to date - one hundred forty two million 
Balance - 59 million.  
That answers that question, Mr. Speaker.

What enterprises are remaining unsold?  The enterprises are: Apollo Hotel Corporation 
Associated Amateur Company 
Ten per cent of B.A.T. Uganda Limited 
30 per cent of Cable Corporation Limited; 
Coffee Marketing Board Limited; 
Dairy Corporation; 
Development Finance Company of Uganda - 50 per cent; 
Government Central Purchasing Corporation; 
Housing Finance Company of Uganda - 20 per cent; 
Industrial Promotion Services Limited; 
Johannes Brothers Africa Limited; 
Kakira Sugar Works - 30 per cent; 
Kasese Cobalt; 
Kilembe Mines; 
Kinyara Sugar Works; 
Kulubya Properties; 
Lake Victoria Hotel Windsor Limited - 49 per cent; 
National Housing and Construction Corporation; 
National Insurance Corporation; 
National Water and Sewerage Corporation; 
New Vision; 
Nile Hotel International; 
Steel Corporation of East Africa; 
Sugar Corporation of Uganda; 
Uganda Air Cargo; 
Uganda Consolidated Properties; 
Uganda Grain Industries; 
Uganda Electricity Board; 
Uganda Grain Millers Limited - 28 per cent; 
Uganda Hotels Limited - winding up;  
Uganda Libyan Arab Holding Company; 
Uganda Livestock Industries; 
Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation; 
Uganda Prisons Industries; 
Uganda Railways Corporation; 
Uganda Seed Project; 
Uganda Spinning Mills Limited; 
Uganda Telecom Limited; 
UGMA Engineering; 
Uganda Posts Limited and Post Bank Limited; 
Uganda Development Bank; 
Uganda Commercial Bank.  
Total - 47 enterprises.

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Kabasharira for the question. 

MS. KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Manzi for the answers. I have some few supplementary questions originating from his answers. He has told us that there are some people who have paid part of the money. May I know whether those people have defaulted, according to our PERD Statute? And if they have defaulted, what does he intend to do to them?  Shall we be able to recover the money or get back our property soon?

Secondly, may I know the current members of DRIC since the amendment of the Statute?

Lastly, is it also true that some title deeds were transferred to some of these people, who have not fully paid? Are there some people whose title deeds have been transferred? If it is true, may we benefit from you, in knowing who those people are and what you intend to do to recover the money, since they have already given away the property with the title.  Thank you.

DR. NKUUHE: I thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the Minister for his exposé. He talked about privatisation of UTL, I would like him to clarify the recent reports we have been reading in the Papers. According to the Papers, it seems the payment is being delayed. Are we starting another saga, where payment is delayed and then the payees pull out?  

Secondly, I want to know about this second national operator. When the law was written, we were supposed to have what they call a duo-poly that is to have operators for a period of five years. But five years starting from when? Because the starting period is not fixed. For instance, MTN has been in the business for I do not know how long, but it is open ended; their five years have not started. So, could the Minister tell us when you intend to fix the period for some of the operators who are in the market, because the five years is supposed to protect them so that they establish themselves, and yet it cannot be open ended? Otherwise, the whole idea of privatisation is defeated, because you want to create competition and yet you are protecting some operation for an indefinite period.

MR. NDEEZI:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also I wish to thank the Minister for agreeing to answer this very important question. I have only one supplementary question, not from a negative perspective, but from a positive one. I am interested in the employment aspects of privatisation. At the time of implementation of privatisation, we were told that privatisation would help to create many more job opportunities for our people.  But at the moment, people are telling us that they have no jobs, and that the rate of unemployment is worrying, simply because privatisation was implemented. Can the Minister put the record right on the number of job opportunities created as a result of the implementation of the privatisation exercise? Can we also have figures on the number of jobs foregone as a result of the implementation of the privatisation exercise? Thank you, Sir.

MR. NYAI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have just two simple questions. First of all, allow me to congratulate the Minister for being very forthright and frank with this Parliament. It is a tendency that must be applauded. But my simple question is; on the list of people who have not yet paid, I am not so sure whether I did or did not hear Printpak being mentioned. If I did not hear it, by accident maybe, the Minister can help re-state the position.  

Secondly, based on the principle that privatisation was going to stop the bleeding of public funds in the up-keep of corporations which are not performing and therefore, privatisation would get rid of unnecessary debts, if the figures the Minister has read are correct, if all debts were paid, that means the privatisation exercise is in the red. I know I am supposed to seek clarification from the Minister, but as our guide in this House, Mr. Speaker, I do not know how we can change this answer to an oral question for a full debate of the House, on how this House should determine what to do. You cannot just lose 30 billion shillings and this House keeps quiet. How do we proceed to investigate how these monies were lost, and how we can bring the culprits to book? I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I seek clarification from the Minister in charge of Privatisation, on the question of unpaid monies on enterprises that have already been acquired by individuals. Full payments have not been effected on some of these enterprises that have been acquired by these individuals, as the Minister has already read out. Given the value of the shilling, and the constant value of the properties in question, is there a collective measure, in terms of payments, by these individuals who have acquired these properties, so that as they default in payment or as they delay in payments, the value of the properties sold does not depreciate over time?  Thank you.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister for his answers, but I am seeking clarification and posing a supplementary question with regard to his answer to question (iv). In his answer, he stated that 47 enterprises are yet to be privatised. My concern here is that, we have tended to use one aspect of privatisation, that is divestiture, much more than the other aspect, where you restructure an enterprise, commercialise it, subject it to the market forces, and it still remains an asset for the people of Uganda. 

So, my supplementary question is; when will the Ministry responsible for Privatisation ensure that the other aspects of privatisation, like selling shares to Ugandans, whereby we are able to democratise ownership of some of these very essential enterprises, could be put on the ground? We need to democratise the ownership of some of these very big enterprises like UEB, the water board and many others. So, when can this be done? Can the Minister answer these questions in no uncertain terms? I thank you.

MR. BAMWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to seek clarification from the hon. Minister, with regard to the National Social Security Fund. There has been an outcry, especially from the workers, because of the rumour that has been going on that National Social Security Fund is going to be privatised. National Social Security Fund does not fall under 100 per cent Government ownership. Does the Minister intend to privatise National Social Security Fund or does he intend to liberalise the pension fund schemes?  Thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions to the hon. Minister are general. As the Minister in charge of Privatisation, is he satisfied with the progress of privatisation?

Secondly, to what extent has privatisation generally helped the peasants whom I represent?

Thirdly, how is he intending to counter the accusation of Ocheger that the Government has sold all the enterprises and given the money to Banyankole or taken some of the money to Congo?  Thank you very much.

MR. BEN WACHA: Thank you, Sir. In respect to question (iii), can the Minister, when circulating the schedules he intends to circulate, indicate the personalities behind the companies, which have not finalised payment for these enterprises? Personalities are names of directors and of companies, which have not finalised payment of these enterprises.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Could the Minister tell us whether it is true that among the people who bought NYTIL is President Kagame of Rwanda?

Secondly, the Minister mentioned the names of banks and their accounts where the taxpayers' money got from the sale of these parastatals is kept, what is the Government plan for that money? It is not enough to tell us that so much is in such and such a bank. You could go on mentioning that year after year.

Thirdly, the New Vision newspaper is one of the oldest newspapers in this country, because it gets its name from the Uganda Argus. It has been reported that it is among the enterprises, which is run by Government, and is properly managed, because it makes profits. And I had occasion to participate in a reception, celebrating the fruitful management of that establishment. Why is Government bent on selling The New Vision?  The people I represent in Lubaga south would like to know.  

There have also been allegations about the people who once attempted to buy Nile Hotel, the Tunisians. I happen to be a member of the Natural Resources Committee, which has special interests in such establishments and the land question. It is reported that these Tunisians took away the land title for that hotel. On behalf of the people I represent, I would like to know when we are recovering that land title.  

Lastly, I was most disturbed to hear the Minister mention that the Government Central Purchasing Corporation is among the enterprises to be sold off. I put it to the Minister that selling off the Central Purchasing Corporation is an indication that sooner or later, even State House shall be privatised.  Could the Minister explain?

MR. WAMULONGO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister has told us that among the expenses, 10 billion shillings is given in recoverable advances. I would like to find out from the Minister, who these advances were given to and under what circumstances.  

Secondly, the Minister quoted some partially paid for enterprises, and I think the worst is African Textile Mill, which was sold at 1.7 billion shillings, but only 100 million has been paid. I know that if you are a taxpayer in this country and you have tax arrears, for the time you spend without paying the taxes, you are charged interest at the prevailing bank rate. I would like to find out from the Minister whether he is charging, I would call them defaulters, interest, or if he is not, whether he intends to charge them interest.  I thank you.

MS BWAMBALE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister for updating and giving us useful information. My supplementary concern is the fact that the so many people who bought these enterprises have not paid. What strategy does the Minister have to ensure that the people pay? 

When I hear about an enterprise like NYTIL Picfare, which was sold for ten billion, and so far only two billion has been paid, I get concerned. Will the debt ever be completed?  Picfare is one of the industries that are doing very well, and I hope it concerns production of stationery. With UPE in place, it means more uniforms, more children, and we see so many shops all over the country in this up coming town, so they should definitely be making profit. If for an enterprise, like Uganda Hotels, Magherita, which is in a war area where tourists have not been going, a buyer fails to pay, we can understand. But we get disheartened, as representatives of taxpayers, when we see enterprises, which would otherwise be doing well, but are not paying.  What is the problem?  

My second supplementary question is about the employees of these enterprises which we have divested. Have they been paid? Every now and then, we see in the newspapers that the employees of Uganda Railways Corporations and other such places have not been paid. When we come to elections, these things turn political, especially when they are not paid in time. What strategy is in place? Is it those peoples fault that industries are not being bought? Does the Minister have another arrangement so that these employees who have been laid off can be paid? 

I would also like to know from the Minister when he is floating the shares for the Cobalt plant in Kasese, and whether it is open to the public, because the cobalt processing industry is doing very well. They are producing cobalt and the market is good. They should be making profit. The only snag is that they do not have enough electricity. But, when are you floating the shares, so that the ordinary people like us, can also buy shares in that company?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Mr. Karuhanga, and then we will give the Minister an opportunity to respond to these questions.

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank hon. Kabasharira for raising this question at this very opportune moment. 

First, I would like to know, from the point of the legal contracts that are entered by DRIC with buyers of these enterprises, whether there is a clause for penalty or termination of a contract when there is default.  And if the clauses are there, I would like to know how many contracts have been cancelled because of default.  And if they have not been cancelled, why they are not cancelled and what action is being taken to make sure that those people who bought these companies and have failed to pay in the time stipulated, will have their companies contracts cancelled. After that, the companies can revert to privatisation for advertising and for sale to other bidders. 

From the list the Minister read, it is very clear that people who bought companies in 1996, at billions of shillings, have paid very little money, and yet they are still continuing to run those companies. And yet I am sure that in the contract there is a termination clause for failure or default. So, I would like to know, now that we have a new Minister, what he has done. As a new Minister, is he sweeping the floor of that office, or is it a case of a new broom not being aware of the corners. That is my number one question, and I am really retaliating hon. Kabasharira's supplementary question on that. 

My second question is a matter of great importance to me, and to many other Members who represent people who are in the cattle industry, namely the Dairy Corporation. Three years ago, we passed a law here, the Dairy Corporation Act, and we said we should sale 70 percent to a private co-investor and 30 percent was to be retained for the local population or farmers in the dairy industry. 

We also said that the 2 billion shillings should be put aside in order to assist the process of privatisation, pay off the outstanding debts, take care of staff and then prepare the company for privatisation. As we speak now, because of failure of this industry, not knowing whether it is going this way or that way, the company has been closing a lot of its milk cooling plants upcountry and opening up the industry to people, whom I would call highway traders. 

These people come with their pick-ups, and when they do not come, people spend a day there with their milk and it goes bad, and they lose interest in the dairy industry. As a result of that, the price of milk has completely collapsed. So, I would like to know what the Privatisation Unit is doing to privatise the Dairy Corporation, in order to be able to help the farmers come back in the main stream of production. What is the P.U doing in the light of the fact that even Rwanda, which was taking our milk, closed its borders against some of our products, including milk? 

There is a small company in Kitgum called Hill Top Hotel, which was sold at 35 million shillings and the buyer paid 10 Million, with a balance of 25 million. I know this buyer, he was a Member of Parliament here in NRC, and he told me that the army occupied this hotel for more than 2 years when they were fighting Kony, and they have failed to pay him the bill of over 100 million, in spite of the repeated requests. Now he has almost become a pauper. Now Privatisation wants to take the hotel because even the 10 million he paid is not sufficient. But have you done anything for this former honourable member of NRC, who is facing this problem? Have you done anything so that he can collect the money from the army and give Privatisation, since he has approached Privatisation on numerous occasions and he is not being assisted? 

We get a lot of stories about Uganda Commercial bank, and some times they are so horrific that you want to put your fingers in your ears so that you do not hear any more stories about it. When the Minister was a Backbencher, he was very knowledgeable about this company, and he had a lot of very strong views about it. Now that he has told us it is due for privatisation, I would like to hear from him, since he is handling this sector. How is he going to handle this situation, in light of the views he used to strongly express? And, is he aware of the stories we get from there? Has he been able to correct the problems he found there? How far has he gone in sorting out the mess he found in UCB? 

Lastly, a number of tenders would be approved by Privatisation, by DRIC, by the Ministers, and then the IGG would intervene, and then they would be cancelled. There would be an inquiry after that, and then some times Parliament would conduct some inquiries, like in the case of Midroc and Karim and all those people.  Has he streamlined the tendering process now, so that it is transparent, open, fair and water proof? Has he streamlined it to the extent that people who have interest in Uganda do not spend a fortune trying to enter into the business in this country and end up being so frustrated, and giving Uganda a very bad name? Is the process of tendering for the remaining parastatals, which he mentioned going to be transparent, fair and different from the one that had been employed by the previous administration, before the Minister joined that unit? If not, we cannot again subject interested investors to come here. 

He said 47 enterprises are remaining to be sold. Is the Minister going to advertise the enterprises once so that people who are interested can apply? Or is he going to say, in two years we are only going to sell two, and then another two years we sell two, then we sell up to another twenty years, until we sale 47? It is important to answer this question because many people are asking, and they may say we are not ready. So, I would like to know whether they are going to advertise them all and then people who are interested can buy, whether they just are going to keep removing them piecemeal, so that the job in Privatisation does not get finished, like Custodian Board. Custodian Board is now finished, so we no longer have a Minister for Custodian Board. So, if you advertise all of them and they are bought in one year, then we would have no Minister for Privatisation.  So, is it possible for you to work yourself out of a job quickly?  Thank you.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Members for their good questions, except in some cases where they asked the same questions I had already answered. Nevertheless, I will be very brief. The current members of DRIC are the same old ones, except the hon. Members of Parliament, who were removed by a Resolution of Parliament. We are in the process of appointing others to replace them, because their term of office ended.  

The other question from hon. Kabasharira was; has there been a case where a land title was transferred, for someone who had not paid? Yes, there was one case where SHOWA Enterprises was able to produce a land title, which was genuine, and the land title which was at Privatisation Unit was the fake one. We have asked the CID to establish how Government would hold the wrong title and the buyer would hold the right one. CID will soon tell us how this took place, and I am sure hon. Kabasharira knew that, but did not want to mention it.

The second question was by hon. Nkuuhe; is there a delay in the payment for UTL? There is no delay because the terms of reference of the buying of shares in UTL stated that the winner shall pay within 120 days from the day of opening the bids. The bids were opened on February 5th, and 120 days ended on 5th June. However, we expect the bidder in the country on Tuesday, because we have already finalised the post-bid negotiations. We hope things will go well.  

His second question was on the second national operator. Actually, the first national operator is Uganda Telecommunications Limited.  MTN is the second one of what was existing. Five years run from when the contract was signed or somewhere thereabout. I do not have dates. 

Hon. Ndeezi asked whether employment is positive. Yes, enterprises that have been divested are not just liquidated. Employment is positive in terms of increase of numbers. In many cases, the jobs lost are less than the jobs gained. Although, of course, the people employed are not the people who lost the jobs, but they are also other Ugandans who got the jobs. If you want exact numbers, it would need heavy research to establish the exact employment increase in each enterprise. However, the jobs have increased and samples are very easy to get. Even if you look at Hima cement or Nytil, they have got more employees than they had at the time of divestiture.  

Did you hear Printpak, hon. Nyai? I thought you did, but if you did not, I will read it again.  Printpak was bought in June 95, for a sale of price 900 million shillings. 75 million has so far been collected, and there is a balance of 825 million.  However, in the privatisation process of Printpak, there was some kind of misconception. Government did not own the whole of it, it was also owned by another organisation, and it had been mortgaged to East African Development Bank. So, these assets are mortgaged, and the buyers have refused to pay, unless the old mortgage is removed. In other words, they did not buy anything genuinely, because there is nothing they paid for, even with the little they paid for. There is a wrangle for the ownership of the whole thing (Interruption).

MR.WACHA: Can I seek clarification in respect to that? Is the industry running? And who is running it? Who is collecting proceeds from the industry now?

MR. NYAI: I would like to seek further clarification, Mr. Speaker. If Government sold an industry, which was mortgaged, and Government is aware it was mortgaged, because the Minister is saying so, what steps has Government taken to remove the encumbrance? 

Secondly, if the mortgage was to a bank, it attracts interests, and therefore, I would like to ask the Minister, in all these matters, with the sales price and with the delay in payment, is the Privatisation Unit charging commercial interest at bank rates to the people who have not paid up funds as expected?  Thank you.

MR. AWORI:  Would the hon. Minister also consider or has he considered absorbing encumbrances as part of our internal debt?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEEE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Well, should we consider absorbing it as internal debt? We shall consider it and see whether the pros and cons actually give us a way forward. It is being run but limping, meaning that actually it is on the verge of collapse.

I do not think, when we talk about having sold and then having little money, that it means we have lost money. I do not think so. Anyone who knows accounting knows that. We have paid the expenses and liabilities, and I took time to say that we actually had to absorb certain loan portfolios. Now, the question is; what would you do with those loans if these were Government companies? Should you have left them around? You would not, because they would sue you. So, we had to absorb them. So, it is really not a loss.  Even if you put up a Commission of Inquiry, you will find that nobody has lost money, but money has been paid for the liabilities that existed in those enterprises and I gave an example of an existing enterprise. If an existing enterprise has borrowed money rightly and it is being privatised, you have, as Government, to take over the liability. If you cannot take it over, who will take it? 

Where no full payment has been made, what is the corrective measure? The corrective measure is what we charge 15 per cent on the outstanding balance. However, as we talk now, and this is a concern of some Members of Parliament here who know and those in the private sector, that Africa Textile Mill is about to collapse. Even if you took it over and you sold its total assets, you would not realise 1.6/= billion. So, we have to think of the option either to write-off the purchase price or to let it collapse and lose the money. Either way, we are not getting it. 

Nytil Picfare, which hon. Bwambale said is a wonderful company, I can assure you, is neither wonderful nor performing. It is a loss making company. Please do not mix Nytil Picfare with Picfare exercise books, the two are separate limited liability companies, and they are completely different from each other.  

Nytil Picfare has failed to pay, and as we stand now, the Commonwealth Development Corporation, which lent Nytil US $ 7 million in order for it to be able to perform, has not been paid back. And anytime now, Nytil Picfare will be under receivership and both of us will lose (Interruption)

MR. AWORI: Mr. Speaker, I am very perturbed by the hon. Minister's statement about Nytil Picfare. The same Government that sold Nytil to this group, wherever it came from, is the same Government that placed an order of nearly US $5 million worth of uniforms for UPDF, and the same Government did not live up to their commitments; they never went ahead with the order. Can the hon. Minister or his Colleague in Defence, tell us why they keep doing this kind of thing? One minute they want the companies to succeed, and the next minute they are sending money to China and to Korea to buy the same goods we would have manufactured here. Could they tell us what this kind of internal sabotage is all about? We have had enough of it! I think they should resign!

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I would like the Minister to clarify to this House whether it is true that some of the people who are buying these enterprises intentionally, actually, want to sabotage the peasant who grows cotton, so that they keep on importing foreign textiles.  Is this true?  Is this happening?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Minister still has many questions to go through, why do we not let him go through those and if you have more questions, I will give you an opportunity.

MR. BAMWANGA:  Mr. Speaker, this is pertinent to Nytil Picfare. 

THE SPEAKER: This specific one?

MR. BAMWANGA: Yes, Mr. Speaker. I have heard the Minister say that Nytil Picfare borrowed US $7 million from CDC. I am sure when they borrowed this money, it was meant either to buy the company or to revamp the company. Are we sure that they did not use our titles to secure this loan? And if they got the money using our title, why did the proprietors, Nytil Picfare, not pay some money which was substantial?

MRS. BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am feeling saddened to hear from the Minister that Nytil Picfare is not making profit, when uniforms are being made in this country. It makes me think there is some other issue, other than divesting these enterprises. Could it be that after getting these enterprises, the money is not ploughed back or the management is poor? What is fundamentally wrong, so that we may revisit this law?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  First of all, I think hon. Aggrey Awori's question is not mine, it should be directed to Defence, because I do not participate in Defence purchases. 

The issue as to whether there is sabotage to the people who grow cotton or not, I do not think so and I do not know about it. However, I do not think anybody is out to sabotage growers of cotton. Enterprises can be big and heavy, total sales can be in billions, but you can still make a loss. Somebody may ask why. That is the way business operates. You can operate a business and have a turnover of 100/= billion and make a loss of 10/= billion, that is normal and acceptable worldwide, and it happens every day. So, if you want to find out why Nytil Picfare is making a loss, that is a different issue, we have to establish - (Mr. Nyai rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Dick Nyai, let us give the Minister an opportunity to finish answering the questions, then we shall give you an opportunity.

MR. NYAI:  It is just a simple question, Mr. Speaker. Is the Minister saying that if I have a turnover of 100 billion shillings and I do my books in such a way to reflect a loss, I am running at a loss?

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: I will invite hon. Dick Nyai, after here, to look at how we make losses and how we account for them, because that is very simple. I do not think Parliament is a place where we can teach accounts.  

Hon. Bamwanga's clarification was whether CDC lent, and therefore used, the title that we have. If you have an enterprise, you have got a title, and you can have a first charge, you can have a second charge, and you can have a subordinated charge. It depends on how you handle your business.  I hope that is clear. 

I think hon. Okumu Ringa was not around when I said, the remaining enterprises were 47 and I read them out. So, I do not think I should read them out again. Can we have stock exchange? Yes, we are going to, but you see, the stock exchange requires an enterprise that is profitable, or whose existence as a going concern can be projected to be profitable. So, we are looking at enterprises that can be in that category and we are clearing the debt burden of those enterprises, to be able to be put on the consolidated thing. I agree with him, we will do it, but where I do not agree with him is when he says we have stopped the idea of first of all restructuring, commercialising and then divesting. We are now divesting, as is now, to avoid further unnecessary expenditure. 

Hon. Bamwanga asked whether NSSF was going to be privatised.  Good thing. Of all the enterprises going to be privatised, NSSF was not one of them, because it is not out for privatisation. The only thing I know about the pension fund is that it will be liberalised to include some other participants, but NSSF will not be privatised.

Am I satisfied with the process? Yes, I am, because we have now streamlined the procedure. And we think that the procedure, the way it is, has minimised the chances of messing up the exercise.  

Hon. Ben Wacha wants to know the personalities behind the companies. It is good that hon. Ben Wacha is a lawyer; companies which are limited are themselves personalities, they are corporate bodies. Hon. Lukyamuzi - (Interruption) 

MR. WACHA: Let me clarify, Sir. I said I wanted to know the directors of the companies which have not yet paid off.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I need another notice to go and dig out all the directors of each enterprise. But what I came with was the personalities who bought, and I read them out. Limited liabilities companies are really personalities, so if he wants, he can bring up another question, I will come with them (Interruption).

MR. WACHA: Sir, the purpose of supplementary questions is so that they go into the details, which were not covered by the original question. Supplementaries are part and parcel of the question. So, if the Minister wants me again to raise another question, I am telling him that the supplementary I raised is perfectly in order. Can the Minister, when he is circulating his schedule, do the needful and provide for this House the names of the directors of those companies, which have not paid off the monies due to the people of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: I thought the Minister has said that he will provide the names of the directors? That is what he said.  Although, towards the end, he again said another thing, but it was unnecessary. Having accepted to provide the details of the directors, there was no need to say that he should come up with another question.  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will try and get the names of the directors and give them out, but the document I am talking about is already with me, I will leave it with the clerk to circulate. I will try and dig out that specific part on all the directors. It is not a simple thing to say I can now tell you all the directors of the enterprises. But it is very easy, I will get them.

I do not know where hon. Lukyamuzi got the idea that His Excellency Kagame bought Nytil. My understanding is that he did not. At least on that one, I know that the buyers are only two people, who are brothers, the Kishur brothers, they are the only owners of Nytil Picfare. So, I do not know any other. If there is any other information, I think it is only with hon. Lukyamuzi - (Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Speaker, in mentioning His Excellency Kagame, I was quoting the Monitor newspaper, which published that information. And since that information was published, nobody has challenged it.  It was on the front page, so I took it for granted that since it was not challenged, it was a fact. And I am sure the Minister cannot speak on behalf of His Excellency Kagame.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, I am sure the hon. Members of this House are most knowledgeable about whether those Paper reports are always 100 percent correct. I am sure in this House we all know whether Papers are always 100 percent correct. If hon. Lukyamuzi believes that everything written in the newspaper is always 100 correct, I think that is his belief and he is entitled to it. However, I do not think it is Government duty to always go out and argue and answer to every article in the newspaper everyday. However, I am now saying that His Excellency Kagame is not part of the privatisation process of Uganda, he did not buy any Nytil Picfare, because at least for that one, I know the buyers and they are around (Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you for giving me way, hon. Minister, and thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to just add extra information for hon. Lukyamuzi, and probably for those who believed the story in the Monitor. The owners of Picfare Nytil had a company in Kigali doing textile business called Tex-Rwa. The company is called Tex-Rwa and it is in Rwanda. They have a big factory there, which manufactures clothing, bitenge and the like. I think it was attacked during the genocide period, and they actually re-located and they were looking to start somewhere, and then they bought in here. So, it is because of that rounder connection that some of our people who would like to write anything started looking and reading President Kagame's name into it. Otherwise, it is a fake story, and it should not be believed. 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, the other question was; what is the plan for the money? I made it extremely clear that although we have got a surplus of 14.6 billion shillings, the obligations are 17.8 billion shillings. So, the current obligations unmet are actually 17.8 billion shillings. If we were to meet them today, we would have a deficit. So, that is how we use the money -(An hon. Member rose_)- Can I continue?  Do you want to inform me where the money is?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: With reference to what hon. Elly Karuhanga has said, this House should not forget what has been said in the past. A whole Minister in Government, from Kiboga, who is the Minister in charge of Luwero now, openly said sometime back that His Excellency Kagame owns some land in Kiboga. If he is able to own land in Kiboga, is it surprising that he would acquire shares in Nytil, which is also Ugandan based?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think this is incredible, it is unbelievable! Because I own a piece of land in Soroti, must it follow that I should own one in Kabale? What kind of reasoning is that, you are just wasting time! Can the Minister proceed!

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEEE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have and hold the land title for Nile Hotel, so there is no problem with it. GCPC is a trading company, it actually has no assets, it is a trading company. And I think Government has reached a stage where we should not be involved in the sell of tyres, tubes, paper, staples, and make losses. I do not think you want a Government, which is permanently selling staples. What are the recoverable advances? Before an enterprise is privatised, we lend it some money sometimes. For instance, Nile hotel had a shortfall and we lent them 1.1 billion shillings to rehabilitate the hotel so that it works. Those are called recoverable advances. We have not privatised the enterprise, but we lent it some money to operate until such a time as we actually privatise the enterprise.

Hon. Bwambale, I have already answered your question, we should de-link textiles from Picfare books, the two are not the same. I want to assure this House that as far as I am concerned, and as far as I know now, there are no workers of enterprises that have been privatised who have not been paid.  The last one was Lira Spinning Mill, and we paid them their dues of 1.4 billion shillings two months ago. And as I talk now, there are no enterprises where employees are not paid. There may be scattered individuals who, maybe by mistake, were not paid among the other groups paid, but these are case by case basis, and as they come up, we go to the Auditor General. If we find that they were not paid genuinely and they were genuine beneficiaries, then we pay them - (Interruption)

MR. WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the Minister that there are people in Jinja, who were in the East African Steel Corporation, who have not been paid. There are many former employees, and they have been actually disturbing us continuously, and we did send them to the Privatisation Unit, but even up to this morning, they were pestering me about that issue. So, when I hear you saying that, I get disturbed.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEEE: Mr. Speaker, among the enterprises I read, which are not yet privatised, East African Steel Works was included, so I am right. In any case, we have paid them a deposit, but we disagreed on the rates. So, we are now working to see whether there should have been more or less; however, we have not privatised.

As soon as we are ready, we shall let hon. Bwambale know what how we are going to handle Kasese cobalt and how the individuals and other people can participate.

Hon. Karuhanga asked whether the legal contracts have a clause of penalty or a termination clause? Yes, they do, and I read out the enterprises whose contracts have so far been cancelled. Before you came in, I said that three divestitures had to be cancelled and are now subject to further review. These enterprises include Uganda Commercial Bank with the Westmont group, Nile Hotel International with Taha Fourati, and Apollo Hotel Corporation with Midroc. So, certainly, there is always a clause, and where we can get it out, we use it.

On Diary Corporation, we de-linked it to be -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Minister misunderstood my question. Can I get a chance to put it so that he can answer me properly? I was not referring to those cases, which he has just mentioned, I was referring to people who have failed to pay. The list, which he enumerated, was a very long list, and that is what I was referring to. So, being a new broom, is he going to exercise his freshness in terminating those contracts so that they are put back on the market? That is what I wanted to know. 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEEE: Mr. Speaker, there are companies I read, which have not paid. I can read them again. African Textile Mill owes us 1.6 billion shillings. It is on the block. I said, it is about to be put under-receivership. Whether we say pay or not, it cannot pay. That is the fact, and as Charles Biggen says, facts, facts and nothing but facts only.

Lango Development Company had problems because of some internal insecurity, and we agreed with them so that they pay over time and they are paying in instalments. They are now remaining with a balance of 24 million shillings.

On Nytil Picfare, which still owes 7.8 billion shillings to Uganda Government and 7 million dollars to CDC, we are still in the process of seeing how we can either help the industry, by laying off 1100 workers in one town, or if we cannot, we let it go under receivership and the workers go and rule. Mark you, since it is already sold, it is no longer under Privatisation, we cannot pay those workers. So, as a concerned Government, we are trying to see how best we can at least maintain the workers, but otherwise, even if we forced them to pay and we sold the assets, I do not think they would raise the money. So, either way, cancellation or no cancellation, it would not work.
I have told you, -(Interruption)

MR. AWORI: I would like to thank the hon. Minister for giving way. When the hon. Minister talks about Government recovering the outstanding money from a company or from a buyer who took over a parastatal body, do they ever consider assisting such a buyer, by placing firm orders for goods or services, instead of taking this business abroad? Are we really serious about the so called, foreign investors? Why do we go abroad to buy the same goods and we refuse to assist them, so that we even recover the money they are supposed to owe us? He cannot answer that question.  Mr. Speaker, I beg your assistance.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEEE: Mr. Speaker, my Brother, Awori, is asking very good questions, but to the wrong person. The Privatisation Unit is not the purchasing arm of Government. I do not think my schedule includes reporting on behalf of Defence, Internal Affairs or any other Ministry. My duties are very clear; I know them and I am trying to do them. Nevertheless, if you are saying that I should act as a public relations officer for the privatised enterprises, that is an added schedule - (Interjections)- but of course, you have got to pay me more for that.

Hon. Karuhanga was worried about Diary Corporation. We have de-linked the Diary Corporation operations part and the Diary Corporation policy part. We have returned the policy part to Ministry of Agriculture, and the technical staff are working out details on how we can privatise Diary Corporation, either by floating it or by other means. We would welcome ideas from you. 

Can we really put all these enterprises on the market at the same time? The answer is no. Any good businessman cannot put all enterprises at the same time on the market because then, you cannot get buyers -(Interjection)- Yes, I know. Mr. Speaker, if I can be protected (Mr. Awori rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, you are about to become violent, and I will swiftly restrain you.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: Mr. Speaker, the total GDP of the country is 6.6 trillion shillings, not much! And the monetary part of that GDP is 64 per cent, but if you look at the internal rate of earnings of individuals who can participate in this, it is not so high so that you can put all the enterprises on the market at the same time. However, if that was the wish, we can put them all, but you will be surprised. 

The other issue is that each enterprise has got to be worked on. You have got to have a transaction action plan. Now, that means you have got to have a transaction plan for 47 enterprises and that means you have got to have at least 47 employees. That means Privatisation will be another Ministry. All these are issues that we consider, and I can assure you, we now have a programme to finalise the privatisation process by June 2005 latest. I will give you the reason why. To privatise Uganda Railways Corporation, for instance, you cannot wake up one day and do it, you have got to advertise it. You have got to write the programme very well, you have to write the contract documents very well, and you have got to be able to make sure that things move rightly, otherwise, you will go back to the mess. But I would invite hon. Members to have a look at the  -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA: I am sorry to interrupt the hon. Minister as he assures us that he is not ready to privatise all these companies immediately. I would like to know which companies he is ready to privatise this year, for example? 

Secondly, let us assume there is pharmacy to be sold, and there is a person who deals in pharmacies who wants to buy it, if he would know that it is to be sold in 2004 or 2005, he would not come here. So, I would like to know whether this is all calculated to keep employment.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I am now giving you the opportunity to finish your questions.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINEE: I thank you very much, because that helps me also. We have the schedule, and I will avail that schedule to hon. Karuhanga as soon as he wants it.  We have a schedule of when each enterprise will go, and we do not entertain someone coming in to the office and saying, I want to buy this enterprise, negotiate with me. We advertise and you come and bid with everybody else.

Finally, the issues of Uganda Commercial Bank are very close to me. I know that. But as you all realise, Uganda Commercial Bank had a few problems in the last privatisation exercise. Westmont came, bolted, over lent, and currently we are in the process of legal dis-entanglement of the problem, but I can say, even at the Supreme Court, we have won the case. We have taken the case now to arbitration, and the reason we are going for arbitration is, even if we won the case, attachment of the shares of Westmont now will not yield much. But we hope that when we get arbitration, and if it is in our favour, we can attach other worldwide holdings of Westmont.

I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the hon. Kabasharira for asking the question. I hope it has made a difference, and people will now understand privatisation and support it. I thank you.  

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE CIVIL PROCEDURE AND LIMITATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, hon. Members of Parliament, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, "The Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) (amendment) Bill, 2000" be read a Second Time.

Sir, this Bill intends to amend Section 2(1) of the Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provision) Act, 1969, Act 20. Now, this Section reads as follows:
"No action founded on tort shall be brought against, 
the Government; or 
a local authority; or 
a scheduled corporation, 
after the expiration of twelve months from the date on which the cause of action arose". 

This means that if - and God forbid - I was run down by a vehicle by hon. Rwakoojo, and he happens to be a Member of one of the schedule corporations, I would only be able to sue the corporation within 12 months from the day I was run over. This is unless, of course, I was suffering under some disability, for instance, if I was a young person. But if hon. Rwakoojo was not working for a corporation or a Government Ministry or whatever, I would have three years to sue. Why does my right to sue depend on disability, and then time keeps on running?  

So, there is clear discrimination here between actions against Government for torts and actions against other citizens. This is why the Government had decided to reduce discrimination by giving 12 months for actions brought against the Government, against local authorities, and against scheduled corporations. So, now we seek to amend the 12 months to two years, and I think that is much better than the present situation. So, Sir, I beg to move.  

THE CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) (amendment) Bill, 2000, was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for consideration as required by the Rules of the House.  

The Committee considered the Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1969, and held discussions with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

Act 20 of 1969, Section 2 (1), which the Bill seeks to amend, provides: 
"No action founded on tort shall be brought against  
the Government; or 
a local authority; or
a scheduled corporation, 
after the expiration of twelve months from the date on which the cause of action arose.

The Bill seeks to increase the period from 12 months to two years. The Committee observed that many actions have been defeated because of the short period within which an aggrieved person is required to bring a suit against Government.

During times of armed conflict, for example, rights of individuals are often trampled upon by servants of Government acting in the course of their employment. Such individuals may not have access to legal services because of the conflict at that time. The increase of the period to two years gives an opportunity to aggrieved persons to enforce their rights, when they could otherwise have been unable to do so.

Further, many have been unable to enforce their rights against the scheduled corporations and local authorities, such as Kampala City Council and Custodian Board, because they are not aware that they must bring action within a period of 12 months. An increase in this period will give more time to persons with tortuous claims to realise their rights.   

The Bill will enhance administration of substantive justice and lessen reliance on technicalities.  

The Committee recommends that in future, Government should address entire Acts under review, so as to come up with comprehensive amendments. The Committee is aware that there are several areas in the Act, which require amendments. For example, the Schedule to the Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1969 lists corporations, which have ceased to exist, such as Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation, Uganda Airlines and Lint Marketing Board. These remain part of the law, notwithstanding the fact that an amendment is sought in another area. The Committee's mandate does not, however, extend to considering this.

The Committee recommends that the Bill be enacted into law.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA (Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to support this Bill because it will enhance administration of justice.

When you look at the way the Ministry of Justice, and particularly the administration of Justice is handled, and more so when it relates to suits against the Government, there are a lot of bureaucracies and delays. And these delays may arise, not because the Government does not want justice to be administered, but because of lack of knowledge or the distance an aggrieved person may faced with in handling the case. 

This Bill restricts itself to the aspect of 12 months, pushing it to two years thus making it 24 months. Whereas I support the Motion, and particularly the amendment, I would have wished for the Minister to consider a proposed amendment to push this period to 36 months instead of 24 months. If this period is extended to 36 months, this will assist and enhance the administration of justice. The Constitution is very clear on the aspect of technicalities in the administration of justice. Article 126 (2) (e) emphasises that, and it provides as follows:substantive justice shall be administered without undue regard to technicalities.  

This means that the Minister is putting into operation this aspect of the Constitution. Unless otherwise, the Minister should give strong reasons as to why this period should not go to three years. I will move an amendment that will push it to three years.  

My last point is with regard to the need for the Minister to bring an amendment later on, to remove the period of statutory notice, which is usually required. If you have any claim against the Government, you have to give statutory notice of 60 days to the Attorney General and to all scheduled corporations, but 60 days is fairly a long time. Even if you consider what is being extended, the 60 days still eats into the actual process. This is one of the reasons why I justify my proposal for amendment, to have the period as three years.  

I would like to thank the Minister for having brought this amendment, and I would like to urge him to consider the two issues I have raised. There is a need to completely remove the statutory notice or to reduce it to 30 days, it is not part of this amendment, but he can consider it when he considers the review generally. I thank you.

MR. NSAMBU NSUBUGA (Makindye West, Kampala): Mr. Speaker, I have been in practise for sometime, and have found this Act a nuisance. We are required to give notice of 60 days. To the injured people, and even to me, we find a notice of 60 days too long and laborious. They would like it reduced to 30 days. I think that is reasonable. That will give the scheduled corporation or the local government or the Attorney General enough time to prepare themselves; 30 days should be enough.  

Secondly, the Minister has brought just a small portion of the tortuous cases for amendment, but I think the question of contracts should also be considered. Three years is too little for somebody to decide to take the Government to court, because Government contracts are usually very big and they involve a very big sum of money. With that view, you find a man deciding to add good money on bad money. It is really very dangerous!  So, if he was given a period of 6 years, that would have been quite reasonable. After all, even when you win, there is no chance for you to attach Government properties. 

It is also wrong to equate local governments to the central Government, so that you give them such a wide area. The secretary of a local government is more capable of deciding whether he will go ahead with the case within only a short time. And not only that, even if he gave notice, this notice does not help, because on many occasions, the Attorney General never answers those notices. He says you can do what you want yet again when you have already filed your suit, you find yourself in a very difficult position. The Attorney General may have failed to file a defence in time and you have to go there and beg and ask if he has even seen your plaintiff and summons.  This is just because you want to make the working machinery friendly, rather than an attack on the Government. So, in the circumstances, if the Minister is really serious, he should be thinking of increasing the period of the contractual liabilities to six years.

Thirdly, when you look at schedules themselves, they are extremely out of date. Things have changed a good deal, and you find that schedule one does not really mean much now. They have been changing portion by portion, and when you want to compile these things, on many occasions you will not be able tress the statutory instruments which have changed the schedule of the corporations. You will find -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are referring to schedules which the hon. Members may not have.  But I would like you, if you really do not mind, to confine yourself to this proposed amendment introducing this Bill. You are making references to schedules and to certain other things, which are not before Members. It might make it difficult for them to appreciate your line of argument, which I thought was intended to either support this amendment brought by the Minister or as hon. Okumu Ringa says, not to support it, because he thinks the period is too short. I appreciate your point; you would want a review of the entire Act at a later date or under associate laws.

MR. NSAMBU: Thank you very, Mr. Speaker. I would have entertained that advice, but as I am speaking, I am directly speaking to the Minister so that if he was to review the revision of this Act, he would know where the amendment should be. That is why I am referring to these schedules to let him know that some of the scheduled corporations are no longer in existence. So, I have to take the little he has given us. I would not like to go back, but if I had an opportunity to amend, I would have preferred to amend the whole thing. That will take us a long time, as you have said, because some Members are not conversant with these restrictions contained in this Limitation Act. So, in light of that, I support the amendment with reservations.

MR. KARUHANGA ELLY (Nyabushozi County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very great moment for me in my life as a lawyer, and I want to give personal testimony on this Bill, in order to help Members understand what this law is all about.  

I lived with this law for ten years, when I was a practising State Attorney in the Ministry of Justice, where, Mr. Speaker, you served as Solicitor General later. It is a dream law for any State Attorney. This is the law every State Attorney knows. When you wake him up in the night and say what is the best law you have ever seen, he will say, 'the Civil Procedure and Limitations (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act of 1969.'  Why?  This is a short-cut. It is a short cut to any thinking of any lawyer.  You just turn up in court, and when the man comes up saying that his son's eye was removed at school by the principal, and the son is there, you say I am quoting the Civil Procedure and Limitations (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act of 1969. And then you say that the notice, which the plaintiff is using, was short of one day, it was not 60 days, it was short by one day. Then you sit down.  Then the judge looks at the child who is injured, and he looks at the law and tells you, you have lost the case. Then you see the parents and the whole village yelling and crying, and you go out as a young State Attorney telling the Solicitor General that I have managed to defeat them; and the Solicitor General says you are very good lawyer. This is how Government has been treating our people. I used this law many, many times.  

Any State Attorney who works in the civil department in the Ministry of Justice will tell you that he or she relies on this law perpetually to defeat justice. To make matters worse, it is not the notice, which is painful, it is also the time when you must bring your cause of action. If you were crushed by a Government vehicle, you must sue within one year. If the Government has wronged you in any way, you must sue Government within one year. What happens to our people? They go and see a lawyer in a very busy law firm, and they say I have a case.  The lawyers say pay fees to open your case and the person does not have the money. He goes home to look for money and two or three months later, he turns up. He puts in a deposit and then he goes to look for more, and he keeps depositing. By the time the lawyer brings the case to put 60 days' notice, it is already too late.  Because if you wait for 60 days, and the person has come in the month of November, it is too late for you to be able to serve the Attorney General. In the process, the State Attorney wins the case very easily and the lawyer cannot even tell the person that, by the way, we are late; and he will get his fees. This is what has been going on with our colleagues in the profession. You will get the poor person's fees, go to court, lose the case and say, they defeated us on technicality.  The person does not know what technicality is. Now, the Government has seen how unfair it has been, and it is saying no, now we can increase to two years, but they are not talking about the notice. I hope the hon. Members understand what this law is about; but that is only for tort.  

What is tort?  Again, hon. Members may not understand what tort is. Tort is civil suit, like where you have been injured, either they have slapped you or the muluka chief has given you kiboko or you have been wronged, but in all other matters of civil nature, other than contractual matters. When it is a contract and three years have passed and you have not sued Government, no matter what contract you have, they say you were sleeping on your rights. But for you and me to enter into the contract, you can sue me after the limitation period - I think it is six years, Mr. Speaker, you can help me on this. Yet Government, which is in a stronger position, gives itself a protection of three years. 

Now, the Minister has only amended one year and has said you can sue me in two years, and I really would like to thank the hon. Minister. It is his Christian background that is behind this law.  He has been able to bring it out, and I want to thank him for that. But really, the reason we have a Minister of Justice as opposed to having an Attorney General is because the Minister of Justice is supposed to make sure that we have got just laws.  This law, in my view, is very unjust, and in fact, if we had a strong legal system, this law would be challenged as being unconstitutional. Of course, this is a debatable issue, but it favours the stronger party in the suit, and the stronger party should be the one which should not be favoured too much.  

Now we have a chance, we have arrived at this law, and unfortunately, Members are not very conversant with the full impact of this law. If they were, they would really take this opportunity to give this law thorough surgery, so that we can live in a just society. I have been in private practice after serving as a State Attorney. I represent people, but without naming some of my clients, I want to tell you how painful this law is. 

Recently, my client entered into a contract with a scheduled corporation. They signed an agreement, in which the scheduled corporation is supposed to pay my client up to more than a billion shillings. After signing and putting a date for paying, the days have passed. When we go to ask them to pay, they are not there. Four months have passed, and they are now in breach. We now have to give them 60 days' notice in order for them to prepare themselves to be sued.  Now we are in April, so 60 days will give them up to July without paying this money.  Then when it goes to court, of course, you know there will be postponements. They will put in a written statement of defence of some sort, and in the process, justice is denied and defeated.  

This is a very unfair law, and I do not know why the Committee did not take chance, especially knowing who the Chairman of the Committee is. Why didnt he take the opportunity and establish a just law and maybe delete it from the books, or at least make Government more advantaged but not at such a very serious advantage. 

I have no alternative, but support the Minister of Justice and thank him for moving from one year to a miserable two years.  But, I would have liked him to also remove the 60 days of notice, and I would like him also to address the question of the contract from three years to 6 years. You must know that even when you are disabled or an infant, you are supposed to bring your case within 12 months of achieving your majority age. Even if you have been disabled, on stopping being disabled, they count 12 months, even before you have even organised yourself -  (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, I wish you could use the word in the law; it is not disabled, because if you used disabled, you might confuse us.

MR. KARUHANGA: No, Mr. Speaker, in the Act, disabled means even infants, for this purpose. And it says that a person  -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, I thought you were being more and more complicated. If you can simplify your submission, it would help us.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank hon. Karuhanga for giving way. Hon. Karuhanga is a Member of the Business Committee of this House, and hon. Karuhanga is a lawyer, he knows the procedure. We bring these Bills and other business, and lay them on the Table. We do this so that, besides Members of the various Committees, other Members of the House, who have either specialised knowledge or an interest in the business at hand, can go to these Committees and do a good job. 

Hon. Karuhanga, with due respect, is taking us back, so I seek clarification from him. Is it only now that he should be making these very fundamental contributions on this Bill. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issue is; do you or dont you support this amendment to increase the period of limitation?

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I thank the Minister, I support the idea, but I want the hon. Members to be able to understand the total impact of this law. As for hon. Kagonyera, he is right, I should have been much more concerned at an early stage and made the necessary provisions. I was unable to, because it actually caught my notice only yesterday, and I realised that when the Minister was moving this Motion and came up with a provision like this, it seems the Committee found that their hands were tied and they could not even make amendments -(Interruption)

MR. NSUBUGA NSAMBU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform Members that it has not been our habit in the past to come back with these law books, but the society is really suffering so much, and we thought it was better to come up with these books so that we can adequately quote from them. I never told my brother Karuhanga to bring his, but I thought I would not state my case better without coming up with this book. So, that is why we have brought these books, and we pray that the Minister takes real consideration of the seriousness of this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Karuhanga, can you make your concluding remarks. 

MR. KARUHANGA: My concluding remarks, Mr. Speaker, are that there is a bit of confusion, which I would like to bring to the notice of the Minister. This confusion also appears in the legal profession. When they talk of scheduled corporations in the real Act, which is what hon. Nsambu was trying to say earlier on, they have been amended by various statutory instruments. Some have been added and others have died. And now with privatisation, some have become limited liability companies and others are not. And some limited liability companies, which are public companies, are not scheduled and others are scheduled. 

So, it is very important to actually streamline this, because there is complete chaos when you want to sue a Government body. And I want to take this opportunity, in contribution to a general debate of this nature, to inform the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs about the outcry in the legal profession, not only about this law, but also about the justice situation in the country. 

After the painful procedure of going through this law, six months, then one year, working within a certain framework of trying to pursue justice, then you go to court you spend such a long time trying to get a judgement. I tell you, hon. Members, it is not easy to get a judgement in our Uganda courts. Once you get judgement for your client against the Government, it is the biggest joke, because that judgement is almost useless. You go and serve the Attorney General and say, I have my judgement, can I be paid?  The Attorney General says it is the Minister of Defence, and their budget is drawn. You cannot attach a vehicle of the Ministry of Defence, you cannot attach a vehicle of hon. Kweronda in charge of Monitoring, you cannot attach a vehicle of the Minister of Justice, and you cannot say anything about Government. There is a law, which -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, can you come to your conclusion.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, it is very important that we say this and put it in our Hansard, to show the state of our laws and the nature of Government as a party in justice; it is so protected that suing it is a waste of time. 

And then we have what they call domestic arrears. When you hear about domestic arrears, they are coming out of this situation. You get a judgement, it is part of domestic arrears and who pays domestic arrears; it is not the Minister of Justice it is the Minister of Finance. The Minister of Justice has no chance to decide who should be paid. What the Minister of Justice does is to say to the Minister of Finance we have been sued, we are defeated please pay them, and that is the end of the story. The agony out there of our population, of people whom we represent, of our clients, is too much. Right now, we are loaning Government more money than the World Bank, almost as much as the debts that are pending by the Government. I could go on and on, but let me stop here. I support this Motion.

THE SPEAKER: I think the sentiments you have expressed have been well taken, especially by the practising lawyers. 

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like also to thank the hon. Minister of Justice for bringing this amendment. And I would like, in particular, to appreciate the remarks of the Committee, but also say it was not adequate. The most important thing would have been for the hon. Minister of Justice to submit a comprehensive review and amendment of this Statute.  

This Statue is bad enough to plastic surgery by this small amendment. In fact, this amendment should have considered clause 1 of the Act in order to reduce the time of notice at the same time.

I am not satisfied that the hon. Minister in trying to overhaul this law and give justice to the citizens of this country, should have brought this small amendment. I consider this amendment to be a token. It is a token, and on that ground, I would rather go by the view of the Committee that the hon. Minister should bring a more comprehensive amendment, which deals with the notices, with torts, with contracts and with schedules. Then we can see the hon. Minister actually seeking for justice to be delivered. For that reason, I oppose the entire amendment, and I would like to recommend that the amendment of this Bill be rejected, so that the hon. Minister can go back and come back to the House with a more comprehensive Bill.

As to the hon. Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister, you must appreciate that we are all very busy in different Committees, coupled with seminars and workshops, all of which encroach on hon. Members of Parliaments time. So, it is very difficult for all of us even if we may be very keen, to sit on all the Committees and make contributions there.  So, when we make contributions on the Floor and make an effort to make sure that on this occasion, you are here to make your contribution, it should be accepted as very genuine and really most welcome.  But I oppose the Bill, and I wish that it is rejected, and the hon. Minister is asked to go back and bring a more comprehensive amendment in fitting with the need to improve on the delivery of justice, based on this particular provision.  I thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA MICHAEL (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the Motion for amendment, and I thank the Minister and Government for bringing in this amendment. I thank hon. Elly Karuhanga, from Nyabushozi, for really having educated us. Some of us are not specialised in this field, but I am happy that, at least, we have been irrigated with the knowledge of the law, we now can appreciate the actual content and intent of this amendment.

Law is a matter of great concern to this country, and it is quite clear that justice delayed is just denied. I am happy that the Minister has come in with this amendment, which focuses on streamlining the unconstitutional laws, which are inherent in our midst.  

I would like to say that, for us in Teso, having gone through insurgency, we have seen a lot of people who have taken Government to court. A number of our people, during this insurgency, lost a lot of property. But having sued the Attorney General, it is now close to 10 years from the time war stopped in Teso, and I continue to be bombarded by my constituents and other people from various constituencies, who come to me in trying to seek justice and get compensation for property they lost in that rebellion.

It is unfortunate that as we talk now, a lot of these claims still lie with the Minister of Defence and with the Attorney General. Very few people have been compensated. It is because the law and the implementation of this law sometimes is inadequate. As my other Colleagues have articulated very clearly, it is difficult to implement judgement, which has already been given by courts of law in this country. The law in this country, in Article 1 of the Constitution, says power belongs to the people. Now, if the Judiciary does its part, for us in Parliament, we have already empowered them by giving them the necessary laws for constitutional governance, but if the Executive fails to implement them, it therefore shows that we are not acting to prescribe democracy and justice to our people.  

It is against this background that I would like to say that the statutory notice of 60 days, within the framework of the notice and the time schedule the Minister has described of 1 year, would definitely lead to an abortion of the intentions of trying to bring justice and asking Government to live within the framework of the law.  It is within this arrangement, as I support this amendment, that I will, at Committee Stage, move amendments to extend the period to at least a minimum of either 3 years or 4 years. 

If we have a shorter period of implementation, it will be difficult, taking into account that sometimes we are constrained by our own inadequacies. Government has got shortfalls. For example, this financial year, the shortfalls are projected at close to 70 billion shillings. If we have got outstanding domestic arrears of 260 billion shillings, we are paying an average of 12 billion per month, and on top of that, other budgetary pressures do emerge. Definitely, the Director of Budget, or the Secretary to the Treasury, will eliminate some of these areas of the law. If the statutory period expires, it means, therefore, that you cannot enforce this law. Therefore, in support of this amendment, I would like to urge the Minister, hon. Mayanja Nkangi, and the chairman of the Committee to sincerely consider when to bring the amendment, to extend the period to a framework in which this law can be exercised constitutionally.  I thank you.

THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, hon. Members.  I rise to support the Motion for the amendment, with some observations. 

It is true that a number of laws in this country may appear unjust at present. Hon. Members have concentrated on how the law we have hurts the people, but they have said little or nothing about how the State can be terrorised by liberal provisions in our statute. Members seem to be oblivious of the circumstances in which this country exists. The law can be abused by anybody in this country, which actually happens on a daily basis. We have a Government that Members of this House also have a duty to support, while they also look on the other side. I am not a lawyer, but I would like Members to imagine, if we liberalised the laws - I can see the Speaker holding his head, and the chairman of the Committee and Minister of Justice, who are lawyers (Interruption).

DR. OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I understood the Minister of General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister correctly, he seems to imply that we have a duty to support this Government, basically because the law we are making now is for this Government. Are we making a law for this Government or are we making a law for this country for any time exceeding this Government? I thank you. 

MR. ERESU: I seeking clarification from the Minister who has been on the Floor. He has stated that if we have liberalised laws, people can turn around and terrorise the State. Could the Minister give us three or four examples of such ways through which the State can be terrorised, taking into account the fact that the State has machinery, which it can use to mitigate the citizens from terrorising it?

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will deal with the observation by hon. Eresu. Actually, the Government has got thorough machinery for dealing with the violent forms of terrorism that we are capable of. But when it comes to legal terrorism, the Government is definitely handicapped. You know how much backlog we have, even in court. You know, in spite of the fact that we have employed the largest number of Judges possible and literally posted them all over the country, we still have huge problems. Since you are a lawyer, you will need to guide me, a lay man, as to whether we ought to have laws that make us unable, incapable of implementing policies. 

Like surgeons do, when you are dealing with a very serious tumour, you do not cut out the whole tumour, you can kill the patient in the process. You go stage by stage, improving on the situation, and when the major part is healing, you move to another. Healing continues until you have arrived, and I think that is what the Minister of Justice is doing prudently. I am sure he is aware of the many inadequacies that are within all our laws, but you cannot take on everything at the same time.

Hon. Okulo asks whether we are legislating for this Government or other Governments. I do not want to impute wrong motives, but I talked about the State, and if I mentioned the Government, I said the Government, not particularly this one. There will always be a Government in Uganda, Movement or otherwise. So, if I talked about Government, I talked about this one and the one in which hon. Okulo Epak may one day be a part of on the Front Bench. So, the Government I am talking about is not this Government. I am fully aware that we do not have to legislate for the Movement Government. Because, it is here today, it will not be here tomorrow, and we are all aware of that. Everything comes to an end. Therefore, I would like to plead with the Members - (Interruption) 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I think it would be the hon. Minister to make a useful contribution. This law, which we are amending, was made in 1969 in Uganda. Anybody who knows the events that were taking place in 1969 in our country, will know why this law had to be put in place. If I can just refresh your memory, it was after the 1966 incident, it was after the pigeon hole Constitution, it was after a one party State was declared, it was just moments before the Military Coup was to take place and there was a state of emergency, and that was the time when the State was terrorising the citizens of this country, and it was a time when the citizens rights were completed down- trodden and ignored.  The only thing we have tried to amend in that terrorist law is a small thing, which does not really help anyone. So, when you turn it around and say the population wants to terrorise the State, I think you are completely misunderstanding the whole intention of our debate. Hon. Members who are arguing, are not looking at it from the angle that you are looking at it, but I want to thank you for always being there to defend the Government.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr. Speaker, I hope hon. Karuhanga means well. I do not always defend the Government, I defend the truth. I thank him, but I would also like to thank him for reminding other Members of this House, including those who are within the Chambers, that there was a time when Governments were terrorising them. I want Members to go back in history and take cognisance of that. This Government is trying to move away from that kind of thing. I think Members will agree that, even where Government would terrorise the people, the Government has always restrained itself. This Government has especially restrained itself from applying the laws on the books in a draconian manner. Many of them are applied with due diligence and caution. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to agree with you, I am not an expert on law, but I just want to appeal to Members to look at the other side and also make sure that when they are making amendments to this law, they bear in mind that they are serving as legislators in a Government. So, we must not make laws that are going to make it difficult for the State to operate. I support the Motion, Mr. Speaker.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank Members for their contributions to this debate. I only want to comment on what hon. Okulo Epak submitted. He said we should reject this Bill because it is giving too little. Indeed, the Committee also agonised on this. As we have pointed out in our report, there are many other areas we would have wanted to look at. We would have wanted to look at the statutory notice, and we would have wanted to look at public officers, because there is a limitation against public officers. We would have liked to look at the schedules and who should be given this notice. We would have liked to see whether we actually have the same period for these local authorities and Government, whether they should be different. 

We agonised over all these, but we had a problem. The parent Act, the one of 1969, whose date of commencement was 28th April 1969, is 31 years old, but nobody has brought any amendment to it. Now, what we were faced with was, since we cannot bring comprehensive amendments, let the Minister take back this Bill, consider all the comprehensive amendments, and bring them back. But what guarantee did we have that this law, which has taken 30 years to be amended, would come back within one or two years. There was no guarantee that when it goes back, it would not come in the year 2031. So, as hon. Karuhanga said, we recognise this is very small, we saw that we were being squeezed, but we said, let us take what has been given (Interruption).

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, when a Minister brings an amendment to a Bill, is Parliament prohibited from making amendments to that Bill?  Is there a prohibition, or is the act open for us to take the opportunity to improve on it? Our duty in the Constitution is very clear, we are supposed to make laws for the good order and governance of this country. So, I would like to get your professional guidance on this. If you are not ready to help me on this, we will be waiting for next time when we meet, and you can give us the considered opinion, legally thought out, so that we know where we stand with this law. It will really be painful for us to go through the procedure of making a Private Members Bill. Why cant we finish this thing once and for all?  Could you, Mr. Speaker, think about it?

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the chairman first.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Speaker, the view of the Committee had been that once a Bill is brought, Parliament is entitled to re-open the whole Bill and re-debate it. That was our view, but then on the other hand, we were told that the policy of Government was in respect of this particular clause and that if we re-opened the whole Bill, we would actually be addressing policy matters, which Government is not ready to change. So, since the policy behind the law emanates from Government, and Government was willing to come in respect of only this, it was the position of Government is that we could not re-open the whole Bill. The reasoning was that, if you want to re-open it, then the Minister has to take the Bill back to Cabinet to look at those other matters so as to determine whether the policy requires changing. So, we thought we should not lose this little, which we have obtained. Can you, as you have been pleading to the Minister, that having done so -(Mr.Karuhanga rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Why cant you allow him to finish! He is responding to your clarification.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Should we take the position, which you have taken, pleading with the Minister to open up more on this Bill. Our hands were tied, and we also agonised. We thought as a Committee that we ought to open up on the whole Bill and debate it, but -(Interruption)

DR. 0KULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the hon. chairman for giving way. We have precedence here on the Electricity Bill, which was sent back, and the Ministry had to come back with something else. And that is why I am moving a specific proposal, and I am seeking your support, so that from the Floor of the House, we can help you to do what you wavered on. We request the hon. Minister to go back and come back with a more comprehensive Bill.  Thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, we have a precedent from the last Bill we handled. Government brought a Bill called the National Security Council Bill, and they were proposing to create a National Security Council at the national level. That is where they stopped. It came to our Committee, we created District Security Committees, we created Sub-county Security Committees, and we named members of those committees. We completely brought our own Bill. We had our amendments, we brought them here, the Minister was there, he supported some of them, he opposed some of them, and we voted on them and we finished. So, why do we not do the same?  

We just have some amendments to this, when we meet at Committee Stage, those Members who have got amendments to make can bring them. The Minister will stand up and oppose some, the Committee will support others, and we will write our Bill and finish. Why should we waste our time and miss the opportunity?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, dont you like the guidance of the Committee?  Because what the chairman was saying is that (Mr. Karuhanga rose_)- first of all let me answer your question.  Yes, it is the responsibility of Parliament and the right of Parliament to handle a Bill such that it can amend it and it can delete all sections. This has happened before, where a Bill has been brought with say 70 Clauses and Parliament ended with more. So, that is really not an issue. But what the hon. chairman was saying is that, as the Committee, they addressed their minds to that, and their view was that, for other provisions, you would require looking at the policy behind them. Just like in this particular case, the Minister could see that, and develop a policy with regards to the time limitation within which you can bring an action. And mind you, this is only in respect of tort.  

Now, if you are going to talk about contracts and so on, maybe there will be policies to be developed with regards to contracts. How you are going to operate the contracts? But here the Minister only picked tortuous actions and developed a policy behind them. I can say I think it is about time Government is fair and allowed and extended periods of limitation by another 12 months, but I do not know whether, in terms of proficiency, without assistance of the Committee, we can re-open issues related to the various provisions of the entire Act.  This is the point the chairperson is trying to make. It may be equally correct to say that, and you can urge the Minister as hon. Karuhanga said. We can tell him thank you very much, we are happy with the little you have given, but we would like you to go back and have a look at the general Statute, so that you can come with a further amendment. You can also say that.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me just distinguish between a Bill coming for the first time, as a fresh Bill, and an amendment to the Bill. An example of what hon. Karuhanga is referring to, is the Bill we handled last. That was something new, and it was opened up and debated, and you can do anything to it. But this is now an amendment to an already existing law. So, you should really distinguish that.  That is why we have that problem.  

But I think we should take this and plead with the Minister to come back and revisit the law with more comprehensive amendments, as we have said in our report. We should move away from this kind of law, which in truth, is very oppressive and it is a nightmare in legal practice.  I thank you.

CAPT. MUKULA: I still seek further clarification, Mr. Speaker. As the Minister comes to the Floor, I just want your guidance for the future and for the Hansard. Assume that the Minister, as it is now, is bringing this amendment which is within the main framework of the Act of 1969. Arent all the sections of the Act, which is before Parliament, open for any amendments from Members of Parliament, if they so wish to make amendments on any particular section of the Act? I am just seeking your guidance, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think you had already said that when a Bill comes here, any amendment can come. My problem here is that, this is just one amendment, reflecting a specific policy, namely the limitation period. This is a period within which you can bring a tortuous action.  This is opposed to other suits.  I wonder whether you would be in a position to review the whole Act at this stage, without the assistance of the Committee, which would have looked at the policies behind it, interacted with the Minister and the Minister would have responded. That is the point I was making, and I think that is the point the Chairman was directing you to. Hon. Minister, maybe you can help us with these matters.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, I am utterly surprised by some of the submissions by hon. Members. An hon. Member says we check the whole Bill, because it gives only part of the issues. What are these issues? This Act is a Procedural Act. It simply says, if you have got a claim against the Government as a potential litigant, please first tell the Government you are going to sue them. You can do that in 60 days. Why do they need the 60 days? Because the Government may start from Arua, right down through Sesse Islands, and to Kabale. 

Someone sues the Government because a civil servant somewhere, down near the Rwanda border run somebody down, and he or she comes to the Attorney General to say that they are going to sue Government because somebody down there run them down. The Attorney General must have time to ascertain the facts on which this potential claim is based. So we need 60 days. If the facts are established through the investigation, the Government can proceed (Interjections)- yes, this is the truth. In that case, it will not even be necessary for the person to go to court, they can still settle. That is why they need 60 days. 

Secondly, take the contract that you are talking about, section 3 (2) says you may sue the Government after three years, once you have got a contractual right against the Government. They want to be paid quick compensation and yet they now probably want this to be extended to 6 years. My question is, will you be paid early by having 6 years to sue? If you want to be paid quickly, we say get up and sue that Government after three years. They want an amendment to make it possibly 10 years; this is why I am surprised. I do not see why they want to tamper with that. 

The one thing we saw was that in 2 years there might be cases of disabilities. I was talking to a doctor, a member of the Government, and she told me that she is tired of cases of people who are run-down by a vehicle and have broken their legs, and for two years, they are still in Mulago Hospital. These are clear cases of disability. So, we say we shall deal with these cases, and we give these people with disability 24 months to come and sue. But if they are seeking an increase in the time to sue, say from 3 years to 10 years, who is being served? Of course, they are helping the Government. In fact, within 6 years some of the witnesses may have died, so who is being helped?  This is why I am saying I am a bit surprised.  

The other question was why limit the time to sue. This is basically a question of public policy.  Who pays the damages if one wins a case against the Government?  It is the people. How do they pay?  Through the Budget.  How do you go to the Budget? Annual budgeting. And we need to set time every year for the Minister of Finance to know the potential claims against Government. So, instead of leaving it lingering around for another seven years, you can come up with action to sue the Government after four or five years. It makes budgeting for compensation much more difficult. This was really the reason why the DPP said, once you know when you are going to sue us, let us ascertain the facts. If you are going to sue us, please help us, there is a limited period of, now you are proposing 2 years for torts and three years for contracts. Please, let us, within that time, arrange our taxes so that we are able to pay you. This is going to be the public policy behind the time of limitation. 

I have got every sympathy for the sentiments expressed. I think the hon. Members should remember, it is the Government, which has brought this - if you would like to call it  dispensation. And eminent lawyers who have been practising at the Bar for years, they wait for us to come and bring an amendment. Then they tell us about cries outside this Chambers; the people are crying, the people are crying that there is injustice. 

Somebody talks about executions. It is Government's difficulty to execute a case against Government. Yes, again it is a matter of public policy. Supposing I won an election against Government, and tomorrow this part of this building is put to auction, there are certain difficulties. This is what the Minister here was probably alluding to. It is the State, not Mayanja Nkangi, not Sendawula the Minister of Finance. It is basically the State and other people. So ultimately, it is a capacity of this country to meet its obligations to pay compensation, which is really of the State.

Having said that, Sir, I glad that apart from only one hon. Member who wants to say no to the whole Bill, everybody supports the Bill and I think we should go ahead and pass it.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Bill entitled The Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) (amendment) Bill, 2000 be read a Second Time.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, I would like you to guide the House before we vote on it. Does it mean that when we go to the Committee Stage, we are free to make amendments? That is what I would like your guidance on?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, that is always the position; that is why we go to Committee Stage.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for that, we can now pronounce ourselves.

THE SPEAKER: I will repeat the question that the Bill entitled The Civil Procedure and Limitation (Miscellaneous Provisions) (amendment) Bill, 2000 be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE  

THE CIVIL PROCEDURE AND LIMITATION (MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000

Clause 1

MR. KARUHANGA: In light of the fact that Members have a misgiving and would like to bring some amendments, may I move that we adjourn the proceedings of the Committee until we are ready with some of our amendments and have circulated them?  I hope that somebody will second me on my motion.

THE CHAIRMAN: We are now at Committee Stage, they do not have to.

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes, Sir. So I am moving a motion to adjourn the Committee Proceedings.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I will put the question to hon. Karuhangas Motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi) I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has met, has done precious little about the Bill and moved to have the Bill amended. So, this is the position.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi) Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I take it that this will give you an opportunity, or rather it will give hon. Karuhanga and those who want to move amendments, an opportunity to do some homework and consult with the Minister, if necessary.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, I request that anyone who wants to propose amendments should try and give them to me before they come to the Floor, because they might involve issues of policy, in which case I have to go back to Cabinet.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, you will take note of that.
 
MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Speaker, the Minister's request is fair and we understand that he does not move alone, he moves with the Cabinet. I think it is only fair that his request be granted, and I would even request further that in light of this, and since we do not have many amendments, we may have two or three amendments, the Minister may want to consult on it. So, maybe, in the next schedule, he could be allowed to skip the next meeting and come a day or two later, but we will be ready.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, you may also need to consult the chairperson.

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes, Sir, we shall indeed consult the chairperson. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m, Tuesday.

(The House rose at 5.35p.m and adjourned until Tuesday, 25th April, 2000 at 2.00 p.m.)
