Wednesday, 24 April 1996

The Council Met at 2.30 p.m. in parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairperson, Ms Rebecca Kadaga in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

MOTION

MR NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I rise to support the Motion, I think this is a straight forward Motion which we need not to spend to much time on, but on scrutinizing some of the forms that had been brought to us for approval, I found that some of them need a little bit of a comment.  The first one I am going to comment on is that prescribing the oath for the Members of the Interim Electoral Commission.  Madam Chairperson, it is already known that the members of the interim Electoral Commission have already been sworn in and have already embarked on their on their duties.  So, I was wondering whether we are being required to approve the format of this oath on membership of the Commission, but otherwise I have no quarrel with that, but I think we need the clarification from the Minister to indicate to us as to whether the oath taken by the members last January was exactly the same as what we are being required to approve.

I get on now to the Form MP.  Form MP is a nomination paper which says with the under signed registered voters of a particular constituency propose the following person to stand for Parliament etc., and you have a number of columns which indicate the surname, other names, age, voter registration number, address, and so forth.  

Now, in the last column in the extreme right of this Form MP we have an indication of occupation, I do not know whether it is necessary for a supporter or a nominator to indicated his or her occupation.  I have in mind elderly voters who are 75 years old they are no longer active in service, they have even given up farming and things of the kind they just sitting back there, may be, waiting to die.  So, they have no occupation, but they are voters all the same, so is there any need for them to indicate occupation or simply indicate retired and I do not know, may be, the Minister will have to indicate to us ass to whether indication of occupation by a nominator is really all that necessary.

Finally, Madam Chairperson, I would like to refer to Form indicating the appointment of an official agent of a candidate.  There is a provision for a nominated Member of Parliament to nominate one agent.  Now, to me I think things are a bit risky for one to just nominate one agent, suppose anything happens to that agent on the eve of the election and that person is involved in an accident, falls serious sick or dies, what would happen?  May be, the Minister could indicate to us as to whether it would not have been good for the candidate to be on the safe side to nominate more than one agent so that in event of one being involved in mishap there will always be an alternative agent to carry out the duties.

With these remarks, Madam Chairperson, I still support the Motion for the Resolutions.  Thank you.

MR KIDEGA (Aruu County, Kitgum): Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  I would like to report to you and the House that, I have just come right from the North and I think you can see there is none from Kitgum except me and reason for their being away is self explanatory, I escaped an ambush on my way back to Kampala they had just passed, but thanks God I escaped.

All my fellow colleagues and Friends from Kitgum district I think they had gone back to the district to help in mobilization of the mass so they could come out to support the forces in control of the rebel activities, but Madam Chairperson, I am disturbed before the presidential election campaign started, there was talk over Acholi politicians supporting the rebels, but now some people have come out openly and they have said they are now able to talk to Kony, I was there even in the village and a team of Kony’s people number over 30 passed just by my place and the people who meet them told me that these people are going towards Kalongo area and Patongho to campaign for Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere.  

Now, if these people are going to campaign for Dr Kawanga Ssemogerere than, Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere is part and parcel of the people who are trying to condone the insurgence in the north.  Because, if they had not gone to campaign for him then why did they talk about him and up to now they are also quiet about the move by the Kony rebels campaigning both in Gulu and Kitgum. This is a very serious State affair, Madam Chairperson, if our leaders who are campaigning to lead this country can collaborate with the rebel to destroy a particular part of  -(Laughter)- Uganda, this is very serious as that is the way I look at it.

Madam Chairperson, I also discovered another problem in the area, that the displaying of voters although you started earlier, the registration cards were released very late in some areas they were released as later as one day on to the date of the collections.  The result of this is that some of this cards have not been issued to the appropriate owners.  Now, I do not know what arrangement is in place to make sure that these owners do receive their cards and they also match with the number so that at the time of voting they are not deprived of their voting chances by saying that the card number and that on the register do not match.  So, this is part of the action I would like to bring forward this House.

Secondly, there is a wide range of intimidation to the voters in my area and then other areas in Kitgum and Gulu district, that those who will vote for Museveni will be killed.  To that extent people are scared even or put posters on their houses, they are even scared of attending any other consultative meeting and yet those who are in support of Ssemogerere are holding consultative meetings.  Now, this I think is a terrible aspect of intimidation and it is worse than the hooliganism we have talked about in this House.

Madam Chairperson, I would love, therefore, to turn to the Motion which I have stood here to support.  I would like first of all to touch on sub-section c; of section 65; of the Parliamentary Bill which has been noted down.  To me I think the situation which is causing worry to the people here would not appear.  After all this specific registrations are in village where people know one another.  So, if a person comes and shouts and says, I am Kidega, then automatically many people in the village should be able to know me, so this part of the law to me it appears it is just utopic, and it should not cause any worry to anybody even in the city here, the polling station has been so much narrow down that the people who are polling in one particular station should be in position to know one another and if somebody is Kidega then that person should definitely be Kidega and nobody else.  So, that clause should not worry anybody as far as I am concern.

Madam Chairperson, I am not irrelevant it is a true fact that we are working with the RCs in the villages and the RC know who is in his village that they are on their register.  So, if somebody comes outside then he is not a member of the RC, therefore, he cannot vote because how can you bring somebody from the street and say, now you belong to Barubini polling station where I come from?  Will I accept? Will any other body accept?  You know what happened.  

Madam Chairperson, I would like to support very strongly the suggestion raised by Dr Besigye Kizza.  If procedures is to be laid down for the Army and this House should approve then I think we in this House or in the next House who will be there would like to elect people whom we know how they come in and, therefore, all other interested groups should also be given the same procedure, their procedure of their election also be laid down before this House and approved, because what is good for the House is also good for the gender.  

Madam Chairperson, I think we will be stressing the law to far or we will be giving this House too much work to do if this House now goes out to fix the election day.  So, I do not see a point why we should limit it that by the 5th of such and such a day, the work of fixing the election day is a duty of the Electoral Commission not only that, we shall also be interfered with independence of the Electoral Commission if this House begins to fix a day for the election.  So, I would accept the preposition that, that part be deleted so that Electoral Commission is left free to act in a way it wants.

Madam Chairperson, with these observation, I would like to support the Motion.

MR WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I would like to take this opportunity of also saying that, I congratulate you and would also add that when you get things being done you could pass some of the remnants to me so that I could also enjoy them.  

Madam Chairperson, I would like the elections to be fair and just, we all belong to this country and we are fed up with some of the things which went on in the past, but the most unfortunate part of it is that, some of our Friends on both sides, may be, committing some of swine behaviour of the past regimes.  Madam Chairperson, as an example, you find that ISO, person was appointed in every sub-county throughout Uganda and these are the people who have been going around doing some tuition on behalf of the Government and they are writing voters card numbers, not only that, but they were also involved in distributing shillings 80,000 last week per every parish in Budadiri and the whole of Mbale district.  Madam Chairperson, this practice to me should be condemned because hon. Wangusa was also complaining of the Minister of State for Works, Communication and Transport doing the same thing and this is one way when they write voters card numbers as a way of trying to buy some of those voters and is this what we want the country to be involved in when we say we want fair play and free and free choice.  

Madam Chairperson, the Government and the Electoral Commission must look into this and stop it forth with if we want to have fair and free election -(Applause)

Madam Chairperson, I would like the Minister of State for Constitution Affairs to get out on page 8; form ID it should not be there because it is one of the forms which has been designed in my view to get some of nefarious ways in place.  For instance I asked him a question yesterday and the Minister did not even care to reply to that question.  In my own area we have 663 registered voters and of those 663 if there three presidential candidates, Madam Chairperson, you would add up the votes for the three presidential candidates then add on the numbers of those who have not add and the total should be 663 and not more.  If this form ID on page 8; is introduced that is where things will go wrong, because if you try to add up you find that it would be more than 663 and, therefore, this should not be in. If somebody comes and says he is Wanendeya William son of Geboni Dadiri, Madam Chairperson, the LCs of the area know who that person is, but if Wanendeya comes to vote and someone tells him that, you have already voted, is that what the Minister would want to see done?  Of course that would be the wrong way of doing things and, therefore, Madam Chairperson, that form should not be there unless somebody is planning to rig like they have been using ISO who have been recruited in -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Madam Chairperson, I would like to strongly stress the point which hon. Wanendeya is raising, it is so significant.  As an Auditor I find it because you cannot create a scenario which is not yet there, just you create a provision that such a situation in case it happen then we should take this. That one is already creating a loophole which is already intimated and I think, Madam Chairperson, this is really wrong and I would say that, this form number 8 should be deleted completely.

MR WANENDEYA: Thank you for the information for emphasizing the point, but some of the ISO’s are going around in sub-counties and I was told three names of persons in Western Uganda who are distributing money to disrupt the rallies of some of the candidates. Madam Chairperson, I would request the Minister also to make sure that if a form is connection with the presidential elections it should be in connection with that and, therefore, the appropriate amendment should be in place.  If the form is in connection with parliamentary elections Act it should be in that connection, but not to bring a whole bunch of forms and instructions to be under this motion.

With those few observations, Madam Chairperson, I would beg to support the Motion.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER: It has come at last.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I would like to start with supporting what my Friend from Kitgum was emphasizing about the rebels during the election.  Madam Chairperson, if we do not protect a voter this election will be useless.  I am telling you, because if rebels can now handle areas and threaten the voter then there is no democracy. I would like to call upon Government to make sure that we the voters are protected.  Recently, when some people passed in our area, the letters were sent to area of Bululu in Kalak, put in the churches warning the local councils 1,2,and 3, that they should get the young boys to go and fight in the name of ‘panga’ group to support Kony and that the group would be in Tuboi were I sleep that is the headquarters, you are laughing, but this is a very serious matter.  So, it means there people who are already out to disturb Uganda so that the elections are not seen, these remarks very serious remarks because for some of us we have seen rebellion.  If a rebel can say you do not vote for someone if you vote I will kill you, definitely he will kill you.  

So what is the guarantee?  I want the Minister to take these matters very seriously so that the hope for having free and fair election is really sustainable not just to talk on words.  People are talking about through stones, but there already bad stones in our area indicating that if you do not vote for this you will die.  I do not know what is in west, for us in Soroti we are talking politics of advanced level we do not want ‘Kelele’ we are fed up, we have seen the war does not help at all, so we now want to negotiate on a table, who ever wants to rule we discuss with him instead of fighting him.  I am not saying negotiation with Kony; you are misunderstanding me; you sit down. (Laughter) 

So, Madam Chairperson, that is a very bad as far as I know if we do not protect the voter then this far and free election is a dream.

I will not go straight to the Resolution.  I support the resolution, but people want a lot of clarification on the UPDF representation. 

Madam Chairperson, I want to know, how is this council arrived at; is it democratically, if not democratically this House should be told so that the local soldier is protected because those soldiers who are in the UPDF are equal like Ugandans who have the chance in the village.  So, I wanted to find out why should this council be the one to propose the names of those who will be eventually Members of Parliament?  

I want the Minister to clarify and the Minister of State for Defence to tell us how this Council is arrived at because we are doubtful we want to stop the suspicion which the people of Uganda have that this country has ever been spoilt by military men, but so longer as I know our Army today is civilised, is for the people, therefore, if democracy is to be availed and to be seen in the Army also, how is this council going to be arrived at? And if there is no council with democracy why don’t this parliament put ways and means of making sure that those chaps in the military men and women have opportunity to exercise their political right to get down people to this Parliament?  This is the thing I would need because if others are going to do it at their own will what about these soldiers; that is my complaint.  Otherwise, people have been scared about military since Amin took over until of recent we still have that scare also that is why people are running up and down think that this is this, and that.

So, this is an area where I have doubt.  I support what my Brother Lt. col. Besigye and then Kanyeihamba talked about yesterday we should really make sure that people know what will happen in this because other interest group have got their lines of coming in to Parliament.  What of this UPDF can we be clarified?  Otherwise, that is only where I have problems, but with other areas I am okay.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

AN.  HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I support the Resolution, but before I support it, I want to give a piece of information to all the Members who are here.  As I talk now I am highly disappointed by the Kony activities in the North, just yesterday I have just learnt Kony came down to Apara which is in Moroto, he came to a secondary school and took 20 students so, this makes me support the other Member who spoke initially, it is very disappointing.  Of recent, Ssemogerere if you may allow me to say, went there in Lira and launched his campaign as he was launching he said he would make sure if elected that he talk to Kony so that Kony could stop fighting, but now what is he waiting for?  If really he is going to be a leader what is he waiting for, is he not in Uganda now?  Why does he not go? (Laughter)

MR ATWAI: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I would like to give the hon. Member holding the Floor, very interesting information.  This morning I was reading the New Vision where I found that hon. Dr Ssemogerere a presidential candidate wanted to talk to the rebels in Kisoro and at the next sentence he could not go to Kisoro because of the rebel activities.  So, I do not know, and here he was already, his audience where he would meet them face to face and feared going there, talking is easier than done.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much for that information. (Interruption)

MR ONGOM: Point of information. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  This business about talking to Kony is getting very interesting, when we discussed insecurity in the North in this House only two weeks ago, Madam Chairperson, you remember that the majority of the Members supported the idea of dialogue with Kony and this was over whelming here.  Now, that somebody comes and says, if I am in power and I have the opportunity to talk I will talk, we are now saying, why do you want to talk?  And yet we are the people who supported the idea of dialogue with the rebels here -(Applause)- Madam Chairperson.  Right now he cannot talk because he has no authority, some of us have been trying to talk to Kony and we are told by the Government that they do not want people to talk.  Now, how can you talk when at the same time you will be suspected?  Madam Chairperson, I think we have got to stop having double standard in this place. (Applause)  

The Kisoro case hon.  Ssemogerere was stopped by authority not to go because they could not protect him, that is what we are told.  Let us stop having double standards, let us talk is we want to talk and if we all do not want to talk let us say so, let us have the same message that is what we have been crying for here, we say talk and then you say somebody offers to talk you say, do not talk. Is it Museveni only we should instruct to talk and not anybody else?  So where are we, Madam Chairperson?  I have given the information that we supported the information that we supported the idea of talk in this House and why are we now opposing it?  Thank you.

MRS KALEMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I wonder whether I can take this opportunity to congratulate you very heartily on my own behalf and on behalf of the women not only in this House, but outside this House -(Applause)- on your most prestigious appointment as Deputy Chairperson of the National Resistance Council.  

The clarification I am seeking from the hon. Member there, is how does one get the confidence, I would like to know how Dr Ssemogerere or any other person gets the confidence to go to face and talk to a killer, one who has killed so many people and yet you have the confidence to go and talk to him.  I would like that clarification, Madam Chairperson.

MR AMUSA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I want to add that there people outside Uganda who are sent by their presidents to go and represent outside and they discuss such external affairs the same thing could be done by Ssemogerere, he is a person of this country he could ask to be released to go and talk to them.  Otherwise it is very painful.

Secondly, as I said, I do support the resolution, but now that people are being disturbed in the different parts of the country with mine inclusive, this voting -(Interruption)- I do not know to what extent it would be extended to cover people who are completely displaced from their areas.  That one I want to have it clarified please.  Otherwise I support the Resolution.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I support the Motion and the Regulation as presented by my Colleague and I understand that in the debate yesterday questions were raised as is being raised by the Member for Kalak County about the formulation in regulation 2; about representation of the Defence Forces.  I am sorry I was not here, and, therefore, I do not speak with the benefit of the arguments of the logic that was presented yesterday, but allow me to say that this formulation first of all as we all know is in full conformity with the provisions of the constitution and of course the Statute that this House passed.

Secondly, I have heard someone say that the manner and procedure of election of MPs representing the Defence Forces should be clearly spelt out here.  I would like to inform the House, Madam Chairperson, that of course while talking about democracy, democracy has limitations in it’s application, particularly in the case of the military as you know, I hope all Members know leadership is not determined by the popular vote.  Leadership in the Military is determined by the ability and skills of the individuals in question.  Promotion is gained because of the years of experience, because of the work one has actually done in the field and because of the training one has under gone.

The Army Council as it is today by statute is defined by an Act passed by this House; the composition is a certain level of leadership in the Army.  The Army Council itself as determined by statute is not on a popular vote, it is according to positions held which as I have just said is determined by the skills and the ability of the individuals within the Army Forces.  So, when it comes to sending representation of the Army to Parliament the considerations cannot be different, the methods used to determine that leadership cannot be fundamentally different from the methods determining the leadership within the Army itself.  So, to suggest, therefore, that  -(Interruption)

LT COL BESIGYE: Point of information. Madam Chairperson, I suspected that the hon. Minister indeed from what he said is contributing without the benefit of the main input in the yesterday’s debate.  I would like to inform him that actually in yesterday’s debate on this subject no one as far as I remember was suggesting any particular manner in which the Army Council ought to bring it’s representatives here.  What was, however, being suggested was, that even if they are to be appointed it should be stated here that they shall be appointed and in the following manner -(Applause)- and the reason for that was that, these representatives are part of Parliament, Parliament which is a national legislature and that it would be necessary for the population which this Parliament represents as a whole to know the manner in which all it’s Members come to this House. (Applause) 

This was the main thrust of yesterday’s argument; it was not as to whether they should be elected; obviously I do not think anybody was suggesting that in the Army we should hold campaigns and put up posters and there elections of these representatives.  It was only that whatever manner they Army decides should be reflected in the regulations by Parliament.

MR ONGOM: Point of information.  Apart from the information already given, Madam Chairperson, this matter was pointed out very clearly that this is a constitutional provision.  If we look at Article 78; part 4; says, first of all part 3; says, “the representatives referred to in paragraph A of clause 1; which is Member directly elected to represent constituency of this article shall be elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage and by secret ballot” and then part 4 says, “Parliament shall by law prescribe the procedure for the election of representatives referred to in paragraph b and c of clause 1”, and c talks of representatives of the Army.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I thank the hon. Members for the information they gave.  Well, I think hon. Besigye wanted to reiterate the argument that was presented yesterday that the manner of election of Defence Forces representatives should be determined by this House, because that is precisely what he repeated although he said that was not the case and I think that is how I understood it and that is what I was replying to.  Because, Madam Chairperson, if I may repeat what I said, the composition of the Army Council itself what we call the Army Council today is determined by an Act of Parliament the Statute that we passed here, it says for example; that the commander of the forces will be a member, that each division commander will be a member, you know, that kind of thing.  

Now, how does a Division commander come about?  He comes about by appointment, appointment bases on the skills of the individual, based on the training and things like that.  Now, this method incidentally is not only applicable to UPDF; this is universally applied there is no Defence Force anywhere in the world where it is not done that way.  Once the Army Council then is composed of people who have come through that method then I think he would be fundamentally departing from the conventional method of determining the leadership of the military if you are to suggest for example, that they be elected on universal adult suffrage either of the Army Council or of the whole Army or whole the Defence forces, I do not know what the suggestion would be. 

Secondly, -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of order.  Is it in order, Madam Chairperson, for the hon. Minister of State for Defence to labour a point when we are discussing the regulations and forms which will elect those Members.  We are aware very well that in the present set up of our Armed Forces and promotion some of them could be described as sectarian, but we want to set the instructions very clearly.  Is it, therefore, in order for the hon. Member to belabour a point when the motion is in place and the Minister is going ahead and we are debating the regulations?  Is it, therefore, in order for the Minister to continue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The hon. Member is educating the House on the workings of the Army.  He is quite in order.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you very much, for that ruling, Madam Chairperson, but I must say that the hon. Wanendeya may be, right in saying that I should not belabour to a point that is obvious and that it is accepted by this House.  My understanding was, that there some people who were questioning this provision and I was trying to defend it and giving reasons for it, but if the House supports it without need for an explanation of course I do welcome that, because 

I would like to say that we have considered this both in Defence Forces and in Government and we found that this was the most appropriate formulation that we could have.  Of course I agree with the point hon. Besigye is making that Members of the Defence forces will be Members of this House, yes, but that does not change the fact that they will be representing the Defence Forces.  They must represent here the Defence Forces that is the reason, otherwise next time I will hear Dr Besigye say that, since the handicapped are Members of this -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I would not like this to turn into a dialogue.  Minister please complete your point.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Especially since I heard that hon. Besigye had a full day yesterday.  So, Madam Chairperson, I would like to call on this Article 78; the only relevant provisions which hon. Ongom read are; article 78.1(c) and 4, and all they say is that, “Parliament shall consist of representatives of the Army and that Parliament shall prescribe the procedures for elections of representatives of the Army”.  Now, as far as I am concern this provision here to the effect as it stands that the representatives of UPDF shall be elected by UPDF Council in such manner and by such procedure and shall be determined by that council he is not inconsistent with this provision because as a Parliament we are doing what we are expected to do, we are delegating the Council to determine the procedure and the manner of election, so there is really no contradiction. 

DR MAGEZI: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, I would like really to be assisted to internalise what the meaning of this article says, because when it says, “Parliament shall be law prescribe the procedure for elections”, we are saying the procedure we are delegating it to the council because we shall never be able to know what the procedure was, whereas if you say “Parliament will prescribe the procedure for elections”.  To me I think it would state Parliament that the procedure for elections would be a, b, c, not the power to delegate to somebody else to make that procedure.  I think what the clause is saying is that, the Council will determine the procedure.  The constitution is saying that, we should prescribe the procedure.  Could you please assist me to understand this?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: What I am saying is, if Parliament passed this regulation now as it stands which is asking the council to determine the manner, Parliament would have done what is required of it by the Constitution. (Interjection) Definitely, I mean you would not take us to court and say that, this is - the constitution because we did not actually give the details.

CAPT. BABU: Thank you, very much, Madam Chairperson, I would like to congratulate you again.  Madam, Chairperson we did pass a law here, we passed a law for the C.A elections and in that we had special groups and we did prescribe as Parliament how these people would be elected and we did say that in case of the Army representative, that the Army Council will elect them and from the little bit I have picked up it looks like the House is in agreement with that.  The only requirement I think they want is, once the Army Council has decided a method of election this House will look at it and they can agree to it or modify it accordingly I think that is what they are trying to say, but I think we passed that law last time and the Army Council did bring some people in the CA and they debated very well and I think the same method if we could be told how it was done we could solve this problem right now I think we are talking at cross purpose.  Thank you very much.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Anyway, Madam Chairperson, I think for military matters when you look at what we have as a matter of fact now we are talking about Army Council as it is composed by statute which we have, you know, the Defence Forces between now and when they elect these Members may not change, of course, they may not change their composition, but you never know on the other hand they may between now and the time when we must elect from the Army Members to represent the Defence Forces in Parliament.  

So, when we look at it we felt that the Army being what it is a disciplined force we should not really we in Parliament should not take a rigid position to give them something they cannot manoeuvre around.  I think, therefore, that since this is not in blench of the provisions of the constitution, since this is consistent with the statutes that we have already passed including the one about this particular election in order to maintain the kind discipline the fact that this is legitimated force that we have in place we should leave this formulation as it is in order to avoid causing un necessary problems and I glad to hear that no one really is seriously questioning that.

Madam. Chairperson, there is another matter that was raised -(Interruption)

MR RAKAKOOKO: Point of information. I thank you Madam Chairperson.  I think, Madam Chairperson, this matter is being driven to far when in my view from yesterday’s deliberations, the House wanted incorporated into these rules the spelling of how the elections are going to take place.  Now what transpired yesterday and I hope to the Minister responsible would have followed up was consultation so that when he returns he is able to tell us how the election is going to take place.  I do not think there was anything being changed really; materially we wanted a systematic spelling out of how the elections are going to take place.

Secondly, I do recall that also applied to the disabled, that is at the time hon. James Mwandha produced his public relations documents which you gave to somebody here along this line.  So, I think, Madam Chairperson, really there is communication at different frequencies unnecessarily here in this matter.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, I think the issue with regard to the election of the disabled persons is such a different because the Minister actually outlined the way the whole thing is going to be done.  The only objection raised by hon. Abu Mayanja was the involvement of the National Union of disabled persons of Uganda on account that it was not an organisation set up by Act Parliament and set up by law.  I must report that, after we left this Parliament we discussed, if you like we had some peace talks and I think it is now in agreement that the proposal by the Minister is the correct method to use in the election of disabled persons.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mbabazi if you could tie up your loose ends.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I think hon. Rwakakooko just confirms what my understanding is, that really there is general agreement about this formulation except that apparently some people wanted a little more information about the manner.  I thought this formulation itself leaves that to the Army Council to determine, but I suppose for purposes of satisfying curiosity of Members, I can tell you some of the procedures we followed last time when we were electing Members of the Army to represent UPDF to the CA, first of all there was a meeting of the Army Council of course and the agenda was to elect this people and there was a procedure to nominate them - you first determine the number to be nominated, the number is determined and then nomination is carried out by individuals nominating any one either a member of the Army Council by the law or members of the Army who are not members of the Army Council and that is why you saw some one like Lt Noble Mayombo being elected  when he was not a member of the Army Council.  So, nomination is not limited -(Interruption)

MR OLUM: Point of order. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We had request the Minister of state for Defence to bring us here the procedure under which the members of the Army who are going to represent the Army in Parliament and the Minister has chosen to give this procedure verbally.  Is it in order that the Minister is giving us this procedure verbally, should he not bring it in writing to us, so that we incorporate it in what we are now discussing? (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I expect the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs to bring that amendment.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, the reason why I did so was in response as I said to what Members were saying today it appears that curiosity demanded that they know a little bit about the method, but if you do not then I will leave it. So, Madam Chairperson, I thank the House for supporting this formulation which is fully support by those to whom it is to apply and which has been discussed.

Now, on the question of -(interruption)

LT COL KIIZA BESIGYE:  Madam Chairperson, I am rather in a difficult situation because of course the person contributing is my Minister, but I am also constrained on the other hand because I am a Member of this House as a Historical Member and in that right to contribute on this matter without causing a conflict in those two roles.  But, the hon. Minister has just stated that, what is proposed by the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs is supported by those to whom it applies which would put me in a terrible situation because yesterday I contributed precisely saying that it is better that these procedures are brought to Parliament and I am one of those to whom it applies.  So, it would suggest that I was, may be, acting out of order or in some kind of confusion. 

I would like to clear this, Madam Chairperson, by first of all stating that, indeed I am a member of the Army Council, I am a member of the High Command, I am a member of other organs of the Army and my contribution was not in conflict with any decision that I am aware of concerning this subject.  I do not know, therefore, whether the point of order I was raising, whether it is in order to throw me in that light as someone who was acting out of order in my contribution, unless there is information which is not available to me, Madam Chairperson.  

In any case, having said that, really these elections are going to be different from the last ones.  We are going to have a Returning Officer appointed by the Electoral Commission.  What regulations will the Returning Officer be following in conducting the elections?  Will he first Chair the Army Council in order to establish the procedure? (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  Thank you, very much Madam Chairperson; and of course I hope hon. Besigye in his other capacity as a disciplined officer in the army, will use the appropriate forums in which to sort out some of these questions.  Because of course I will like to inform the House that even in the High Command or in the Army Council, we have minority opinions; we have debate.  So, we do not always go by what is either unanimous or to which everyone subscribes.  But that one he will sort out in his other capacity.  

But on this other point about insecurity, I would like to repeat to this House, Madam Chairperson, that of course it is true that we have these problems in the North, meaning in Gulu District and yesterday it is true that these bandits crossed over into Lango.  We have had problems as you know in West Nile Region, we have made public statements on that; and yesterday we had this incident in Kisoro.  All I can say is that really this is an act of desperation on the part of those who would like to deny this whole exercise.  The country in fact as a whole, not only NRM.  Legitimacy in its efforts to restore democracy in this country and I would like to assure you and the country that we have the means -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, the Minister has said the act of insecurity in the different parts of the country is an act of discretion from the part of those causing the insecurity.  I am wondering how in all three or four different regions of the country people who should have been desperate, should have become desperate almost at the same week or at the same day.  As a civilian and somebody who is worried, I will like the Minister to clarify to this House and also to the country at large whether there is no co-ordination among these various kinds of rebels?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  I would like to confirm your suspicions that obviously there is co-ordination.  All these acts have been co-ordinated and they are as I said calculated to disrupt the election and to deny the whole exercise legitimacy.  But I wanted to assure you that of course they cause disruption in the lives of our people, they inflict pain on families, many people have lost their lives.  But in terms of putting a halt to the democratization process that has been going on for the last ten years, there is no chance that, that will happen.  And I would like to assure the people in the North especially in the West Nile Region and in Lango and Acholi that come election day, May 9th; all people will be able to vote in their voting stations. (Applause) There is no doubt about that.  

Madam Chairperson, I was waiting for my good Friend hon. Daniel Omara Atubo to give me information that he kept murmuring I wanted to hear it but I could not get it.

MR DRATRUTRU: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I am giving information to the whole nation. (Laughter)  Madam Chairperson, this information is purely information of my knowledge and belief that unless the Minister of Defence really goes down to prepare for the day of polling, security in this country may not be easy as he is assuring the House.  I am saying this because last Friday I left for Arua. I am about 30 miles from the border with Sudan.  On the day I landed in Arua on Friday, the first information people from my Constituency gave me was that about 300 rebels entered peacefully from Sudan border and matched through the Constituency of Aringa and through part of my area and by the time I arrived, they were in Okoro Constituency in the Nile valley along the River Nile.  That distance is about 50 miles.  Of course they were about 300 well armed and matched without interruption. Good enough, they did not harass any civilian they met.  The civilians feared and kept quiet, but I am sure they made arrangements to inform our office. Now, if that was done, these people could have matched as far as 50 miles and slept.  Then it was the following day that arrangements were made as to how they could be handled; and I am glad to say the civilians co-operated very well with the army at the last stage to handle the situation with success. (Applause)  

Now, the clarification I want to seek from the Minister is, will they not come in fifties and go to every county and during that time of polling people will run away?  Because they were able to come in three hundreds, if they break as far as - (Interruption)- then they will upset our elections.  Because once they tell the voters that go away, voters must run.  This is possible.  Now my appeal is, will you be in position to seal the borders?  If there is a guarantee to seal the borders then I can hope that there will be security.  That is number one where I need clarification.  My point number two was clarification. (Interjections) I gave the information to the nation through the Minister.  

The second was clarification and my point of clarification was, I was wondering whether the Minister was not telling us the regulations which happened during CA elections; whether that regulation is applicable, to elect members of the Army to Parliament, using the same CA regulations.  That is the clarification I wanted to seek because it appears there is no preparation for Parliamentary elections.  Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI:  I would like to answer the last question first.  The Army Council will of course wait for the decision of this House to take action.  It could not have anticipated the decision. So, I was just giving you the election of the Army Representatives to the CA as an example of what happened; I wanted to show you how democratic it was but I was not around.  

The second question as to whether we can seal all our borders. I have repeatedly said no country in the world can seal its borders.  All we can say is that, if anyone comes in they do so at their own risk as we have ably demonstrated many times before. It is true that those 300 hundred walked that long distance and it is not true to say that we did not detect them.  But without really discussing military matters here, sometimes you see a thing like that happens and civilians wonder why the army did not respond.  I told you I think a fortnight ago, I told this House that we had been bombarded by the Sudanese Armed Forces.  I made a statement here.  They had bombarded us for two and a half consecutive days; heavy bombardment using very heavy artillery.  And using the airforce antinovel.  So, this incursion or this infiltration followed shortly after that bombardment.  So, although we detected the entry of these bandits obviously our response had to be cautious because we were not sure that these bandits were not trying to lure us away from our defences, to open up the borders for a bigger evasion.  So, normally you take precautions, you take in your position in order to defend the borders where the main threat comes from and then you take other measures to handle that diversion and that is precisely what happened and I am glad to say, that it has been handled very effectively and I would like to add my voice to hon. Asiku’s.  I have already issued a statement to that effect to thank the people of West Nile for the tremendous support they have given to the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces in tracking down these fellows. (Applause)  And with that kind of support I can assure you that the 300 or any one else who comes in cannot survive in that region, it is not possible.  

I would like in the same breath to thank the civilians of Kisoro District for doing the same.  Because these chaps came in, took our small detach by surprise and it was the civilians really who braved this fight and you know what happened; and I am glad to say that by last night, our forces reported.  But they had captured  another 15 of these bandits alive.  So, where the population is alert and is determined to get rid of banditry, it cannot last.  That was an answer for hon. Asiku’s point.  But I think I was assuring the people that - of course you know that the threat by these bandits to disrupt elections has been there before.  They threatened to disrupt the CA elections; you know they failed, we held elections everywhere.  As you know, all constituencies were represented.  There was no single constituency where they made it impossible for the elections to be held.  There had been a previous threat when we were carrying out a national census.  We were carrying out a National Census and in fact banditry activities in this country were much wider spread than they are at the moment.  Because the Teso region at that time was still under banditry.  But you recollect that the National Census was carried out.  So, I would like to assure Members that, the elections will take place, whatever efforts these people put in with their supporters to disrupt them.

Finally, I would like to give information to hon. Ongom.  It is not true that anyone stopped hon. Semogerere from going to Kisoro.  No one gave him an order to stop.  But security forces discharging our responsibilities informed everybody including hon. Semogerere, including the Electoral Commission here that a problem had developed in Kisoro and that fighting was taking place in the streets of the town.   If he had chosen to go, I do not think we would have set up roadblocks to say, No! Please do not go, and if he chose to go to Kisoro to perform what he thinks he can easily perform, to talk to these people out of banditry; I think we would have been out of our minds to stop him; and I would like to inform this House that we have not stopped hon. Ongom from talking to Kony.  I remember I have said before in this House that we as a government having been responsible for the restoration of the Constitutional Order, must defend that order.  And if each time a bandit comes up, we break the Constitution and go to talk to them, then we would be undermining this new Constitutional Order ourselves.  But if the Ongoms and people like that, if they want to talk to Kony of course they are free to do so.  Thank you very much, I think Madam Chairperson. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  The Minister of State for Constitutional affairs can now reply.

MR KAVUMA:  Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, first of all I wish to thank all the Members who have contributed to this Motion for the wise debate that has taken place for the last three days that we have been discussing this important matter.  I thank them for this overwhelming support they have given to the Motion and permit me Madam Chairperson to say one or two things in conclusion of this debate.  Madam Chairperson, I want to state it very categorically that, the government of the National Resistance Movement does not in any way condone any acts of violence, any threats meted out by some Members of our society to fellow citizens of this country during this time of campaigns.  Madam Chairperson, we condemn this kind of approach to our public life in the strongest possible terms and government will do everything possible to bring the culprits to book.  

Madam Chairperson, I want to say I was rather taken aback yesterday when an hon. Member cast doubt about the provisions of the Statute we passed here regarding the Parliamentary Elections.  The argument was that we rejected this provision and it is in the Statute.  I must say, Madam Chairperson, that government and this Council, and the administrators on this Council, have no intention whatsoever to tamper with what this hon. Council passes.  I would refer the hon. Member to the recorded version of our proceedings then she will find that actually what is in the Statute is what we passed.  It was checked at all levels as is normally the case for any Bill that passes through this Parliament.  I said I was taken aback because it was casting doubt on the integrity of many people in this House and outside, who do not have the slightest intention to jeopardize the proceedings of this House and I do not want to go very much beyond that.  Madam Chairperson, there was a call that probably we made a mistake in passing section 65 of the Statute.  

But as Members realised and they pointed it out, this is a law we passed after a very, very long debate here and we cannot run away from the provisions of that law.  We cannot through the debating of these pieces of subsidiary legislations which have been subject of our discussion for these Bills, amend any of the provisions in that law.  Madam Chairperson, one or two Members were saying okay, I think we go back and look at it and we produce a Bill to amend.  I say that would be possible.  But first of all, I am not convinced that there is justifiable cause for that; and secondly, Madam Chairperson, we must remember that we are prosecuting a kind of crash programme with regarding to organising elections to have an elected government, elected by the people of Uganda by the 7th of July this year.  That alone calls on us to avoid any measures that are likely to derail the process of electioneering which could easily lead us into a Constitutional crisis.  I, therefore, urge Members to go along with the law and pass the regulations to implement the provisions and I can only promise that, where matters can be improved upon by the Commission administratively, everything will be done to effect those improvements.

Madam Chairperson, -(interruption)

MRS KALEMA:  Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I do  quite agree with the Minister regarding section 65, where this form ID is concerned and section 67(2) - I have not come to that yet.  But on the forms, I agree with him and I believe this is really necessary and relevant.  Because we also passed this very Bill which is now the Statute.  All I am asking the Minister to clarify to us as he is winding up is whether these forms shall be translated into various languages?  Because these three forms particularly need signatures and understanding of the Members concerned.  Because we have only two weeks to go and here it is written in English.

MR KAVUMA: Madam Chairperson, if hon. Kalema was asking about interpreting any of the forms in local languages, I only want to say, Madam Chairperson that, by our constitution legislation is in the official language which is English.  But over the years and especially during this time, we have deliberately adopted a policy of explaining the population where they are concerned about the provision of whatever law is in place.  This is one reason why it is very important that we pass these regulations as early as possible, so that explanations can be made even in these last few weeks we have before the election is conducted.  

Madam Chairperson, an impression was also given yesterday that with regard to say UPDF representatives, with regard to DP representatives in the next Parliament and to a certain extent the Worker and the Youth that maybe where necessary we could postpone the matter to have this worked out, brought to this House; so that we create say NUDIPU as a legal entity.  Madam Chairperson, for the same reasons I have given, lack of time.  That one would only be inviting problems for us unnecessarily.  I want to urge Members to accept the spirit of the Constitution in this transitional period.  Where in Article 263 and 264 the CA wisely allowed the organs of the government during this Interim period to do what can be achieved as far as conforming with the letter of the Constitution.  There is discretion; there is a leeway, which was very wisely put in the Constitution.  Because even the framers of the Constitution realised that the nine months that were set within to organise these elections considering the bulk of legislation and other activities that had to take place was a little bit too tight and they therefore, provided for some discretion which would allow flexibility in the conduct of our business in order to achieve the ultimate objective of having a government elected by the people of Uganda, by the set date.  And it is in that spirit that we propose the regulations; we have proposed all the laws we have been dealing with.  Madam Chairperson, there were some arguments on the proxy form.  

First of all, on the oath of a member of the Commission.  Yes, I want to say, Madam Chairperson,that the current Commissioners took an oath; but as you know, Madam Chairperson, a vacancy could fall on the Commission through one way or another and it is only proper and fitting that we have on our Statute Book a proper formulation of that oath to be taken by the Commission and this is what we are doing in this case.  It is not different from oath the current Commissioners took.  

Madam Chairperson, I think it was hon. Ntimba who talked about the occupation of a person supporting a nomination.  He did point out quite correctly that, many maybe elderly people who might have retired from active work.  But many of those people retire into some kind of occupation, it could be farming, it could be cultivation, it could be cattle rearing and to a certain extent they feel proud of what they are doing even in the last days of their life on this planet.  I do not see it as a very big -(Interruption)

MR NTIMBA: Point of clarification.  Yes, the clarification I am seeking is in respect of young graduates who have just come out of the university, they have not yet had a job, they are still walking in the streets and they have no occupation.  What is their position?  Will they be disqualified from nominating somebody merely because they do not have an occupation?  

MR KAVUMA:  My own thinking and I think it is quite reasonable is that, if actually a case happens that this is a registered voter, that is the absolute qualifications he has to have.  If he does not have a qualification - normally in administration in these forms, we say  “not applicable” and nobody will have any problem with that.  I do not think it is a very big deal and we could leave it at that.  Yes, hon. Ntimba was asking whether it was not safe for somebody to have two agents.  Precisely, it is.  It is safer.  The choices for the candidates; but even where you have two, it is important that you appoint each one individually.  Therefore, you will only be required to complete two forms and the technicality will have been complied with.  

Madam Chairperson, on the form of the oath of identity, this is an area which has had quite a lot of arguments advanced, but as I did indicate, Madam Chairperson, this is a position already in our law.  But I want to assure Members that enough safeguards have been put in place.  First of all, as Members have also indicated, this voting is going to be in our local areas; people are going to announce their names, fellow voters will be there to see whether the person who claims to be so and so, is actually so and so.  They will know them.  Madam Chairperson, there are going to be candidates’ agents and we allowed them to be near within the vicinity of the entire exercise of voting; and the purpose was for them to monitor and take into account the interest of their candidates.  Madam Chairperson, even the people who vote, we left it discretionally upon them.  Those who want can stay around at a place where they can view what is happening; and our population is no longer very politically you know thick.  If they see that somebody is committing a fraud, they will definitely expose that fraudulent person trying to mar the election exercise.  Madam Chairperson, there was also a worry that this kind of thing could even lead into double voting.  But as I did say earlier, Madam Chairperson, and the hon. Members, we tried this time to make sure that, the ink we are going to use is superior of what was used last time and I am glad to inform the House that, that ink has already arrived in the country.  So, Madam Chairperson, I request the Members to do the best we can within the provisions we have in the law and to invoke the vigilance and -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Could the Minister inform this august House how the total of the registered voters would amount to the number that is on register as opposed to the inclusion?  What would prevent a person coming in with 30 or 40 votes?  Since already numbers of some people having got the voters’ numbers on their three notebooks which were distributed in all the sub counties.  What would prevent the person from putting in say 70 votes?  So that the total registration is increased tremendously from the registered numbers.

MR KAVUMA:  Madam Chairperson, and hon. Members, I remember hon. Wanendeya has been waging war in this area ever since the CA days.  He carried the battle into this House.  At this moment even when the Statute has already been passed -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Madam Chairperson, for the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs to personalise issues instead of answering the point which I raised?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  No, he is not in order.  You are not in order to personalise issues.

MR KAVUMA:  So, Madam Chairperson, I am saying the questions of the total voters, what, what.  I am not here to do the Commission’s work.  They have to do some administration work themselves, they know what they are going to be doing; and I did advise that, the ultimate authority to settle any problems that may arise from any exercise of voting are the courts of law.  Hon. Wanendeya should rest assured that everybody doing their job is doing it in accordance with the law.  I know there is a kind of exercise books phobia that is halting hon. Wanendeya; but I did say yesterday.  I did say -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, is it in order for the Minister for Constitutional Affairs to again - why this primitive way of not answering issues? (Laughter)  I said in my voting electoral area, we are 663.  Supposing candidate ‘A’ gets so many votes? ‘B’ so many votes? ‘C’ so many votes?  Those who have not voted so many votes, will this total of 663 or the Minister has got diarrhoea of the mouth and therefore, can talk anything.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Wanendeya, I think you have used un Parliamentary language in this House.  Secondly, I will urge you to address your concern to the Interim Electoral Commission.  They will handle how to tally votes. Please let us concentrate on this Motion.  Hon. Minister.

MR KAVUMA:  Madam Chairperson, I want to reassure everybody that, there is only one set of record that is going to be used in this election and it is the official voter’s register compiled by the Commission.  Anything outside that will be illegal and it will open anybody who uses it to challenge by anybody who cares to the courts of law.  Madam Chairperson, I wanted to say something on the proxy form.  Again this as I did say, first of all I want to say that, unfortunately we did not provide for covering voting by proxy for people who maybe displaced.  We restricted this right to people in the UPDF, the Police and the Prisons.  But Madam Chairperson, I want to say that again this form has been designed with a lot of care.  You will note Madam Chairperson, that we do not only stop about just applying; we require the name of the applicant, we require the rank, we require the service number and we require the unit number or station of the applicant for this proxy.  These matters are going to be handled first of all administratively within the units, those people who have their numbers outside the normal voting areas we have to do a bit of homework, submit it to the Commission, the Commission will first scrutinize it; if it is satisfied with it, they will go ahead to issue the forms which will again be witnessed by as you see somebody acting on behalf of the Commission.  In fact, the Commission itself, the chairperson or anyone of them could if he found that the numbers are not too many, he could do the job of authenticating the contents on the form.  I want to allay the fears of Members that, this form might be abused by stating that the Commission is doing everything possible and it will want to ensure maximum transparency, not only in this exercise as regards the proxy voting, but throughout the entire exercise of electioneering and voting.

Madam Chairperson, a number of arguments have been put forward about the UPDF and the proposed formulation of the method of their electing the representatives to come to this Parliament.  First of all, I must say Madam Chairperson, that the representation of these special groups including the UPDF, is not first and foremost based on the very important notion of democracy.  The point is, these are groups which the CA and this House thought they deserved representation.  That is the most important part of this.  

Now, as far as the procedures how these people come, I want to repeat that this matter and the formulation has been examined both professionally and otherwise and we are satisfied that it does not infringe against the provisions of the Constitution.  Article 78, Madam Chairperson, sub article 4, must not be read in isolation.  It must be read together with Articles 263 and 264.  I will refer to some of them.  Article 263 (b) it says’ not withstanding anything in this Constitution, the Government of the National Resistance Movement existing immediately before the coming into force of this Constitution, in this chapter referred to as the NRM Government shall first of all continue in office until a new government is elected in accordance with this Constitution.”  (b) “As far as possible.’  And those are the important words to mark  ‘as far as possible exercise its functions in such a manner and with such modifications as are necessary to bring them into conformity with the provision of the Constitution.”  Article 264 says ‘ the appropriate organs of the NRM Government shall take such measures that are necessary or practical to give effects to the provisions of this Constitutions and in particular, but without prejudice...” and it goes on.  

So, Madam Chairperson, this is the kind of flexibility the CA in its wisdom put in the Constitution because they foresaw this being a new document, and the timeframe we gave ourselves, the CA foresaw that we may need to have a large degree of flexibility when organising for the elections of the first government under this Constitution.  

I want to assure every Member here that there is nothing wrong with the formulation as said.  I was urged to go back and consult; I must repeat.  I did consult and this was one reason why even these regulations delayed in coming to this place; we were doing consultations with all the appropriate organs of the concerned interest groups to the extent that we did not leave any stone unturned.  

Madam Chairperson, with regard to UPDF, my Colleague has been explaining; and I only want to say as a civilian and not a Member of the Army Council that I think we all realise that the army is slightly a different arm of government, where we do not unnecessarily over involve ourselves in the administration of that institution.  It could have serious implications and I think it is only prudent that this House allows the UPDF to exactly behave as we have provided and we shall have by the way complied by the requirement of prescribing the method, because we have said it will be a method and the details we leave them to the UPDF.  Madam Chairperson, the same goes to NUDIPU and the Workers and the Youth.  So, I want to request hon. Members to accept the regulations as presented in these areas.  

Now, as a member of the population, I want to say and I say it with confidence on behalf of the entire population that we the civilians have every confidence in the UPDF.  We are not worried that you give them this kind of regulations that it is going to be abused, that it is going to cause a catastrophe to our country.  They have been in charge of the security of ourselves and our properties for the last ten years and it is on proven experience and ability that our trust has been worn to the UPDF.  This House should not appear to undermine that confidence which is widely enjoyed in the whole section of our population.  

Madam Chairperson, on regulations given under miscellaneous, I am accommodating the very positive proposals made by a number of hon. Members, that we could remove the subjection of the Commission to consultation from these special groups when exercising their authority to appoint officers that will be conducting elections to get the representatives of the special groups to Parliament elected.  I am therefore, accepting the amendment so that at the end of the day that regulation shall read that ‘the Commission shall appoint Returning Officers and Presiding Officers and other election officers as may appear to the Commission reasonably necessary for the purpose of conducting the election of the representatives of the special interest groups with such functions as the Commission may direct.’  I thank hon. Members for the wise counsel and guidance they gave and it is in that spirit that, I also exercise the spirit of reconciliation and accommodation.  

Madam Chairperson, on regulation 8, I only want to repeat that, everybody concerned is working round the clock to ensure that elections are held with these special groups as soon as possible.  But the date of the 5th is just the maximum, just in case and it causes no problem judging from the arrangements on the ground.  Madam Chairperson, with those remarks, I once again thank the hon. Members, for the support they have given and the wise counsel they have given when we debated these regulations. (Interruption)

MR ATEKER EJALU: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I thank the Minister for accepting the amendment of regulation 7.  But I would like the Minister at least to clarify his position on regulation number 9.  Where it is provided that, it is the electorate which will carry the results to the Commission.

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you very much, hon. Ejalu.  In light of what we have accommodated under 7, then definitely it will be the Election Officer and I thank you for bringing it to my attention once again.  Madam Chairperson, I was thanking the Members for the support they have given and the wise counsel during the debate of these regulations. (Interruption)

MR TIVU: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, on the representation of the Youth, the Minister says that the representation of the Youth in Parliament shall be elected by the National Conference which shall be held as provided under section 8 of the National Youth Council Statute, 1993.  I said yesterday that Clause of that Statute provides that, it is only the members of the National Council who will be deemed to be elected.  I will like the Minister to clarify whether it will be the only 56 Ugandan Youths who will stand as candidates or there is a provision somewhere the candidature can be extended? (Applause) 

MR KAVUMA:  Well, Madam Chairperson, I can see section 8 deals with National Youth Delegates Conference.  Well, Madam Chairperson, I did allude to the fact that, in some of these areas it maybe now too late to go and revise the law.  This Statute is an existing piece of legislation on our Statute Book.  But I can see, I do not know whether it is part of their Constitution; I can see in three they say; ‘ subject to this Constitution, the Delegates Conference shall have the power to make or amend the Constitution of the National Youth Council.’  That to me is a residuary power that can be invoked if there is any absolute need for them to make any alterations.  So, I would urge the youth who have genuinely put up this case to approach the appropriate authorities and see whether they can seek ­-(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the Minister that as far as we stand as youth, we do not have a Constitution.

MR KAVUMA:  That is very good information.  Let me urge whoever is concerned to make one and make it appropriately to cater for your situation.  Madam Chairperson, I want to conclude my remarks by saying really that we are constraint with time.  There are many things we would have wanted to attend to with a view to perfecting whatever we are proposing, but time is not on our side; the people are waiting for elections both for the President and for the next Parliament.  Madam Chairperson, the urgency is even more apparent when one considers and remembers that the election for the President is fixed for the 9th; we cannot change that day and some of these forms and regulations are to apply to those elections.  There is need for them to be passed; they should have been passed yesterday, but we must not move on any more time.  Because there are a number of preparatory measures that must be taken in order to ensure that these forms once approved will form part and parcel of the documentation that will be used for these elections.  We have to go into printing and the rest of it.  I therefore, earnestly appeal to this hon. House to adopt and approve these regulations.  I thank you very much, hon. Chairperson and hon. Members.

MR ONGOM: Point of procedure.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  On a point of procedure, I will like to know whether we are going to vote clause by clause or number by number or we are going to approve the whole thing enmasse?  Because as we have seen, some of the provisions have been doubted by some Members and maybe they would like to preserve their position on some of these things.  The other one I want clarification on finally, Madam Chairperson is on a point of law; I am not a lawyer.  I understand that in the Constitution Clause 78(4); it says ‘Parliament shall by law prescribe the procedure.’  But here in the election of the UPDF representation, we are about to pass on that procedure to the Army Council.  I understand that you cannot delegate a delegated power.  I want to be assured that if we do that, we are not you know breaking any point of law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  First, Minister you can respond to the last one, before I answer the first query.

MR KAVUMA:  Yes, hon. Chairperson and hon. Members, I really have to repeat what I have been saying about 20 times that, the formulation as it is does not infringe against the Constitution.  Once we have provided in the law and in those regulations, the formulation we have put in this place, we shall have complied with the provisions of the law.  Especially when you read 78(4); together with 263 and 264.  That is the last one you wanted me to respond to, Madam. (Applause)

MR KABUGO:  Madam Chairperson, since we do not have in Uganda any traditional or cultural leader who is aspiring to stand for a Parliamentary seat -(interjection)- I would request the Minister to accept to delete item four on this form.  Because if at all there is a traditional or a cultural leader who wants to stand as a Parliamentarian, he has to renounce his throne or his status and he comes as an individual.  So, in this case I do not think Madam Chairperson, this Clause is necessary on this form.

MR KAVUMA:  Yes, hon. Chairperson, and hon. Kabugo Member for Nakaseke, I want to say that in law once there is a law, and you make a form to conform with the provisions of that law, if you quote that law then you must quote it in its entirety to avoid any confusion in interpretation and any doubts that maybe raised.  And this is an important area because it deals with qualifications and disqualifications.  And as you recall hon. Kabugo and you were a CA Delegate for Nakaseke, we did put that, a person intending to be a candidate for Parliament shall not be a cultural or a traditional leader.  So, you must conform to that by taking this oath with that part inclusive; and in any case, nominations have not come yet.  How do you know whether there could not be an ambitious traditional leader somewhere who may want to come and we want to give him ­-(Laughter)- I can see Kalaki is producing one right away.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kabugo you have inquired from the Minister, he has answered you.  Is it not?

MR KABUGO:  But whoever is standing is standing as a person individually; not as a cultural leader?

MR KAVUMA: (Interjection)- hon. Kabugo in the corridors after here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, on the question of procedure, I had hoped that those Members who have serious objections to any part of this Motion would present amendments.  At the time of speaking now, I have not seen a single amendment; and under the law, where you do not issue a rejoinder you are deemed to accept what has been presented.  In the circumstances we shall consider the Motion wholesale; and I now want to put the question.  I now put the question that the Motion for the consideration and approval of the Presidential and Parliamentary Election, Rules, Regulations and Forms be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE JUDICATURE BILL, 1996

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Ekemu):  Madam Chairperson, it will not be courtesy to me not to add my voice to the voices of many hon. Members who I am sure have extended some of these questions to you, upon your appointment to the Chair. (Applause)   I will like to add my voice with confidence and mention that with your long experience in this House and competence, I am sure the Chair and the House will be enriched with your experience and we should be able to do a lot of work together.  You can rest assured Madam Chairperson, of my personal commitment and loyalty to yourself and the Chair.  May I now, Madam Chairperson, beg to move that, the Judicature Bill, 1996 be read a Second time and in doing so, Madam Chairperson, I am sure hon. Members are aware that the promulgation of the new Constitution has created problems which we must cope with and some of those problems have necessitated amendments of certain laws in order to bring into operation the provisions of the Constitution.  

One of the areas which are greatly affected, Madam Chairperson, is the Judiciary - the Courts of Judicature especially the Higher Courts.  And some of them, new institutions have been set up by the Constitution, in others the composition has been changed, in others the order of appointment has been changed, in others even the procedure is lacking.  It is, therefore, necessary that this House looks at the old law which was governing the Judicature; the Judicature Act, 1967; and look at those limitations with a view to amending them in order to streamline them, or indeed repealing some of those provisions which are no longer necessary.  And that Madam Chairperson is the spirit of he bill that is before the House.  

This bill before the House is urgent.  Members are quite aware that as we talk now, there are campaigns going on for the Presidential elections and sooner or later, there will be campaigns and Parliamentary elections and therefore, it is extremely important that we put into place law.  For example, the Supreme Court could be asked to determine after the ninth of next month after the elections to see whether the candidate elected there will have been properly elected.  It is, therefore, important.  On the other hand Madam Chairperson, the court of appeal which is now not in place could be asked to give legal interpretation to the present constitution and if that happened now we would not as a country a proper court to execute that mission because it is the court of appeal which is going to be the body responsible for interpretation of our constitution and as I speak now, we have not set it up.  So, Madam Chairperson, the importance and the urgency of this bill cannot be again said.  

The bill is not very long.  This bill has got eight parts which in my view are very important to generally look at.  The first part of this bill deals with general provisions about things like the order, precedence of judges.  Hon. Members may wish to know of course judges have got what we call orders of precedence depending on their seniority and this is extremely important in the institution of the courts.  So, the first part of the bill is general part which deals with general provisions.  The second part of the bill is perhaps much more significant because it starts with dealing with the supreme court as is now provided for by the new constitution under I think article 130.  Now, this part points out the Supreme Court as the final court of appeal in this country.  It prescribes the membership of the court that the court will be headed by the chief justice.  When this court is hearing other matters like constitutional matters, it should sit as a full bench.  In other words Madam Chairperson, this part of the bill just provides the details of what a supreme court should be like as provided for by the CA in the new constitution.  The others are really more of procedures and rules which should govern the supreme court.  The Court of Appeal on the other hand is provided for under part three of the bill which has got five clauses and this also defines in terms of the new constitution what is the court of appeal and what its composition should be and it jurisdiction.  But it will also be headed by the deputy chief justice and seven justices of appeal and that when it is sitting, it should always have uneven numbers but not less than three members of the court.  

This part also mentions the question of the divisions which are areas of court for special jurisdiction which will handle specified matters like commerce or business, like matrimonial causes or company matters.  So it is considered that divisions will be created.  Since the new court of appeal is in effect to replace the former supreme court, clause 14 of the bill provides that all references in the existing law to the supreme court shall be references to the court of appeal and under article 147, this court of appeal established as our new constitutional court; there is a constitutional court within the court of appeal itself.  It is, therefore, important of course to note this Madam Chairperson as I talk about the constitutionality of the matter that any matter now arising at this time, serious constitutional consequences will require to make reference to the court of appeal which at the moment is not in place and Of course the question of interpretation which I mentioned earlier.  

Now, owing to the importance of matters of the interpretation of the constitution, article ‘37(7) requires the constitutional court to proceed to hear and determine such matters as soon as possible and empowers the court to suspend any other matter pending before it.  It is important that constitutional matters be given priority.  So this court would work with this hand of velocity.  Now part four of the Bill –(Interruption)

MR ELYAU:  Point of order.  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  Taking into account the seriousness of the bill and this is a matter which involves constitutional issues and cases and appeals, is it in order for us to continue when the quorum is not there?  Because you can now see the House is almost bear with one Minister only one side.  This is a very serious matter which affects government.  Two, there is a mention by the Minister about Act of 1967.  We do not see it.  Can we really continue when some of us are now gazing?  Can we not have those documents also brought?  But more seriously, is there a quorum really?  Because this is a very important matter as we are now getting an explanation from a constitution to actual law because this one affects all of us.  Is it in order for us to continue like this?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Clerk, can you take a count and also let us know the number of people registered as of now?  129 Members are allegedly in this House.  So I would like the Minister to continue with his presentation.

MR KALULE SENGO:  Since this is a very important bill, I was requesting that the hon. Minister does us a favour by giving us a few explanatory notes on some of these very important issues in this bill because this is a very highly technical bill and some of us are not lawyers.  It is a request I am making to the hon. Minister so that these explanations are circulated for us to contribute effectively on this bill.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Minister, please make your presentation.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give is that this bill was circulated a long time ago and Members had time to consult and look up dictionaries and whatever they wanted.  I would suggest that let the Minister proceed and after all, we are not deciding anything today.  He is introducing the matter and we sit and listen and we continue with business.

MR EKEMU:  Thank you Madam Chairperson.  I think as I continue Madam Chairperson, Members should rest assured that all I am doing now is to introduce the bill for second reading and if certain points of the bill provoke your thinking, then it is wide.  You will have time now to read about those and if hon. Ssengo has specific words he does not think he knows and he would like us to explain, I would be prepared to help him to the best of my ability.  Otherwise, I was talking about part four which deals with the high court of Uganda.  Madam Chairperson, it is a court which hon. Members are acquainted with.  I only say that it is supposed to be composed of the principle judge as the head of the high court and 25 judges of the high court.  I am of course not very sure whether we have that number now exactly but these are really some of the reasons why we must set machinery in place.  But the high court has unlimited jurisdiction over all matters and it is supposed to deal with all matters.  So, this clause also restates certain principles contained in section three of the Judicature Act, 1967 regarding the exercise of the jurisdiction of the high court including for example, the application of the rules of common law and the rest of it.  But this high court also reproduces certain principles which we have and which govern our laws like customary law and the powers of the high court to supervise lower courts like the magistrates courts.  All this is within the ambit provided for the high court.  

Madam Chairperson, there are certain provisions under this bill which relate to certain trials, like offences committed at sea or in other countries and matters like arbitration.  The high court also deals with these matters under part five of this bill. Then part six deals with remedies.  There are so many remedies Madam Chairperson in law and it is important that they should be spelt out.  For instance, clause 35 requires the court to give all appropriate remedies as will finally determine the matter before the court and to avoid multiplicity of proceedings.  This must be done carefully Madam Chairperson otherwise we would find that the courts are met with claims about one and the same thing.  So, this court deals with other matters like prerogative wits or orders like habeas corpus.  These are some things which my hon. Brother Ssengo must have been talking about.  These are matters where, for example, if a Ugandan is arrested and he is kept in some confinement and nobody wants to bring him to court.  Then some machinery must be put in place somewhere to be able to help him out.  The lawyers will not help him unless there is machinery. So, there is provision made i n this bill under part six.  Then part seven deals with rules and practices or procedure and part eight really talks about various matters including the officers of the court, the immunity of judges and everything else you can really think about.  

Madam Chairperson, there are eight parts in this bill and 51 clauses which will require consideration.  As I said, this is a short bill because the issues are precise although some hon. Colleagues have expressed a lot of anxiety but when we really come to debating it and when I think hon. Members exchange views, you will really find that this bill is not as complicated as you think.  It really talks about much of what the high court has been doing, much of what the supreme court has been doing.  The only institution which is new is the court of appeal which will also be doing really the same kind thing except under a difference nomenclature.  So, it is through bill where I would like to appeal to you hon. Members not to be over anxious and as we discuss, you will definitely benefit a lot to know what it is talking about.  

As I have already stated, this bill is also urgent.  Of course I cannot say Madam Chairperson that the urgency of the matter should make us over look the seriousness with which we should consider the bill.  So hon. Members are right in saying - I think they were saying they need more time to have a look at the bill.  I think it is important because however urgent it is, it is important that it is debated fruitfully and very openly and clearly.  I think this should be a much better position.  Accordingly therefore Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, I commend this bill to the House for debate and I therefore beg to move that this bill be read a Second Time.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  That is the end of today’s proceedings.  The House stands adjourned until 2.30 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 April 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)

