Thursday, 28 April 2011 

Parliament met at 2.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, again I welcome you and I thank you for finding time to come for parliamentary business. As you are aware, the process of issuing national identity cards started and it is sponsored by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Those concerned have started getting the details from a number of people. There is a plan to have Members’ details taken, starting tomorrow morning in the Conference Hall of Parliament. I, therefore, appeal to you to appear so that your details are taken so that your IDs can be prepared. This will be tomorrow, here at Parliament. 

Again, I am happy to inform you that one of us namely; Maj. Gen. Julius Oketa, Member of Parliament, has successfully completed his Doctorate of Philosophy course in management and has been awarded a PhD in Business Management, issued at Newport University in the United States. He just reported to me and I thought I should inform you of the success of our Member. Congratulations! (Applause) 

2.48
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance, which does not only concern this country but even our image at an international level. This concern is the on-going oppression meted out onto the members of the Opposition and more particularly my party president, Dr Kiiza Besigye. 

Dr Besigye was released from Nakasongola Prison last evening. However, for those of you who watched the Al Jazeera news this afternoon, we were all shocked to see the very inhumane, pathetic situation only comparable to the James Bond films of those days, in which Col Dr Kiiza Besigye was arrested this morning at the Mulago roundabout. This was when he was being driven in his vehicle Reg. No. UAM 660V a Land Cruiser V8 model, white in colour. 

He was besieged by plain-clothed and uniformed security operatives. If you saw the footage, there were two men. One came with a claw-hammer and the other with a pistol and broke the windscreen and door glasses of this vehicle. Thereafter, they sprayed inside the vehicle with teargas. His driver, Kato, collapsed, unconscious. He was taken to hospital and we are not sure of his condition. 

When I saw that footage, I decided to go Wandegeya Police Station where the vehicle is now parked with a lot of blood stains in the seats and from there, I was given the impression that he is at Kasangati Police Station. I went there and met a number of my colleagues, honourable members of Parliament and party members. Even lawyer David Mpanga and Kalibbala and others could not be allowed to see him. Even we, the senior members of the party, were denied access to him. We are worried about his health status. All the blood that you could see in the vehicle means that there is more injury that has been caused to Dr Besigye.

The purpose of alerting Government in the first place is to condemn the inhumane manner in which Dr Kiiza Besigye has been treated. Even if you were to arrest a person, there are civilized ways in which to do it. If you see the footage, and this has been watched internationally, the plain-clothed men who hammered the vehicles talked in Kinyankole and said, “Mutere, mutere” which from my scanty knowledge of Kinyankole, means, “Beat him”. That is what the whole thing was -(Interjections)– yes, I am not a Munyankole and I am pleased that as a Lugbara, I can be able to hear that bit. 

First of all, I think it has portrayed a very negative international image of our country. So, my purpose of bringing this information to this honourable House is to condemn in the strongest possible terms the inhumane, militaristic manner in which members of the opposition in general and Dr Kiiza Besigye in particular, have been treated. 

It is a “crime” for us to walk on foot and it has become a “crime” to drive in our vehicles. What else does Government expect of us? Are you going to buy us choppers so that we can be able to fly? Surely, if Dr Kiiza Besigye had been walking on foot that would be reason enough for you to say that he was pulling a crowd, but he was in his vehicle.

Secondly, I would like Government to come up with a statement of explanation on what exactly happened. What is it? Up to what level are we going to be mistreated that way? A person has just been released from prison and you take him back to prison! I think there is much more that is probably hidden in the heart of Government. We need an explanation. 

It is not only about what has happened to Dr Kiiza Besigye. In today’s newspapers, over 30 of our party members in Bugweri have been arrested and others are on the run, ostensibly at the directives of the Minister of Internal Affairs. How long are we going to continue misusing state organs? The authority that we have entrusted to you through votes and the power that has been given to you by the people through the Constitution of this country are being abused. For how long are we going to continue to suffer and yet according to the same papers, Government, in its cabinet meetings, yesterday discussed the issue of dialogue between the Opposition and the NRM-O, the party in government? How could you be extending a handshake and keeping a dagger at your back? How serious shall we take you if you are going to treat us that way? These are issues of concern to us.  

Mr Speaker, once again I thank you for this opportunity. We really need and deserve an explanation from Government. We are not even sure about the state of Dr Kiiza Besigye. Why are we being denied access to him? Not even his lawyers are allowed to see him. With all that blood that we saw in the vehicle, his life must also be at stake right now; probably that is why we are not allowed access to him. Even if a person has been arrested, he is innocent until proven guilty. Even if he has been convicted he can still be visited. Even if one has been condemned, it is his right to receive visitors to chat with and to assess his condition. 

What is it with Dr Besigye and members of the Opposition in general that we continue to suffer? For how long are we going to suffer? We sit here as colleagues but what is happening outside there is awful! All you use is state machinery. How do you come with a pistol or a claw-hammer and spray in a vehicle where the person is, his own vehicle? We need an explanation. The situation is pathetic because nobody can drive through Kasangati road without holding their noses and tears coming out of their eyes because the air is full of teargas. All that we see in Kasangati are Mambas and Surambayas.

The Police are actually not in charge; it is the Army right now. If this is an internal matter, how does the Army come with all that military hardware? We need an explanation from the Minister of Defence, hon. Chrispus Kiyonga. Are you going to use this military hardware bought with the taxpayers’ money, which is supposed to be used for ensuring safety of this country, on us? Is this how you are going to use the Shs 1.7 trillion jets - on us? I thought this was going to be used for protection against aggression. To turn this on us, honestly, is very sad! I am sorry I am so emotional because if you go there, you will shed tears when you see what is happening. I you thank, Mr Speaker.

2.58
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to address this House on an issue that my boss, the Opposition Chief Whip, has talked about. 

You cannot avoid being emotional if you see what happened to Dr Kiiza Besigye. On April 11th, the A4C declared the Walk-to-Work Campaign and effectively we begun to walk. Many of us were arrested and taken to the courts of law. Only yesterday, we travelled from Nakasongola with our party leader after he was granted bail by court in Nakasongola. The magistrate even had to be transferred to Nakasongola to try Dr Kiiza Besigye and three others yet her jurisdiction is Nabweru. 

There are pertinent questions that need to be asked and these include whether Government believes in the liberty of the Opposition. This morning, Dr Besigye came in his car - he was not walking - and he got to Wandegeya and many of you will bear witness with what has been described by hon. Wadri. I would like to add that we are not sure whether Dr Kiiza Besigye is alive. I would like to challenge Government to produce Dr Kiiza Besigye in the next few minutes and show him to this nation and the world at large. It is only then that we shall be sure that he is still alive. He has not had access to his lawyers; he has not had access to legislators including senior members of the party, and in Kasangati hangs a mood of misery. 

I want to ask Government, where do you want the Opposition to go? Is there another country called Uganda where the Opposition should go? This kind of harassment, I would like to warn, could be a recipe for an insurgency in this country. You may murmur, but I am sure that only 27 people went to the bush 25 years ago and brought down a democratically elected government of this country, so we have got to be sensitive to the Opposition. You have pushed us too far and I think very soon we may not tolerate this.

Dr Besigye has millions of supporters out there. Even after the contested elections, the Electoral Commission declared over two million votes for him. What do you think those common citizens would think when their leader is being mishandled the way he has been over the last one month?

I know that, Mr Speaker, on behalf of this House, you said that what happened in the last weeks of April were unfortunate but I think whereas this House regretted what happened then, we need assurances from Government that Dr Besigye is a free citizen of this country and that not any Tom, Dick and Harry would impede his liberty to freely associate and to freely go about his work. I would like to question the sheer amount of force that is being used on Col Besigye; we have seen red tops and battle gear used against unarmed people of this country, some of them your own supporters.

This is a black day in the history of this nation, I would like to declare. You are about to swear in a new President, I do not want to believe that Yoweri Kaguta Museveni should be sworn in yet we have a mess in this country. I know that is a rather strong statement, but I am here not representing myself but over 25,000 people who elected me. Ideally, I should be making these remarks while shedding tears because the suffering meted on Dr Kiiza Besigye is unbearable! I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.06
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. It has always been repeated over and over again that the reason why a group of people went to the bush in 1980 was because they thought there was no political space at that time in this country. Indeed, one of the people who eventually ended up in the bush or exile had been elected a Member of Parliament but he thought that at that time, it was not possible for him to represent the people in Kasese and he opted for an armed struggle. It is quite unfortunate that the honourable member then and the honourable member now looking at me is the Minister in charge of Defence. 

Do we have lessons to learn from our history? Do we pick lessons from our ugly past? Are you dragging us back to the days when even having a different view from those in government was criminal? We have seen a Chief Justice of this country dragged in the same manner like Dr Kiiza Besigye was and he was never to be seen again. 

You have kidnapped Dr Kiiza Besigye. What are you doing with him? Does Dr Besigye have a constitutional right, even if he has committed a crime, to see his lawyers, medical staff, relatives and fellow leaders? You are holding him incommunicado. You have injured him, there is blood all over and we are seated as if nothing has happened! This country has had the “captains kill me quickly” and they are not here anymore. There was a Capt. Agetta, he is not here anymore. Even those who are arrogant, fed and drunk with power today, their day of reckoning will come as day follows night. 

History teaches us that none of the people who are doing what you do get away with it eventually. We are pleading with you that this country belongs to all of us and we cannot share political views. We shall have our disagreements. Our moments of agreement will be there and our moments of disagreement will also be there. Why do you criminalise my action or my thinking which is not like yours? Why have you turned us into criminals? We have tried our best to make sure that we follow the law to the letter and what do we get? 

Mr Speaker, look at the television footage –(Interjections)- just one minute and I will get them for you. The Minister of Internal Affairs proudly said, “My job is to arrest them. After I have arrested them, I throw them to court.” They are on television everyday. The minister’s job is to arrest and that is what he is saying on television. This arrogance, this impunity must come to an end.

The second point -(Interjection)- okay, I take the information.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for giving way. As I try to piece together the statement of hon. Katuntu together with those of hon. Amuriat and the Leader of the Opposition, I get the impression that people armed with a pistol and a hammer broke into Dr Kiiza Besigye’s vehicle. I recall very well that the hammer was a typical symbol of Dr Besigye himself but to imagine that the Police of Uganda can, amongst its ware and implements, use a hammer - the two are incompatible! You cannot put them together - am I hearing right or are my senses giving way! What is happening? Somebody must clarify whether our Police are armed with hammers. I am failing to even follow the flow or the sequence. 

Can I be assisted to clarify what exactly this is? Have we degenerated so badly to the extent that we are a hammer-wielding government? Those should be for bandits and cannot be government. It is equal to banditry! Can somebody put my senses in order so that I can be able to comprehend what is happening? I thank you.

MR KATUNTU: I thank you very much. Hon. Ssekikubo, there are things happening in this country which we cannot believe are possible under this reign of the NRM. The sole reason they gave when they were going to the bush was that there was a lot of injustice. Now this injustice is the order of the day - including using hammers. Yes, you may be proud of it as a Government but I am telling you that it is something, which you should be ashamed of as Government and also us as a country. I do not want to live in a country where security forces are using hammers to hit people’s vehicles and even hitting political leaders!

The last point I would like to make is that my entire campaign team was arrested last week on Thursday. All of them have been kept in cells in Iganga Police Station for the entire week. I have talked to everybody in the Police, from top to bottom, and I only get one answer: “They were arrested on orders of the Minister of Internal Affairs”. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs has actually been my opponent since 2001 and he does not have any success record against me politically. So, he is using that particular office to get back at the people whom he thinks work against him in the constituency. He has even this time used the police cells just to hold fugitives. They are just being used for fugitives. The O/C CID, the DPC, the Regional Police Commander, the IGP and the Director CID are saying that these are the minister’s prisoners - Al-Haji Kirunda Kivejinja.

In 2006, I proved it in the High Court, Court of Appeal and Supreme Court that he turned his own residence into a cell where he could arrest people and lock them up. I proved it in court and that is why he was thrown out of Parliament. Now that he is in charge of the Police, he is using the police cells as detention centres. You go to Kasangati; it is now another Guantanamo Bay. What is happening now is that the victims are now the villains. The victims of your brutality are the ones to blame. Cry my beloved country!

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, can you say something? As you realise, this was something that came up at the request of hon. Wadri and a lot has been said so let us get the statement of the minister.

3.17
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I thank you, Mr Speaker. In the morning I happened to be in your company meeting the European Union Members of Parliament and you did ask me, on your behalf, to lead them to have some tea. 

They raised questions regarding this matter and we explained to them. However, as we were taking tea, this footage came in and I was with these guests who asked me questions that I could not answer given what we had discussed in the morning. I was embarrassed to see how Dr Kiiza Besigye had been handled in the company of your guests. It is a terrible shame to the image of this country!

I have just come from Kasangati as well. We do not know whether doctor is alive or not. The description of how the car was broken into has been given. I want to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs who these people wielding pistols in plain clothes and breaking into doctor’s car are. I hope before we leave this House, these pictures will have arrived because we have sent them for printing. We have this threat of the al Shaabab, aren’t we giving ground for such people to get in because we do not know - (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you are given another minute to wind up.

MR OKUPA: Yesterday, we met hon. Mao as we had gone to stand surety for Dr Besigye. He told us that the President had sent people to prison for us to dialogue and see the way forward. Is this the way to do things, just a day after all this was being prepared? 

The officers that act professionally have been suspended. Mutabaazi escorted Dr Olara Otunnu to Uganda House and nothing happened, but what does Mutabaazi get – suspension! You remember very well another police officer who acted well in Sembabule, the one hon. Ssekikubo handled, he was disciplined and he is still on katebe. He saved a situation there. If he had acted like these ones here, possibly we would have lost more people in Sembabule but because he acted that way, he was dismissed.

Finally, we want to know from the Government, is doctor under village arrest or house arrest? Are there no-go areas for him even when he is driving?

3.18
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Today has been for me a very black day. I just pray, with God’s grace, I will say something to this country through this Parliament.

Yesterday we were in Nakasongola to secure bail for our party president. We were able to come back in a way that Ugandans along the road showed their solidarity and love for Dr Kiiza Besigye. This morning, I could not walk as I am supposed to because I have a sick person at home. A high ranking official rang me from within saying that Besigye has defied orders and he walked while we are supposed to talk peace. Well, I understand from the newspapers that something is cooking up and they wanted to go into dialogue. 

As I reached Parliament, I was preparing for some work in the Office of the Leader of the Opposition and it was 1.00 p.m. and I saw the news on NTV. I have never broken down but what I can tell Parliament is that I saw Dr Kiiza Besigye being driven. I saw a lean plain-clothed person go to his window side with a pistol, banged it and broke the window. Another one came with a can of teargas and tear-gassed his nose. Another one tear-gassed the driver. I saw on the other side of the car the two young men who go with Besigye - it was like a terrible film - they were being kicked left, right and centre. The driver was tear-gassed in the face, he was pulled out and he collapsed on the ground. The next thing I saw was Dr Kiiza Besigye being pushed into a pickup of the Police, his head was down and he was pushed with the leg under. The legs had not even gotten onto the pickup and they were closing. It was like he was being folded and I broke down -(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, I have sat in this corner and listened to my colleagues across and definitely, none of us this side likes what is going on unless he is a sadist. Therefore, I want clarification or guidance from you if, as Parliament, we could move a motion condemning the manner in which Kiiza Besigye, the leader of the biggest opposition party in this country, has been handled and we condemn the activities and the manner in which he is being handled. If you allow me, I am ready to move that motion.

THE SPEAKER: I thought you were giving clarification to the person who was holding the Floor. Let her complete her contribution.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The sight I saw - if any of you saw - as a mother of this country I had to break down. I would not imagine a son of a woman would be treated like this in this country, Uganda, in this era. Even if Besigye had killed somebody on the spot, still what I saw today would not have reached there because we pride ourselves in following the rule of law. I am sure some of my colleagues on the other side must have watched that. My daughter had to call and say, “Have you seen? Are you safe?” 

As a mother of this country, I cannot imagine what the mother or the close relatives like Dr Olive, the sister of Dr Kiiza Besigye, are going through. I had to leave what I was doing on the desk top, which I should have presented here, and I rushed to Kasangati and I found fellow women wailing. We were denied access and there were bloodstains everywhere. I heard “mutere” as my boss was saying. Really, these are facts and anybody and the whole world will see.

My concern is: does this country belong to all of us? Do we respect human rights in Uganda? Are we going back to Aminism? How long should suffering continue while we sit here as legislators and as fathers and mothers of this nation and see things going wrong? You stop us from walking and he was driving! My dear colleagues, what shall we tell our children? We are here today but tomorrow we may not have the privilege to be here and you might be in the shoes of Besigye. Shouldn’t we follow the law? 

I am here as a mother of this country to condemn this. I should have condemned it in Acholi language, my mother tongue. We cannot continue to run this country like this. Dr Besigye is a Ugandan and he is a leader. How best would you want leaders in this country to be treated? What precedent are we setting? What seeds are we sowing? What dialogue are you talking about when you are just traumatising us and killing us? I am not sure whether Kiiza Besigye is not dead now. They could not allow us to go in. Tell the country. Should he die, you are going to be held responsible!

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, this is a matter of great importance and significance to our country. It is not my practice that I give a reply off-cuff, therefore, I beg your indulgence to allow me to go and compile the facts of the story as the Government knows it. I will then come back to this House to explain or to apologise, whatever facts that will be received from the ground.

3.27
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibaale): Mr Speaker, whereas we appreciate the predicament that the hon. Minister is going through, and maybe intentionally he says he has no facts about what is happening to one of the senior citizens of this country, but as Ugandans, we are in a game of politics. I am not that type of coward who fears opponents; I would want to have a clean competition, but it is now apparent that the person we are competing with for power is nowhere to be seen. Do we require a document from the minister as of now, or we want to be told where he is? He disappeared between Mulago mortuary roundabout and CMI. So, where is he? That is what we want to know. Does it need a document to be brought here?

3.29
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am taking the Floor to supplement what my colleague, the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, has submitted. I will also make some detailed response to some of the very critical issues that my colleagues on the Opposition and some on the Government side are raising. 

My understanding is that our colleagues are saying that Dr Besigye has been re-arrested in what is described as a very brutal manner. Other colleagues are even insinuating that his whereabouts are not known, or if known the state of his life is uncertain.

My brother, Eng. Amuriat, has stated clearly and correctly that sometimes when there are very difficult situations, emotions overwhelm even leaders. I could not agree with him more. Hon. Anywar said she broke down before and even on the Floor of the House she is about to break down. However, I would like to appeal to colleagues that while we are human beings, we are also the leaders of this country, whether you are on the Opposition or on the Government side. So, even if there is a difficult situation, we still must stand up and provide leadership, emotions notwithstanding. 

It has been stated that the UPDF has been involved in this arrest. That is not so critical to me. Whether the UPDF was not involved, whether the arrest was only by the Police, whether there were mistakes or no mistakes, all of us on the Government side are accountable to the country for whatever our security services do. So I think what we should be asking for, on the Floor, is the leadership on the Government side to account for the event that has been described. In asking so, we also need to be realistic and fair to each other. 

Mr Speaker, I did get a briefing early this afternoon that Dr Besigye had been re-arrested and he is now before court. I was waiting for a full brief this evening because every evening, the security committee sits to assess the events of the day, particularly these days because we are going through these challenges of demonstrations. So I appeal to my colleagues on both sides - some on the Government side who have strong feelings about what is being alleged and also colleagues on the Opposition - to be fair. Pause this question of accountability; demand that Government comes back here to give a full account of what happened as soon as possible, even if it requires that we should come back here tomorrow, Friday. 

When we woke up this morning, everyone went for their work. For anyone to expect that here and now, the Minister of Defence or the Minister of Internal Affairs can give a full account of what happened is being unfair. You should give us time to investigate this matter and return to you in a matter of 24 hours. That is not asking for too much. 

While doing that, I would like to request that we as leaders should restrain ourselves. I think this is not the time to threaten insurgency. We cannot say that because of this incidence for which we have not yet responded, people should not be showing results of what they consider –(Interruption)

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the Minister of Defence has asked for more time. I would like to know from him whether the security agents are acting without the knowledge of the political leadership.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, as he asks for time, could he direct that they give us access? At least this does not require 24 hours; could we be given access to visit our party president?

DR KIYONGA: I will start with the question by hon. Okello-Okello. The security agencies are there to keep law and order in this country. So wherever they are, if there is breach of the law, they must take action. They do not have to ring the Minister of Internal Affairs or the Minister of Defence to say, “Now, there is a breach of the law, can we act?” However, when they act wherever they are, if they make mistakes, they get appropriately punished for the mistakes so committed. All of us can quote incidents where this has happened. So we know that the security agencies are out there to protect the people but we cannot be able to account for every moment - that for this particular incident, we ordered it and we know it was carried out either appropriately or inappropriately. That is why we are asking to be given 24 hours and we come back here. (Laughter) 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, hon. Minister, for giving way. The information I want to give is that the tone and language you are using here is good. Also our President, who is our party president, on Easter Sunday – we had the privilege of hosting him in Kabale - was preaching love, tolerance, forgiveness and reconciliation. The information I want to give this House, and maybe to the Minister, is that much as you hear that tone and the President is preaching this gospel of tolerance, peace, unity and forgiveness, the problem is that we are not practising what we preach. 

DR KIYONGA: Regarding what hon. Elijah Okupa has said, I find no reason why Dr Besigye’s relatives and close comrades cannot access him if he is in the hands of the state. I do not see any reason why and I am sure they will be allowed.

In conclusion, yes, there is a challenge from mainly the Opposition and other colleagues on the Government side that what happened this morning or this afternoon was uncalled for and we should fully account for the whereabouts of Besigye and the manner in which he was arrested. I am also adding that while we prepare to give that accountability in the next 24 hours, all of us must exercise leadership. This is not the time for us to threaten insurgency. This is not the time for us to start referring to 1980. I can assure my brother, hon. Katuntu, that the principle I stood for in 1980 is what I still stand for today. I am not convinced that we are in that similar situation. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the most important thing in the circumstances as stated is for security to enable members who want to see Dr Besigye to access him. That will help them to also get the details as to how he was arrested. Contributions have been made here but they only learnt about it after the arrest. If they get access to him, he will be able to narrate how he got arrested and they will speak with authority about the circumstances under which he was arrested. I am appealing to the Minister of Internal Affairs to do that.

As for the motion, the handicap you are going to have is that you are going to move a motion when you do not have the facts. When you bring it here, they will throw it away and that will close another motion soon. Why don’t you wait to get the facts and then move the motion? That is my advice.

MR WADRI: Mr Speaker, once again I would like to thank you and the entire House for the audience you have given us in making this presentation. At the same time, I would like to say that I and a few of my members will have to go back to Kasangati and see if there is any opportunity to have access to Dr Besigye. I would like to request Dr Chrispus Kiyonga and hon. Matia Kasaija to use their good offices and at least allow us to see Dr Besigye. With all that influence –

THE SPEAKER: That is the most important thing.

MR WADRI: Let at least medical personnel have access to him because without that, what is happening there is very unfortunate. Once again, I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be taking leave of this House shortly to go back to Kasangati.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. (Banyenzaki rose_) No, I know what he is going to say. The pipes to Mulago for taking gas were stolen and what security measures is the minister taking to prevent that? That is his point. That can wait. The minister in charge of Mulago Hospital, please explain because today in the papers, it was written that pipes taking gas were stolen and some people lost their lives because of that.  

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification after hearing from the minister that he will be able to give us detailed information accounting for the events of today. I would like to have it clear: when is he coming back to the House to give us the accountability of what happened today?

Two, the state in which Dr Kiiza Besigye is in is critical. Seeing from all the blood stains in the car and us having not been able to access him, my feeling is that he is being detained and delayed and his health is not taken as a priority. That could jeopardise his health. Can the minister also take keen interest and ensure that the health of Dr Kiiza Besigye is a priority because you can only take a person who is healthy and able to stand the trial to court. They are keeping him in some other places rather than the hospital where his health should be ascertained before he is produced in the courts of law or other procedures taken. Can you ensure that the health of Dr Besigye is a priority? Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the difficulty within which the Front Bench finds itself – and today we are privileged to have the Leader of Government Business – but the phenomenon I have been seeing and observing of recent is that even when matters require a straight forward explanation, the minister is always reluctant. 

It was only last Thursday that the President came out to speak about the riots, the rising prices of fuel and foodstuffs yet we have a host of line ministers and other cabinet members. Even now, I can see one attempt to stand and he sits down maybe to give way to some colleague to come up, which colleague is also reluctant to speak. What is happening? Assume your titles and roles, honourable front bench members. This is your country, you are in charge. Are you in charge? What is really happening? This must come to an end! 

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure? (Laughter)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Are we procedurally right to have the Front Bench fully occupied and ministers cannot rise up to defend their turf –(Interjections)- to represent their portfolios? They are all down.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I thought we came to the conclusion that the most important thing to do, based on the circumstances just elaborated here in the House, is to give access to the members who want to find out what has happened to Dr Besigye. We have agreed that they be given access immediately to know what has happened to Dr Besigye and to learn the circumstances because none of them witnessed what happened. They only came to know after the events, and that is what I had said to the minister that he should facilitate those who want to see Dr Besigye to do so immediately so that they can get first hand information and see the condition in which he is. 

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I get amazed when -

THE SPEAKER: Our rules do not allow people to speak twice on a motion.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I get amazed when some of us -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable, let me ask you: have you agreed to facilitate those who want to have access to Dr Besigye to do so?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, noted. And secondly the question of taking care of the health of Dr Kiiza Besigye is also noted. We are here to conserve and protect life and property.

MR BANYENZAKI: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: What is the procedure? 

MR BANYENZAKI: You can see how they are malicing me. Let me put this on record. Every time I stand to speak even when I am alone, when I am about to begin to speak, this microphone is switched off so that I am not given the opportunity to speak. So, to the people who control this microphone, nobody should sabotage Banyenzaki Henry in this House again. Mr Speaker, I need your protection on this matter.

The guidance, Mr Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: First of all, I must confess I know nothing about how these things operate but I hope those who are operating them know. Please, do not disturb hon. Banyenzaki when he has a right to speak. (Laughter) 

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. All along the guidance I wanted to seek is that you ruled that I bring my motion at the time when the statement is brought. I have all the facts, should I take it now and put it on record that I have moved an oral -

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable, I was only advising that it is better we get the facts because if the motion is to condemn the circumstances it is necessary for us to know the circumstances under which he was arrested. That is why we are appealing to the minister to facilitate Members who want to see Dr Besigye to see him. 

You could move it, but I advise you that if you bring it without necessary facts then it may abort and it will be a hurdle to bring another similar motion within the foreseeable future. Therefore, you rather collect the facts and then move the motion and it will be a rich motion rather than a motion that is moved on emotion. 

3.50
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One aspect of the argument was that Members who would want to go and see Dr Besigye be allowed to see him and the other side was that the minister committed himself to be given time and bring a statement in this House. But up to now we are not clear when he will be ready with that statement and yet some of us who may not be going to see Dr Besigye are interested in getting the facts and we debate the issue. 

So, could you probably direct the minister - whether we give him one hour and by the time we finish this debate he will be ready, or maybe tomorrow morning as he had earlier suggested - when will the statement come to the Floor? I think we need to know.

3.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, as he is answering that, when I raised the issue of the health of Dr Kiiza Besigye as a priority he said it was noted. Did he mean that officers there were going to ensure that his health is stable enough to be taken to court, or is he just noting here and nothing happens? We want total commitment to that. Health is a priority. Thank you.

MR KASAIJA: I thought, Mr Speaker, when one says, “It is noted,” it means I have taken note and I am going to take action. That is how I understand the word “noted.”

On the question of when I should come back here to inform the House, there is a proposal by my colleague, hon. Kiyonga that we reconvene tomorrow. That is outside my power but whether we come back here, that is in your hands, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

3.52
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I have consulted the Minister of Defence and he has informed me that tonight there will be a statement because it is not only hon. Members of Parliament who are entitled to get information but the entire nation.

With regards to details, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs needs to establish the facts and he has requested to make a statement tomorrow. You see what I mean? So I suggest that we leave it at that because you cannot get any more information. 

Furthermore, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs has made it clear that those who would like to access Dr Besigye will be assisted to do so. So, I suggest that we leave it at that. I want to appeal to hon. Members of Parliament that we cannot do more than what we have pledged. I suggest that we leave it at that.

3.54
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also love to say that when we are getting the statement on Dr Besigye tomorrow, the Leader of Government Business should give us a statement regarding the theft of the oxygen pipes in Mulago and an account of the loss of life. 

Mr Speaker, I actually briefed you that on Good Friday, in the Heart Institute at Mulago National Referral Hospital, they stole oxygen pipes which serve the intensive care unit and due to that theft lives were lost. It has been reported in The New Vision and on the televisions. The only problem was that they never reported how many people died. As Parliament, we would love to get an account of how many people really died as well as the security situation of the national referral hospital which is Mulago. So, we would love that when you are giving the statement about Dr Kiiza Besigye, even the Minister of Health gives us that statement. I thank you.  

3.55
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, earlier on you had raised this matter. We have made attempts to get in touch with the Ministry of Health. We have received information to the effect that investigations into this matter have actually commenced and that the minister will be coming here with a statement in regard to what exactly happened and the corrective measures that are being taken in order to ensure that we do not lose the lives of Ugandans who go for treatment in Mulago Hospital. We consider this to be a very urgent matter. On Tuesday, when we come back here, we shall be getting a statement on it. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $350 MILLION FROM THE EXPORT-IMPORT  BANK OF CHINA FOR FINANCING THE PROPOSED KAMPALA-ENTEBBE EXPRESS HIGHWAY

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Government of Uganda is seeking to borrow US $350 million from the Export-Import Bank of China for financing the proposed Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway. This is part of the Government’s plans to improve on infrastructure and this project is part of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area (GKMA). 

This loan was presented to Parliament and discussions have been held with the committees on Infrastructure and National economy. But in brief, this loan will be borrowed from the EXIM Bank of China. The project will be executed by the Uganda National Roads Authority under the Ministry of Works, monitored by them and evaluated by them in liaison with the Ministry of Finance and the EXIM Bank of China.

This loan carries an interest of two percent and the maturity period is 20 years, including five years of grace. Uganda Government, as a contribution, will contribute US $126 million because the whole project is going to cost US $426 million. Our contribution will be provided for in the budget periods during the execution of this project. 

The committee is going to present a detailed report and the Ministry of Works will supplement and explain on how this project will be executed. All we are doing is seeking the authority of Parliament to borrow this amount of money in line with Article 157 of our Constitution. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The chairperson, can you be brief – you do not have to read your whole report. Tell us about the amount, the terms, and the justification of the project.

4.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Most obliged, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the National Economy Committee, I want to summarise this report. Good enough all Members have enough information – you have copies of the brief to Parliament. We have circulated even the details of when we were in the field – the responses and interventions of Members of the Infrastructure and National Economy committees. 

We have written presentations. We have quite detailed on how the Chinese borrowing is done. I am reading this because we have five appendices on our report - the responses, presentation - and I think that should guide us. With that I should be able to give a much summarised submission.

During our scrutiny, as usual, we interfaced with the sector ministry, UNRA and also conducted field visits with the Committee of Infrastructure. 

I want to go straight to page 3. A number of measures for decongesting the Kampala Central Business District (CBD) and improving trade movement in the GKMA have been proposed from various studies and the National Development Plan (NDP) prioritised the improvement of traffic flow within the GKMA. 

On page 4, we give the cost estimates for the transport development strategy of this programme. This is a much detailed thing beyond just this project. I am taking the Speaker’s guidance of summarising, honourable colleagues. 

On page 6, among others, the rationale includes the reduction in travel time and costs; access to Entebbe International Airport; implementation of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area Transport Master Plan and it has a highest potential for tolling. Tolling will be for those who can afford and who are in a hurry. 

Page 7 gives the map of the area which will be covered. On page 8, we have the features of the project in the table. The table clearly shows how it will connect to the Northern Bypass, the Express Highway from Abayita Ababiri; the design speed Lweza-Munyonyo and how this road intends to connect those going for international conferences. There is also the widening lane which starts from Abayita Ababiri to the Ministry of Works in Entebbe. 

The Ministry of Finance has already talked of the financing detail but as a committee, I lay on the Table details of the project cycle in terms of the financing. It will show how the Government of Uganda began discussing with EXIM China, how the Memorandum of Understanding was signed and others, including the stage we are now at. 

Those details are given because we thought, as a committee, we seem to be going more to China for money, and Parliament should increasingly understand this financing modality. Also, since we are going more to China and Arab countries, in future we should have more negotiations. Yesterday we informed Members that we have a challenge of small loans from the West as if we were still under PEAP yet we want bigger money. To do that, we will need to have serious negotiations to finance Vision 2035 and NDP.

If you can allow, I will go to page 12. I know you have a lot of information in the other appendices we have given you. Our first observation is that in the current Constitution land belongs to the people, but at this stage of development land has become a liability for all infrastructure projects especially roads, pipelines, electricity, and water projects. 

We are mentioning this because when you compare with countries like Ethiopia where government owns land, you realise that even murram is owned by Government – in Uganda we lose a lot of time. Even as we speak, in Busega where that road is supposed to start from, there is a developer around that place who is already posing a danger to the start of the project. 

In the circumstances, the committee recommends that there is need to revisit the Constitution and the Land Act of Uganda and see if we can give the state more latitude on infrastructure land acquisition to enable the country upgrade itself to a developing country since we do not have a 30-year development plan that would have required gazzeting all the earmarked areas of development.

THE SPEAKER: You mean you want to revisit the Constitution?

MR MUKITALE: No, it is a recommendation for the future. Mr Speaker, I know this is a sensitive matter because we may all be owning some land somewhere but as a committee we have met several problems in that regard. In every project we handle, there is need to first deal with land acquisition. That is why I am talking about a possible review of those laws by the ninth Parliament.

The committee observed that like many other road construction projects, progress of work for this particular project was likely to be affected by land acquisition issues in the road corridor relating to the delays in the compensation of land owners. A number of existing road projects still have outstanding land issues.

In the circumstances, we recommend that strategies for timely and expeditious land compensation, reallocation of utilities for the people on that section of the road project be handled in order to pre-empt any costs and time due to lack of complete access.

We further recommend that the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Physical Infrastructure follows up with the Ministry of Works and Transport, UNRA and the Local Urban Authorities to stop speculators. For example at the Busega round about currently there is somebody clearing land for an already earmarked project.

We also suggest that in future, if possible, we gazette all planned infrastructure access, whether it is for transmission or roads, in time to stop urban authorities from approving development plans. However, we have been told that until one acquires the land, they cannot stop the current owner from developing it. So, it is really a chicken-and-egg situation, for which we think a solution must be found.

On page 13, we have the third observation on the cost overruns which are highly linked to misuse of project funds due to uncertainty and end up exceeding the financial contingencies provided in the contract. Besides, several road projects are completed at much higher costs than project estimates.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport, and UNRA ensure that in future consideration is made on packaging the contract into road sections of standardised construction time as a way of controlling construction costs. 

An optimisation of gains from shorter construction periods as a result of smaller packages and losses from over-fragmentation of the road project mainly from mobilisation, stabilisation, establishment costs and economies of scale ought to be sought.

The committee further recommends that Government of Uganda, Ministry of Works and Transport, and UNRA have standard designs instead of relying on preliminary designs. We are losing a lot of time in terms of project cycle because we depend on the financing and pace of the donors. The ministry had promised to take over the responsibility of designs using our money and that should be the way forward.

On page 14, we observe that the lack of adequate road safety provisions for black spots on most of the newly constructed major national roads and highways has significantly contributed to the high traffic accidents in the country. There is fear that the design speed of the Kampala-Entebbe Express of 120 between end of Kampala Northern Bypass and 100 between Lweza and Munyonyo will lead to very high road accidents along this road. Road safety provisions need to be catered for before it is opened for public use.

The committee, however, appreciates the design of this road where some of these critical areas have been fenced off completely to ensure limited access and more or so where the speed range of 100 to 120 is planned.

Parliament of Uganda appreciates the intended public-private partnership in road toll piloting, which will come at the end of this project and the idea of the very project generating the revenue to repay the loan. However, we think that in future this public/private intention could be taken further to mobilize the money themselves, finance and maintain the project.

The sixth observation is that the Chinese bi-lateral loan has conditions of a Chinese contractor, design and the consultant. This is going to leave the Government of Uganda and UNRA with only supervision and land acquisition responsibilities. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance and Government of Uganda in future should negotiate for more roles and participation of UNRA at the procurement stage through competitive bidding in line with our PDDA Act. Under these circumstances, UNRA then should ensure that value for money is obtained from these borrowed funds by effectively and efficiently managing this project.

In some of the appendices we have attached, there are some of the written answers from the ministry because our concern was: if they have done the design, they are the contractors and consultants, how much value can we add? In that presentation, we have indicated how much more and I hope the minister will be able to explain how they can maximize return on investment value for money even with the Chinese consultant and contractor.

The committee also observed that whereas that Kampala Northern Bypass was done, the original Kampala Southern Bypass was never implemented fully; the express highway only stops at Munyonyo without accessing Jinja Road, which is a very critical lifeline at some place around Namboole or Seeta. This would help those connecting to the eastern borders of Busia and Malaba. 

We recommend that funds are immediately mobilized for the remaining part so that this does not only –

THE SPEAKER: Well, hon. Member, two days ago - I don’t know whether the Minister of Works and Transport was misquoted – but I think he was in Mukono and said the ministry was going to construct a road to Munyonyo – were you properly quoted, Mr Minister?

4.14
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Is this in connection to the segment of the road from Munyonyo to Jinja Road?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR NASASIRA: Yeah! I said that the next phase is to connect from there to complete the Southern Bypass. This project will stop at Munyonyo.

THE SPEAKER: But you have another joining?

MR NASASIRA: We are designing the highway to Jinja and the spur from the highway to Jinja to connect with this one.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much. That confirms that the Speaker is very alert about what is happening in that sector.

The other observation is that the express highway is intended to relieve and decongest Kampala-Entebbe old road traffic – the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA are not offering a robust immediate greater metropolitan city ring road for interconnections of the conurbation of the fast development in Kampala, Jinja, Wakiso and Entebbe.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and UNRA, in line with Kampala city proactively undertakes this structural plan. We need a structural plan beyond the current Kampala, and we have been raising this matter even when we were talking about the water sector. It will continue being an issue because until we have more circuit roads and ring roads, Kampala and the other upcoming parts of the metropolitan city will still be congested.

The committee observed that currently, the country does not have enough contractor capacity. The few existing seem to be in collision or a cartel and could agree on what to charge this country.

The committee strongly recommends that Government puts in place a national construction company to be able to ascertain the unit cost, works standards and designs of national roads in the country. In earlier reports, we have been talking about capacity building of local contractors so that we don’t only depend on foreign contractors.

Last but not least, the committee noted that due to the absence of a comprehensive rail transport system, the roads are generally overloaded with cargo which would have been transported using the railway network hence the constant breakdown and repairs, impacting heavily on the roads lifespan.

The committee recommends that whereas we are finding money to revamp the road sector, Government should expeditiously re-develop the railway transport system for the entire country to ease the pressure that is exerted to the existing road network arising from trucks transporting heavy cargo within the country which otherwise should have been transported by rail.

The committee has noted Government’s continued development of Uganda’s infrastructure with more focus on the road infrastructure. The status of Uganda’s road infrastructure still remains poor despite the recent injection of resources into road construction.

Government has undertaken reforms in the road sub-sector which have led to some signs of improvement mainly on the state of national roads. The construction of the Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway for which this financing is sought, is one of the strategic focus of the national transport development strategy, meant to decongest the central business district and also enhance trade movement through, within and out of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan area.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to the Eighth Parliament to approve the government request to borrow US $350 million from the Export-Import Bank of China for financing the proposed Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

4.19
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I have been to a number of countries and in my view Uganda has got the worst road connecting its international airport and the capital. It is a very risky road. One day a foreign head of state will get involved in an accident and we shall be embarrassed. 

This road has been in debate for a very long time. In 1978, the late Idi Amin issued an order that a new road be surveyed, and as soon as the works started, the war between Uganda and Tanzania erupted and the project was abandoned. This road would have been there by now.

But in any project, when a developer is making capital layout, the cost of land is the first item. I am very unhappy with the recommendation of the committee that the Constitution should be revisited. What is this? The committee has no mandate to recommend constitutional amendments to pave way for development. 

There are many countries in the world where land ownership is purely private, in fact, England is one of them, and many states in America but they are more developed than us. For a long time, land in Uganda belonged to Government, what did we do at that time?

I think the question of revisiting or reviewing the Constitution to make land cheap for development should not be accepted. Even a recommendation like this should not be made because it does not make sense. If we are to amend the Constitution, it means we could get this money and then keep it until the Constitution is amended. It wastes a lot of time. We should just get enough money to do the project, full stop.

I have a small worry about the Chinese. China is now doing a lot of development in Africa. If you look at the parliaments they have built in African countries, the investments they have made - my fear is that should we fail to pay back, these people could walk here on foot and take over. (Laughter) I have a lot of fear. 

I wish we could source money from elsewhere. Because given the population of China, if they want, they can walk on foot and take over the whole of Africa and we shall be helpless to stop them. [PROF. KABWEGYERE: “Can I give you information?”) Can I finish first? I know what you want to say, so sorry. (Laughter) I am not accepting that information.

Mr Speaker, I think the sooner we do this road the better for us but my problem is the stealing of the money. We have failed to supervise projects so that money is put to good use. We are now talking about US $400 million. This project will start, and like the bypass, in the end you will find the cost has gone up ten times because there are so many leakages along the way. People steal more than a half of the money for projects. 

What I am teaching my children is that in future if there is no development on the ground then no repayment of that loan should be made. They should refuse to pay. As for this one on the roads, if the road will not be there in 50 years time, our children should refuse to pay. Because we have stolen a lot of project money that is meant for our development. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I just want to set our record straight. The report is dated April 2011 but among the people who signed, when you look at the page with the signatures, you notice that even people who are no longer Members are included. I want guidance such that our record is right. There is hon. Balyejjusa, hon. Kabanda –

THE SPEAKER: It does not arise. Let’s have hon. Kawanga before you come in.

4.26
MR JOHN KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker and I have every support for this project. I was born in Entebbe, studied in Kisubi and I have lived around and know this area. It is a shame that this was one of the earliest roads to have been tarmacked during colonial times but nothing much has been done to it up to now. 

I want to specifically refer to the recommendation about amending the Constitution concerning land. I want to suggest that this is something, which should be abandoned completely. I only have to remind you that this was one of the thorniest problems in the Constituent Assembly. A lot of time was taken on it and the position that has been taken as of now should not be tampered with otherwise it is going to cause more problems than solutions.

Perhaps what Government should do is to come out immediately with the land use policy for this country. You all talk about land and problems but the land use policy is crucial. Until we have made a determination on that issue, these problems that you are talking about are going to continue. So please, rather than making the other recommendation, I call upon Government to make sure that the land use policy is a priority as it will solve a lot of problems in this regard.

I want to add that for some people in this country, the only item they own is land. Now if you start tampering with them then you are discriminating them against everybody else because you want to solve a problem at their expense.

One other thing is the Munyonyo part being planned, but I think much more than that, the physical planning of most of this area should be another immediate priority. You are putting up these roads but what is going to happen to developments along those roads? What do you have in mind? It is not good enough to say we have put a road here coming from this area. What is going to be done to the people who stay along the road? How is this road going to be accessed by those people? How are they going to benefit from it? This is something, which should be taken into account and it should be guided by physical planning in this area. 

You don’t want to put up a road and then all that you are going to see along the roads are some structures, which cannot provide sufficient accommodation for the people who are going to be living within the area or developments that are not of any use to the economic development of our country. You have just thought about the road; so physical planning in the relevant area should be taken into account together with the developments.

The third point is: it is all very good that you talk about constructing this road but what about the maintenance culture in this country? We put up these roads, we don’t maintain them and within a year or two they are gone and you wonder why all that effort was spent. I would be pleased to hear from whoever is concerned what arrangements they have in place to ensure that what we are going to put in place will actually be maintained to our satisfaction.

What is the time frame within which these roads are going to be done? It has not been highlighted sufficiently to satisfy me that we are not getting a loan, which may take so long so that the road is not done in time and it becomes useless. I would want to know exactly how the whole project is supposed to go on, what time is going to be taken into account and so forth.

All of us along these roads have one complaint. When you start constructing these roads, you are supposed to compensate people but the compensation is never made. The issue of compensation for land or whatever development has to be done should also have been referred to. I would want to know what plans Government has to make sure that those who will lose anything by virtue of the construction of these roads will be duly compensated sufficiently and timely.

Finally on corruption and misuse of the funds that are supposed to construct the roads and using it for other things or not applying it to the roads, I will be pleased to hear that now Government has a mechanism to ensure that all the funds that are going to be used for the construction of these roads are used optimally and will not be wasted through corruption or wastage of any nature.

With those remarks, I am very happy to see that Government has now taken the steps to make sure that this road is finally done. The only things that perhaps should be added are that there are some access roads, which need not to wait for money from China to be done and which roads are extremely useful along Entebbe Road. 

What about that road, which runs from Kabuusu all the way to Kajjansi, which reduces traffic? Who is going to work on those side roads? Of what use is it to make a very good highway while all the other side roads are not in good mechanical condition? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, hon. Kawanga and hon. Okello-Okello have raised an important issue of land. I was also in the Constituent Assembly and people were very emotional about land. That is why we drafted Article 26 of the Constitution. As you know, under this Article, there is compulsory acquisition of land. For compulsory acquisition, even the grounds were laid down. 

26 a) “The taking of possession or acquisition is necessary for public use or in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; and 
b) The compulsory taking of possession or acquisition of property is made under a law which makes provision for - 
(i) 	Prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation, prior to the taking of possession or acquisition of the property; and 
ii) 	a right of access to a court of law by any person who has an interest or right over the property.”

Since the issue of roads is so important, I was wondering whether we can use “(a) The taking of possession or acquisition is necessary for public use …” and acquire it but of course there must be compensation.

THE SPEAKER: So what you are saying is that there is enough provision because their recommendation was to revisit the Constitution so it is not necessary in view of what you have read? 

4.35
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Mr Speaker, thank you and I wish to thank both the Ministry of Finance and the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for the report that they have presented to this House. 

On the onset - I will address the hon. Minister - I would like to say that there is just too much information that is given to Members this afternoon that many would find it difficult to internalise and have meaningful debate unless you were part of the previous discussions. I think this practice should be avoided, Mr Speaker, so that as we debate reports in the House, we are in tandem with each other. 

That said, I would like to say that in principal I support the loan of US $350 million for the Kampala–Entebbe Expressway. It is a good project and I think, as has been stated, it would ease congestion and also quicken the movement of vehicles especially those rushing to the only international airport of this country. 

However, I have got some issues that I would like the Minister of Finance and my colleague, the Minister of Works to respond to. Issue No. 1 is the manner of sourcing for a contractor. World over, I know in projects of this kind, sourcing of the contractors is on the basis of competitive bidding, at least, that is what I was taught while at school. In this proposal, we see the Chinese more or less imposing a contractor on us. 

Our PPDA has not had a single say over who should do this road for us. And dear friends, much as we are being  given this money by the Chinese, this is our money; it is not free; we have to pay back after so many years as specified in the reports given to us. Do we as a country consider whether we are actually getting value for money? 
 
The Chinese dominated the selection of this contractor; they are slapping this contractor on us and saying, “Take this one or leave.” I think that is in contravention of the laws that we, Members of Parliament, actually made. So in a way, we are shooting ourselves in the foot. I would like to ask the minister whether we can have more say on who or which contractor should do this job for us? 

My attention also is drawn to what I think is a contradiction between what the committee seeks this Parliament to borrow or what the government and the figures given by the Ministry of Finance - I think these documents are too many; it must be on page 9 of the statement by the Minister of Finance. What are we borrowing? Are we borrowing over US$ 450 million or we are borrowing US$ 350 million? Where does the discrepancy come from? I would like to be informed about this. 

On top of this, I am mindful of the cost of this project. I think the project is very expensive. I know that UNRA has laboured to bring in examples from Addis Ababa and elsewhere to try and justify the value for money effectiveness of this project.  

I would like to draw the attention of the House to a figure that constitutes 0.97 percent of the project value and this is for planting trees and things to do with the environment along this stretch. Would we like to spend over US $4.5 million to do this? I don’t know whether this is realistic but in my assessment, I think this is overboard. I would like an answer from the minister. 

Thirdly, I would like to attack the weakness in the planning function of Government, in fact, the Ministry of Works. I don’t want to apportion this to UNRA.   We are constructing an expressway, a highway, if you like, graduating from the Kampala Northern Bypass. In doing this, in order to conform to the slopes, we as a country are going to kill 1.9 kilometres of the bypass. This is a total waste given that at the moment a kilometre of road works is going for over US $1.5 million in this country.  

We have lost as a country because of poor planning over a hoofing Shs 6 billion that should have gone to the development of the road network. I think such carelessness should not go unpunished. Who will be responsible for this loss in this period where we are in a tight corner in as far as the economy is concerned? Waste should not be entertained. 

I have ever since gone back to the Northern Bypass at that point and really mourned the loss of 1.9 kilometres of hard won money. And by the way, to date, we still owe the contractors on that job some money. If I am not mistaken, it is a case of litigation between the Attorney-General and the contractor who did Northern Bypass. So, I would like to ask the minister, why this waste? I raised it while we were on site and I think I will continue raising it. 

I would also like to suggest to the Ministry of Works in future to view projects holistically.  When you talk about the spur from Kajjansi all the way to Munyonyo and I also know that Munyonyo is a private property –(Interjections)- yes, it is. You might argue that it is Saalama Road or the investment is of a strategic nature but the person who is going to benefit from most of this investment – and that is about 30 something kilometres - is the proprietor of Munyonyo. 

The minister has forgotten the principles of traffic flow. When you have a spur off to a new road at Kajjansi, you will attract traffic to Munyonyo. That traffic will want to come out of Munyonyo and inevitably it is going to go through Ggaba Road. There is no improvement whatsoever on Ggaba Road. So, whereas you are looking for a solution of the traffic congestion flow, you are going to choke Ggaba Road. I want a professional view from the Minister on how his ministry is going to go around this challenge. 

I think by the committee talking about land, you are touching a raw nerve. I would like to advise you to abandon this project of forcefully taking away people’s land. It just cannot work. In the past you have compensated land owners. We need to continue the practice but also to avoid speculators. You should plan ahead for people who may fall along the way of a new road or in the way of a road that needs to be expanded. 

Finally, I do not know why it does not appear in the notes given to us today but I remember very well that within the loan request, there was a provision of some amount of money for supervision. I am not sure why the committee chairperson swept this under the carpet - and yet at the same time we have got a provision of billions of shillings for consultants. The Ministry of Works and the Ministry of Finance are charging this country twice for the same thing. Mr Speaker, that is fraud! I would like a very clear explanation from the ministers in charge of these two sectors on why we have a consultancy that is not going to supervise, taking huge amounts of money and I would like the chairperson to remind me of the amount of money because it is conspicuously missing in the reports and at the same time, you have a provision for supervision within this loan. 

I believe that we have competent engineers in this country. Some of them are in UNRA and some went to school with me. I know they were extremely brilliant personalities. Almost 20 years down the road in practice, they should have the capacity to supervise roads. Why don’t we use our local engineers? There are two advantages in this: one is that we sharpen our engineers in the process of doing work; they actually become more professionally strong. Secondly, we avoid unnecessary spending. If you want, increase their salaries to motivate them further but do not come to this House to ask for colossal amounts of money for repeated work. 

I thank you for giving me this opportunity to articulate these issues and I hope my issues will be considered. 

4.50
MS GRACE OBURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the loan and I would like to thank the chairman and his committee for the report. We have roads being made and we have heavy trucks passing on these roads. I would like to find out from the Minister of Works when we shall have weighbridges so that we regulate the weights of these trucks. They should not spoil the roads that we so badly need and for which we have asked for money from donors. This money is very dear to us and it will even be paid by our great grandchildren but the roads are done and within a short while, they are not road worthy because of the heavy trucks and lack of weighbridges.

I thank the minister for having decongested Kampala but we also need to have Kampala decongested by having the Kampala-Jinja highway turned into a dual carriageway. We have been told that there is a study going on. When will this study be put to use and when will the road be started? All that is de-congesting Kampala; you cannot only de-congest the Entebbe side yet we have a lot of traffic on the Kampala-Jinja Road and we have had many accidents because of the narrow road. So, we also need that road widened and the study should be done as fast as possible. 

In the report, you say this Entebbe Express Highway is going to have a road toll. Will this road toll be for the URA and will this money be put to the National Road Fund or will it go specifically to other activities? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.54
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy for bringing this report and I highly support the loan. This Kampala-Entebbe express route is over due. I think all of us have experienced the menace when going to Entebbe. Many people have missed their flights because of the traffic jam and I am sure if this road is done in time, and if we have the Northern Bypass and the Southern Bypass also constructed as planned, Kampala will be decongested and we shall have good traffic flow. So, I really urge Members to support this loan. 

Secondly, the issue of acquiring land for roads and for development in general has become a very difficult problem; very expensive! Our own people who will be using the road are the same that will hike the price for the land where the road may pass. So, we know that the land belongs to the people but they should also be sensitised that this road will benefit the public and they should not overcharge the Government because they think that Government have all the money on earth and this will stop development. So, we need to sensitise people to give land for development and also for other projects. 

We have the Physical Planning Act in place. What is important now is for the Ministry of Lands and for Government to provide funds to implement this Physical Planning Act. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure was in Gulu and some civil servants were not aware of this Physical Planning Act and yet it is very important. We need to give money to the planners so that we can acquire - for all the roads in Uganda - even if we wanted to have dual carriage way in ten years’ time, we should acquire that land now and have titles for it, so that nobody comes around and builds. 

If we do not implement the Physical Planning Act then we shall not do anything regarding the development. Even the small towns and urban areas are suffering because of people not giving way for development.

We are happy that the Chinese are supporting us with this loan and they are the ones bringing the contractors. I would like to know whether they will absorb some of our engineers such that they learn from them and also get part of our money to develop Uganda. I hope they will not come with all their manual labourers from China to work here instead of giving us the work. I would like to get this assurance so that our people benefit from this huge money we are going to give.

We cannot do much about their condition; we have been getting money from Europe and America with different conditions and we have to accept that that is the way they work. We need to ensure that they provide us with good roads rather than shoddy work.

4.58
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I also rise to thank the committee and the minister. I support this request before us. But as we support this, I would like to raise some questions for the minister and the committee to address.

Since we are procuring this loan from the Chinese rather than World Bank and IMF, usually we pass loans and the actual implementation of these projects start five or ten years later. I would want to know from the minister when the civil works will actually start and when the project will end. I want to know from the minister whether the process will be expeditious and the civil works will start soon. 

We have passed money here in Parliament for a road project before and the minister comes again to revise his requisitions - I know this was true for the Kabale-Kisoro road where the price was more than doubled. A consultant has estimated the cost of the road and then you come back and say the road will cost twice as much, we may start to doubt the professionalism of the consultant who did that? I think also the Northern Bypass was in the same situation. I would also want to get it from the minister whether this money is adequate and that he will not come back to Parliament to request for more money for the same project. 

On pages 9 and 10 it is stated that we are borrowing US $350 million and Uganda Government will contribute US $126 million as part of this project. I would like to get a comment from the minister whether he has in-built this amount of money in the Budget which we are going to pass for the next financial year. Is it already budgeted for? Because this raises issues of compensation for most of the road projects, like most colleagues have said. Compensation is usually a problem and we presume this is part of the money, which will be used to settle compensation. Has the minister started budgeting for this money so that we approve and not delay the works once he is ready? 

Finally, when the President was campaigning in Kanungu, people asked him why the central government had not started working on the roads which had been taken on by the centre and his answer was that there is a racket of thieves in UNRA who are fighting for tenders and they are the ones frustrating Government work. Some of us got concerned since we have been asking Government to work on roads in our constituencies including the tarmacking of Rukungiri-Kanungu road.

I would like the minister to tell us whether it is true that his ministry has a racket of thieves. I know he was not there when the President said it but we also know his ministry has been accused of those tendencies. For instance, we have been pushing for construction of the road from Rukungiri to Kanungu, I was assured by his ministry that in April or May, the construction would start but the information I am getting is that they may start towards the end of year. Is it because of that racket that is fighting for tenders? We should get a comment from the minister whether the accusations of corruption, which have been raised here on the Floor, are actually true. 

This loan is from China and a Chinese firm will be doing the construction but I am happy to note that on page 10 it is stated that the Government will engage the services of a consultant to supervise the work. I request that in the terms a Chinese firm should not qualify to consult because there must be checks and balances and like some Members have already asked, will you give chance to Ugandan consultants to be involved or you are going to get another foreign firm and at the end of the day we may not get value for money? How are you going to design the terms for this consultant? I hope he will not be from China so that we do not end up with a Chinese loan, a Chinese contractor and a Chinese consultant. How shall we ensure that there will be value for money? 

5.04
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I thank the ministers of finance and that of works because we needed this road. The project is necessary but we have some issues to clarify as we support this project.

There are legal issues and it is unfortunate, although good, that we may not have quorum to pass this loan today because of legal implications. First of all, the Solicitor-General has approved and signed the commercial contract with China Communication Construction Company. Supposing Parliament differs or makes alterations, who will meet the cost and what are the legal implications? Has the Minister of Works and that of finance taken over the work of Parliament in approving this loan and giving guarantees? How come the Solicitor-General goes ahead to sign the agreement before Parliament concludes? What are the legal implications of that? This is very fundamental because it says here: “The Solicitor-General approved the commercial contract between Government and China Construction Company on 14 October 2010.” 

The statement of the minister, according to the document that we have at our disposal, just indicates that was a requirement of the EXIM Bank. We do not have documentary proof to show that it was a requirement. The whole of this week I have been doing research on this matter and I managed to land on the procurement law of china, which we have at our disposal. It talks about competitive bidding, international best practices, advertisement, invitation and so forth. 

International practice - Uganda is a signatory to the World Trade Organisation. I have model sample agreements to which the Uganda Government is a signatory and part of. Therefore, I find that this loan is good and we needed it but Government has gone ahead to violate the national law of the country.

The PPDA Act – I am a member of the committee on finance – talked about where the Government of Uganda has a bilateral agreement with another partner country, the bidding process may be modified contrary to the PPDA Act – I am just paraphrasing. I attended the committee meeting and we have not managed to see a copy of the bilateral agreement between the Government of Uganda and that of China. What we have at our disposal is a brief about the meeting of the head of state, African presidents and the Chinese Prime Minister on this matter.

We need to note that African governments need to stand on their feet otherwise, we are facing re-colonisation. When the Government of Uganda signed and agreed to HIPC-I multi-lateral debt relief and signed the Paris Declaration of ownership, best practice, we committed ourselves to fulfil this. Therefore, I would like to urge my colleagues, the Members of Parliament, that if you do not help our technical people and the ministers to stick to the law, the pressure the ministers and technical people have when they go to negotiate these loans is too much and there is a world-wide web of corruption. The Minister of Works last week talked about the mafia; there is a world-wide web of “mafia” in the entire procurement system in the world. 

If you look at this loan, the consultant who did the feasibility study was also Chinese and he had already determined the cost. Now you have a contractor who is Chinese – we also have a legal question. There is China Road and Bridge and then there is China Communication and Construction Company. They are both independent. Which one shall we hold for legal liability in case of default? One of the companies has wound up internationally and the information is available. The Government is giving us information that the Solicitor-General signed an agreement with China Communication and Construction Company/China Road and Bridge yet these are two different companies. Within the agreement – the document we received, the ministry has already even committed itself to paying any cost overrun. I request the Prime Minister and I hope he is listening; the Government of Uganda has agreed that they are committed to pay any cost overrun as a result of this project.

Within the laws of Uganda, cost overrun is allowed within variation and ranges between 10 to 15 percent. We need to have a look at that agreement because tomorrow we may have another Northern Bypass, where the cost overrun went to about 40 percent. So, we need to know this detail. What do you indicate as the sum you have committed yourselves to? Why did you agree that, “We agree to pay any amount that will result into cost over run,” and yet the laws of Uganda already allow you to vary between 10 to 15 percent?

If you have a Chinese consultant who designed the road and the contractor also Chinese and the Solicitor-General has signed the agreement, where does it leave Parliament?  

The Minister of Works last week gave us a report on Infrastructure Project Africa which did a study on cost of roads in Africa and we established that the cost of roads in Uganda is still high despite the local materials being available. 

Today, the Minister has given us the cost of roads worldwide but colleagues, we need to note and if you are looking at the cost of roads in America and Europe, here you go to Busitema and fence off a Government forest, get a quarry for stone which becomes – you only import Bitumen and water is available for free. But in those countries, all these materials are imported and they are very costly. Sand is available –(Interjections)- no, people pay for it but at a lower cost.

So, when we are being given the cost and African Infrastructure Project put the cost at less than US $1 million for a road per kilometre, the Minister says there are bridges and so forth and that is understandable but this is a question that requires clarification. 

I want to tell the Minister that in China, corruption is a very risky project. If you are involved in corruption, then you are taken to the firing squad. It is even higher than our court martial. The Chinese PPDA Act is very clear about bidding. We need proof and the only document we have here is that the Chinese Ambassador asked the Ministry of Works to sign a commercial agreement and recommended a company to find a Chinese company.

I do not want to engage in diplomatic issues because most of these issues are going to the website but the issues of lack of competitive bidding, lack of transparency in procurement which is very critical, violation of the Chinese procurement law and violation of the Uganda procurement law, usurping of parliamentary power by the Solicitor-General by going ahead to sign this agreement - we have so many Chinese companies that have the capacity to do roads and they are doing roads worldwide. Even if we say, “Because we are borrowing the money from China, let the Chinese company do it,” the law of China still requires competition. 

There should have been advertisements either in China or here in Uganda and then we get the best but now, our hands are tied.      

The issue of arbitration is -

THE SPEAKER: You have to cut short your speech because there are many people who are interested in making contributions.

MR EKANYA: The issue of arbitration becomes a problem. In case we have a dispute and they have imposed a company on you, how shall we sort out the issue of arbitration? 

Therefore, based on that, I support the project but since we have no quorum, I request that we are given more time –(Interjections)- because we have got this document so that we can go and get clarification on these issues and mobilise colleagues so that we pass this law when we have quorum. I thank you.

5.14
MR ROBERT KASHAIJA (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for presenting this report and at the same time, I want to inform the House that I also rise to support this loan to construct the Entebbe Highway Express road.

However, there are a few issues that I need to be educated on; the first is that we have had many contractors taking contracts but along the way before they finish those contracts, they apply for extension of time and in that process, the Ugandan taxpayer incurs a double cost; you pay for the construction of the road and also for delayed work. I would like to get clarification from the Minister whether this contract that has been given to a Chinese company will be delivered on time? If not, if they apply for extension of time, they should incur the cost of price variation and any other things.

Secondly, I have a problem with the legal status of this company that has been indicated in this report on page 20. Information has it –(Interjections)– page 20 of the report. There is that company that has taken the contract. It is reported that a company called CRBC merged with China Harbour Engineering Group Corporation (CHEC) with effect from 08 December 2005 and formed China Communications Construction Group Limited and technically, CRBC ceased to exist in December 2005 but the company has continued to bid and win contracts such as Soroti-Dokolo-Lira road of 62.6km. I want the minister to show us evidence that this company has a clear record as pertains to its legal status.

Finally, we are paying two percent on this loan for about 20 years. When we get a loan from the European Union, they do not dictate or anoint a contractor to do work in Uganda. They allow all member countries to participate in a competitive bidding process to take up a contract. So, I am wondering why China is pushing us to the wall for its company to take this contract-

THE SPEAKER: It wants its people to get jobs. They are using their money to bring development here and they are also helping their people to come and have jobs.

MR KASHAIJA: But they should allow competitive bidding in China for Chinese companies.

When we have delayed works, we experience things like accidents on the roads. I wonder who will be accountable for this because when you look at this road of Masaka-Mbarara, Kampala-Masaka road and Kabale-Kisoro-Katuna road, we have so many accidents on those unfinished roads because of the delays. So, I wonder who is going to compensate Ugandans who are getting accidents on those roads by their careless and reckless works or failure to finish on time.

Lastly, the minister said in the newspaper of April 18 that there is a cartel of thugs and thieves in the ministry especially in UNRA who intimidate and blackmail the contractors. I have always wondered: how can an outsider influence the award of a contract as if he is part of the whole thing?

THE SPEAKER: But who are the owners of these Chinese companies?

MR KASHAIJA: It is shown that it is owned by the Government of China.

THE SPEAKER: So, when you talk about competitive bidding in China, what is the intention?

MR KASHAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker!

5.20
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy and the ministers for the explanations that were given by the two ministers. My Committee of Physical Infrastructure has intensively and extensively interacted with the Ministry of Works on this project. I am happy that whoever has stood up has supported this motion but it is just a few areas where they want clarity and let me assure you we have used our time well to go through this thing.

What is new and what is disturbing people is the new financing strategy - the Chinese way. We are used to the World Bank, ADB, BADEA and EU but this is a new one. Everything new comes with something new and with challenges. That is what we are hearing. The Chinese are saying, “Here is the money but you must procure this way”. As we speak now, money in this world is silted in that area; the Chinese and the Indians are going to dictate more and more. So we have to get used to it, see how we move with them and use our politicians, the heads of state to see where we can discuss with them to make changes. I can assure you this project is good, the products which will come out are very good; the savings, the economics, all of them are very good for this country. 

I know people have been worried about the design but the Ministry of Works has come in time and they are going to have design reviews. The Ministry of Finance has come in and they are going to have local supervisors on top of the Chinese. 

My colleague hon. Amuriat was wondering about contract management whose cost is reflected in this; but this contract management is one of the most important and highly used these days. You get somebody to do contract management for you and this saves on the cost overrun. So, the ministry has looked ahead and we should thank them for having this country at heart to see that this project is done very well.

I know people have been saying, “We are taking the spur to Munyonyo” - yes, but eventually we are going to join on that spur and go onto Jinja Road and complete the Southern Ring so that it becomes the Northern-Southern Ring. We will complete it and the thing will become very superb. What we need to ask the ministry is to see that they expedite the work that is remaining to be done.

Hon. Kawanga is worried that we are building but the maintenance here is lacking. Hon. Kawanga has just forgotten; we restructured the Ministry of Works for better; we created UNRA, we created the Road Fund and that is where money is dedicated for maintenance, not development. So, that is answering your worry about the maintenance. 

What is worrying me is the compensation issue which is not yet started and when you see on the work schedule, it is going to start late. I appeal to the ministry to see that this compensation starts early enough because if it delays, works delay and contractors are given a chance to make claims and this affects value for money on our projects.

So, as I conclude, I appeal to my colleagues to wholeheartedly support this. Those who will be here in the Ninth Parliament on the Physical Infrastructure Committee; let us keep our eyes open to see that this thing is well done in time. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall end this general debate with hon. Balikuddembe, in whose constituency the road is going to pass.

5.25
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County, Kibale): Mr Speaker, I thank the chairperson for his good report. I support the loan request and at an appropriate time when it comes for voting, I will vote for it because it is going to cause development in this country.

Before I can stake my vote, I only have a few questions to raise to the ministers of finance, and the one for works. To the Minister of Finance, I understand their impediment is that little money is going to the Road Fund because of un-amended URA Act, which only allows URA to remit all the money to the Consolidated Fund and from there it is appropriated through the Ministry of Finance. 

We need the Road Fund for road maintenance, and when this road is constructed, it will still need to be maintained. I am requesting the Minister of Finance to commit himself as to when he is going to bring the amendment that will allow all the monies to go to the Road Fund for purposes of maintaining our roads, including this one. 

Mr Speaker, I also want to ask the Minister of Finance when he is going to borrow money to start on the construction of Masindi-Hoima–Kagadi–Kyenjojo Road. I am tired of passing on a murram road. 

And to the hon. Minister of Works, I read in the Monitor of 10 April 2011, where he was complaining about middlemen blackmailing contractors. It is common knowledge in this country that contractors often do shoddy work. Quite often they abandon the work. Let me give an example: there are two local contractors in my constituency that are doing a road, which was recently taken over by the central government from Kyenzige–Kyakabadima-Mabare and then Muhoro–Kyeterekera-Ndayiga; they have abandoned their site and when people complain about such contractors, he goes to the media and says that certain middlemen are blackmailing contractors. When did he become the public relations officer of such contractors who abandon their sites? 

I am in possession of a document which I want to lay on the Table which indicates that the Ministry of Works is rotten with corruption. This is from one of the whistle blowers - who is concerned and he thinks it can reach the President. Maybe it will reach since I have said it here; it will reach him. He will read about it in The Monitor or wherever they will publish it. It is dated 18 April 2011 and it is addressed to H.E. the President of the Republic of Uganda. It is implicating –(Interjections)– do not ask me; if you do not do research, it is not my problem. It is too long and I cannot read it verbatim, but the key issues are: it is complaining about the hon. Minister of Works who has interest in two particular companies, namely SBI - RCC which has converted into the one that is going to do the contract in Entebbe –(Interruption)

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, in this House we engage in serious debates, which are captured on the Hansard and are covered publicly. Is it procedurally correct for the honourable member to pick a document; he does not talk about the author, where it is coming from; and he starts reading the document that is now dragging in my name without having laid it on the Table, or checking its authenticity? I thought this House should not be used for hawking rumours, wherever anonymous rumours come from. As far as I am concerned, I do not think it is procedurally right to continue with an anonymous document that is now trying to talk about me and others, when the document has no address or author.

THE SPEAKER: I think he is asking you that while you read that document, will you be able to substantiate – maybe we use it to make further investigations?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I am going to lay this document on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Then what you should do – people might start asking you questions that you may not be able to substantiate; it is an anonymous document. So, you can lay it on the Table then we shall find the machinery. Otherwise, they are going to ask you questions to substantiate, which you may not be able to answer.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Mr Speaker, I am just highlighting the main points – somebody is alleging that the document is anonymous; but how does he know that it is anonymous?

THE SPEAKER: No, they are asking you, is it a signed document? You see, in that kind of document, it is given to some people who would investigate and find out. But until then, you do not know because somebody sent it to you; that is the problem you have. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. For purposes of proceeding, allow me to lay this document the way it is on the Table such that the allegations which are contained in it are investigated by arms of Government to ascertain whether there is any involvement by the minister or whether he is taking kickbacks from contractors to do contracts here. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give it to me. Okay, anonymous document? 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I lay this document dated 18 April –(Interjections)- please, hold on. Mr Speaker, protect me. 
 
MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr Speaker, last year we passed the Whistle Blowers’ Act. It is now operational. The whistle blowers do not have to put their names there according to our law -

THE SPEAKER: Agreed. But now -(Interjections)- no, hon. Okello-Okello, the point is that if he reads it out people will be entitled to – since he has got it, let him give it to us. We shall find a way of investigating. I think that is the best.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. (Interjections) In my opening remarks –

THE SPEAKER: Of course, we can see which blower this is; but somebody can be a whistle-blower when he is malicious - 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I said this was a whistle-blower’s document and I want to lay it on the Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We shall look at it. 

5.38
MR JOSEPH BALIKUDDEMBE (DP, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the report of the committee. It is at this juncture that I frankly commend the work that was done by the Committee on National Economy. 

I am on the Floor because this loan is going to enhance development in my constituency. In 1996, 2001 and 2011, the President of the Republic of Uganda on a number of occasions in Nakawuka in 1996, in Kasanje in 2006 and recently in Nkumba this year; he promised that we were going to have this road. When he came to Parliament and was talking to the nation, he echoed this. This is going to be a four-runway road; but the unfortunate bit is that I want some clarity, as the Member of Parliament of that area –(Interjections)- what is the problem hon. Members? We want to ascertain the mapping of this road. How is it going to run from – that is not yet – village-to-village, parish-to-parish? Which dimensions are going to be taken where and how? 

We also want clarity on the compensation of the land on which the road is going to pass because what we are having right now in areas like the Northern Bypass are running battles in courts of law because of people who were not compensated. So, as a Government if you want to refrain from that, we need to have thorough preparations for that to ensure that there is harmony in whatever we do in all this.

To echo what hon. Baryomunsi said, is the money you are asking for enough? Is that money – hon. Minister, is the money you are borrowing going to be enough for you?  

When do you hope to commence works on this road to avoid the Northern Bypass saga? Which timeframe are you going to operate in? We need the commencement date and the time to end, although we believe there could be natural hazards. 

And for harmony, hon. Minister, to avoid all this, to avoid all they say about your ministry; let us try to be harmonious people. That is all we deserve as a nation. We should be harmonious to avoid all we hear that, “The minister is this, the technical staff are that”. Let us live in harmony for you deserving people in the Executive and the people you listen to. Let us try to live in a harmonious manner in all we do and say. Harmony shall give clear-cut solutions to what we have as the nation’s negatives. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I ask the minister to respond to the queries raised then we see what to do next. 

5.43
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the honourable members for the unanimous support you have given this project. 

In fact, hon. Okello-Okello was talking about this project being started during Amin’s time. I would like to remind him further that during Obote I, there was the Greater Kampala Master Plan. This road had been designed as a dual carriage-way as part of the Greater Kampala Master Plan in 1969/1970. The unfortunate bit because of our history – and people were compensated – because of our history of instability, when we tried to trace these records later in the 80s we could not get anything. Here we are back again, trying to start, compensate again and even – and at that time it was going between the lake and this old road, this existing road. 

I thank you for supporting the project. I am happy that during the process when we were dealing with the committee, we provided all the information on recent project definitions, the project justification, the source of funding, the selection of the contractor, the nature of the contract, the project costs and comparison with similar projects, and the project management arrangement. We also tried to show the future of the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Authority with respect to the transport infrastructure, especially roads of how Government wants to improve this based on our National Transport Master Plan and the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area Plan. 

I will quickly respond to some of the issues you raised.

On land, I agree - I think the chairman is frustrated by delays and the cost of the land but I was also one member who was in the Constituent Assembly and the land issue was one of the most contentious issues. In the end, we arrived at this. It is not extremely comforting for a country that is developing to move fast because it is costly; but this is our Constitution. We have to respect it. This article is entrenched and from my own guess, I do not see this article ever being amended because if you go for a referendum, you will not come back with any different result. But it is very difficult to move such projects quickly, and it is expensive. It is a cost we are going to pay as a country but a cost we chose through our Constitution.
 
On the maintenance culture; the chairman of infrastructure clarified that. Definitely the maintenance of roads is going to improve. The thing is never to allow backlog. The moment you get a backlog in construction and a backlog in maintenance, then you can never catch up. And that is why we are always fighting for more money and we established this Road Fund. That is why we also want it to get dedicated money of its own so that there is enough money for maintenance then we look for money and loans for this development. But at the moment, until we clear the backlog, we are going to have this problem. 

But the maintenance is improving and I am sure those who travel around the country can see that the paved network has improved a lot and I am not trying to blow our trumpet. The network has improved a lot in all corners of Uganda and where we have not improved, we are there working. So, as I promised about potholes on the major road works - not Kampala - we do not expect to have potholed roads anymore by the end of next year - at all.

Compensation and Evaluation: we are also improving on evaluation and compensation but compensation is not ours only. We have to work with the Government Valuer and others. What we are trying to do now is to try and compensate ahead of the project. For the next project of the bridge, 40 percent of the people have already been paid even before the project starts.

The too much information that hon. Amuriat was talking about saying it was coming late, is not really late. It is to enrich you as you discuss this, but we should also remember that when we decided to have committees and to take business of the House to the committees, it was for the committee to do most of the work. It was for anybody who had an issue to go to the committee and bring it up so that when the committee brings its report and gives its recommendation, we should not waste a lot of time requiring more information because the committee will have got all the information for us and the committee will be working on our behalf. So, we are convinced that we gave all the information to the committee and I have tried to send more information to my honourable friends, hon. Ekanya and hon. Amuriat, on this selection of contractors. 

Yes, there is competitive bidding in China but there are also conditions of how to get to the EXIM Bank. You even see other countries - I showed you one where we passed this information. Even when you go to the website on the Kenya roads where they are using the same contractor (www.construction.kenya.com) it states as follows, on one project: “The Eastern by-pass together with the Northern by-pass will cost 8.5 billion. The Government of Kenya is financing 15 percent of the project and the Chinese Government is financing the remaining 85 percent of the project. The project’s schedule for completion is three years and includes construction of flyovers, interchanges, standard pipe culverts and box culverts. China has appointed China Road and Bridge as the contractor for the by-pass.”

The key words are: “…China has appointed…” we all go to look for loans but the conditions in these banks are different. In fact sometimes when you delay to get a loan from the bank, you might find yourself in the office of a money lender. The conditions there are even more difficult and different. So, we will have to get used to the new culture of loaning and to me it is something we should openly discuss as Parliament, as Cabinet, that is, how Chinese loans work because this is not the first Chinese loan. It is also not a coincidence that this same company is working in Kenya, Ethiopia and Cameroon where they have provided the same loan. It is also the same company working in Angola and I think even Zambia. That cannot be a coincidence.

This company, the EXIM Bank, is a Chinese Government company and it is one of the best. If I am going for a loan and the government nominates their best company working in many parts of Africa, why should I go further and say, “No, I want to compete. I want other Chinese companies to come”? They have given you the best, I take it.

The next concern to me would be, “Am I going to get value for money because that is the most critical thing?” Am I going to get value for money for that? And that is why we are all working to make sure that that happens. That is why we are hiring but the design is ours. This project is a different style; it is not where you design and prepare tender documents. We are moving to another stage of quick construction: design and build. You build as you design and that is one company. The company has both consultants and contractors. But we as a client, as Government of Uganda, we will put our consultant in place. Hon. Amuriat was saying that we use our engineers. We are going to advertise for that consultant so even our engineers in Uganda are free to compete. That consultant is because we cannot have enough capacity in UNRA to supervise all contracts and they will be on the job on our behalf with our engineers to ensure that the design and the materials we agreed on will be there.

This is a fixed contract. The contractor has taken a risk. The only change will be the variation of prices but the materials required when we want to build this bridge this way, if things change on the ground, the contractor will foot the bill. The project is sealed. You cannot increase. It is both a risk on our side and a risk on the contractor’s side but it is a safer way.

For the design and build method, we are now moving to the Bugiri-Malaba road heading to your constituency, hon. Ekanya. Mbarara-Kitagata is going to be a design and build. We cannot remain in the box because we are tied by the World Bank conditions only and by ADB. Now we have some of our money. We are borrowing from different sources. We must get out of this and develop our country. All we must demand for is value for money. To me that and getting the standards we want, is the most important thing. Let us all work together to get that value for money. 

They talked about corruption. I think I was reported in the papers when I was addressing press conferences. You see, corruption on any project can happen during evaluation, when the job goes to the contracts committee, because these are centres of decision making or when the competitor asks for administrative review either with the accounting officer or with PPDA or where the work approved is substandard or the materials are not put there. Those are about five centres in our sector, especially roads, where there are areas of decision making where people can be compromised. All you have to do is fight to see that this does not happen. 

For example, on the evaluation now, we have agreed with the World Bank that while the UNRA is doing the evaluation, we will be hiring an independent evaluator who will have a separate evaluation report. As it goes to the contracts committee, there will be another evaluation report from an independent evaluator so that you do not have much room for corruption. Otherwise, there are attempts to corrupt our people and what I was not talking about - my friend hon. Tinkasiimire with his “kichupuli” paper he is bringing here was talking about quoting what I said in the papers. He said I was the public relations man for contractors. No! If anything, let me tell you, hon. Tinkasiimire, some of us have spent decades building our names and therefore, playing with people’s names using the privilege of Parliament’s Floor on “bichupuli” letters is extremely irresponsible. Some of us have been in these jobs for some time. We have been tried; we have been investigated. We are not just here as jokers. We have the heart of our country as you and anybody else. Parliament should not just be used to mudsling people’s names on fictitious documents. You make me suspect that maybe now I know the author of the document. 

Anyway, those contractors who did not do work in your constituency are not the ones that I am trying to defend. I was talking about a racket of middlemen who lobby from one ministry to another, from one contract to another, threatening contractors and trying to threaten people who are doing the evaluation. These are the ones we are trying to destroy because they are trying to make themselves a racket. They were called mafia by the headline of the paper but I call them a cartel. But that does not matter. Those are the ones I was talking about. If the contractors have abandoned work, we shall deal with them and get other contractors. 

And by the way, let me also assure you that when some of us visit these projects you will see contractors shaking. You can go and check – we do not joke with these contractors at all. 

A few more points: Are we borrowing US $350 million or US $400 million? We are borrowing US $350 million and that was the prayer of the report from the committee. The end section of the Northern Bypass – we are not going to lose 1.9 kilometres of that bypass; the last bit of the bypass is actually 0.8 kilometres which we will use for going over the Busega-Mityana Road. 

In Kiswahili, concerning building, it is said, “Kujenga na kubomowa”. Sometimes you have to destroy one thing in order to build something bigger. The bypass will be widened to become four lanes but as we go over the existing roundabout, 0.8 kilometres of that road will be lost. But that is part of construction. Where there is construction, there is destruction, sometimes.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I thank the hon. Minister for giving way. There is China Road and Bridge and China Construction and Communication Company; who is responsible for the road and who will be held responsible for the liabilities? It is true that both of them are owned by the Chinese Government but they are limited liability companies. Some of them have wound up and others have merged. One of these companies has merged with another and one has wound up.  

The other thing is that you said the contractor would be held responsible for any cost overrun but in the committee, you tabled a document where the Government has signed an agreement committing itself to meeting any cost overrun that will result from this project. This is contrary to the law because the Minister says it is design and build, fine. The law of Uganda allows variations within 15 percent as cost overrun. Why did you go ahead and commit yourself to “any” cost overrun. So the road can move from US $400 million to even US $700 million. We asked in the committee for the Minister to table the document so that we look at the details and the implications for the people and children of this country but it was not given to us – to date it has not been brought.

MR NASASIRA: Let me clarify this to hon. Ekanya. First, I think I have convinced him about how the company was selected – because I sent him enough information. (Laughter) Now, the cost overrun we are talking about is: if we change the design we are going to agree on, for example, if we added – this contract is at a fixed price as far as this work is concerned. The other increase in costs – there is what we call variation of price, for cost of materials. No contractor can tender for a project and know whether the price of fuel will be the same three or four years from now. You will have fixed known prices – either we use price indices or we use the prices at the current time of tender so that when there is a variation - incidentally if the fuel prices went down, the contractor would reimburse on the variation of the price contract.

The other cost overruns we are talking about are: suppose now he is reaching the airport and we say, “We are adding more of the road” outside the agreed designed project, then we shall pay for those cost overruns. But the cost agreed upon for what is designed is fixed. I will give you one example. There is a bridge which goes across the water – it is about two kilometres – he is going to do what we call “piling”; the supports down in the water will go as far as you get a solid foundation. Whereas in the design estimates it is about 20 metres down, if it happens to be 25 metres, he will not claim for even one extra US dollar. That is the risk he has taken. If he gets it at five metres less that will be his benefit. That is the give-and-take but the cost overruns are ours. 

Finally, the company, CCC, is the one we have signed an agreement with. But on top of that, this company will provide performance guarantees and warranty. These ones are provided by a known bank, saying that if there is any default in the contract, Government of Uganda will be compensated by that bank. Do you remember the contractor we sent away from the Jinja-Bugiri Road? We got back our US $10 million from a South African bank and we even won a case in Paris. So the contract we signed is guaranteed and there is no chance that we shall lose on it. I hope I have now convinced you, hon. Ekanya.

Regarding the spur at Munyonyo, I think hon. Amuriat was trying to calculate that that spur is going to benefit only one enterprise. But honestly, that spur – in fact if we had not constructed that spur, I do not think we would have wanted this highway. We know that there is now the new Serena – let us talk about bigger activity areas. There is Munyonyo – 80 percent of our conferences now take place around that area. Isn’t it nice for the country to get all your delegation, drive them from the airport instead of taking them through Katwe and all these places? Isn’t it also better, instead of coming from Kabalagala or Bunga and trying to go to the airport and coming back literally, to go straight? Even when you want to go to Masaka – if for example hon. Kawanga is a resident of Munyonyo – very soon when we finish this road, he will be driving on that spur, getting on the highway and off to Busega he goes, including those going to western Uganda.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, hon. Minister. My issue is that when those people were concerned about continuing to Jinja Road and you promised, I agreed. But you remember we agreed here that for the road between Kampala and Masaka, the loop of Masaka town should be included. But up to now, when I move around Masaka, I do not see anywhere where the road will pass through the Masaka town. I think this matter should be resolved because the highway to Mbarara has depleted the town – the town is in a bad state. But if the loop were in place, we would go to Kyabakuza, to Rakai Road for a few kilometres instead of passing through town. If we could consider Masaka Town, I would be happy.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly, it would be mainly hon. Kawanga who would be very happy.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I wish to provide information to hon. Ekanya because he raised the issue of why loans like these ones should come before Parliament when they are virtually negotiated. Sometimes loans are negotiated and brought for approval by Parliament as a condition before they are disbursed. It will also require a legal opinion from the Attorney-General. It is therefore not wrong that the minister should bring these loans to you because otherwise they would not be effective. (Hon. Ekanya rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, let us finish this matter. Hon. Minister, please finish it.

MR NASASIRA: Mr Speaker, with those few remarks, I want to thank Members and the committee for their support and beg that we approve the loan.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think you have completed your response. Is the Minister of Finance anywhere? Okay. Then this case – do you have responses?

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister of Works has cleared most of the questions that were asked. My clarification is about the maintenance culture of the roads and that is why we are calling this a toll road. 

First, when money is paid, it will go to repaying the loan. The other money that will remain will go to the maintenance of the road and the balance, if saved, will go to the construction of other roads. That is what this express highway is meant to achieve.

Secondly, there was the issue of the Road Fund but I would like to say that there is a law about how the Road Fund should be constituted. Currently, the Road Fund is financed through appropriation by Parliament through the Consolidated Fund. Money is budgeted towards that activity and it is released quarterly to that Road Fund. And for the information of the House, since January 2010, Shs 250 billion has been dispersed to the Road Fund. The absorption rate of that money is about 80 percent.

There was a conflict between the Road Fund Act and the Act establishing URA, which provides that all revenue collected, must go to the Consolidated Fund. Having realised that, the Ministry of Finance is drafting legislation to harmonise the two laws so that the Road Fund can be actualised and granted the autonomy that was intended to be achieved. And we shall do that as soon as it is practicable.

On the issue of Masindi-Hoima-Kyenjojo Road, this Parliament has time and again heard the priorities of Government. That is one of the roads that are being prioritised for tarmacking. Currently, a study is going on and once completed, money will be found to construct it –(Interjections)– we don’t have a lot of time. That is why I am requesting that we don’t postpone a decision on this loan.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is seeking a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow US $350 from China for purposes of constructing that highway to Entebbe. I now put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: We now remain with only that very important loan request for the extension of the Jinja Dam Bridge. I can see that the report is ready. However, I would like to suggest that you go and study it and the chairman will present it on Tuesday next week. Ensure you read through it.

6.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, on behalf of Government, I want to plead with you to permit the chairman to present this very brief report. I can see hon. Geoffrey Ekanya does not even want to leave this House because it ensures that he gets home safely. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is an important project. So let him present the report, but just summarise.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW JAPANESE YEN 9.198 BILLION (US $102.8 MILLION) FROM JAPAN INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AGENCY (JICA) FOR THE PURPOSES OF FINANCING THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE second BRIDGE ACROSS THE RIVER NILE AT JINJA

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Aston Kajara): Mr Speaker, this is another proposal by Government to borrow from the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA), an amount of Japanese YEN 9.198 billion (US $102.8 million).

This money is for financing the construction of the second bridge across the River Nile at Jinja, which is meant to replace the old bridge at Nalubale Dam that was constructed very long time ago. 

The loan is in line and consistent with the National Development Plan for 2010/2015. It is also in line with the National Transport Policy Strategy and conforms to the Road Sector Development Programme together with the National Transport Master Plan. We pray that the House endorses this borrowing. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you so much. Yes, chairman of the committee.

6.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Fredrick Mbagadhi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before me is a 12-page report whose content is quite precise. I am not going to read it word for word; I will just summarise it.

This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow Japanese YEN 9.198 billion (US $102.8 million) from the Japanese International Cooperation Agency, the purpose of which is the construction of the second bridge at the River Nile at Jinja.

In summary, on page 2 we have the introduction, which basically – 

THE SPEAKER: No, the introduction is really clear; the methodology is clear; and the background is clear. So, just tell us more about the project.

MR MBAGADHI: Okay, let me just say that we have the methods of work on page 2; the background and the project overview on page 3. What I want to add is that this project is quite consistent with the Development Policy Sector Plan and national and regional development plans.

We also have the improvement of the traffic situation, which you already have heard about and on page 5; we have a table that shows the traffic cargo at Mombasa, which clearly indicates the importance of the northern corridor in terms of regional and international trade.

On page 6, we have the National Transport Master Plan and the rationale for the location. The new bridge across the Nile at Jinja will be part of the Northern Corridor route that runs parallel to the northern shores of Lake Victoria. It is one of Uganda’s transport arteries that constitute part of Uganda’s strategic link to the Port of Mombasa.

On that same page, we also have the project objectives, which are quite clear. With the construction of this project, we expect to strengthen the transport capacity. We also expect to have a big contribution made to the promotion of economic development in Uganda and economic integration with the neighbouring countries.

On the part of project implementation, which appears on that same page, it is very clear that the Ministry of Works and Transport will execute this project, but the mandate to implement will be in the hands of the UNRA.

On page 7, we have the project cost and financing. We have a table showing the description of the project component and estimated costs with a total of US $135.4 million. We also have the activity table and time schedule. It is very clear that out of the seven activities, three have been completed. The fourth activity, which is the detailed design period, is on-going. The tendering for construction is slated for June 2011 to June 2012. Construction work is expected to take four years and commissioning is scheduled for August 2016.

On page 8, we have the project components. We have two components, which include civil works and consulting services. 

Item seven is the loan terms and conditions. These are the usual terms – 

THE SPEAKER: How is this second bridge related to the current one? On which side will it be? 

MR MBAGADHI: Mr Speaker, this bridge is 500 metres upstream. 

On page 9, we have observations and recommendations. I will go through them briefly: 

The committee observed that the first road bridge, which is atop of the Nalubale Dam located over the River Nile at Jinja and is over 50 years old, had its structural components suffering from serious deterioration as a result of environmental effects and increasing traffic loads in excess of what it was initially designed for.

The committee further observed that this project required a standard railway bridge to be developed as well in line with the national concept of a standardised railway transport master plan to ease the transportation capacity in the country and in the EAC region.

The committee recommends that Government should expeditiously source for the necessary additional funding for this investment so that a standard railway bridge is also added as an additional cost to this project. 

The committee observed that while repairing the Nalubale Dam, the Ministry of Works did not gazette and map out this site because the properties that existed near the new dam were relocated to the new project site and are now going to be demolished due to lack of earlier planning. The urban authority too had also continued to approve the development plan in the area raising the number of properties to be compensated from 43 to 47.

The committee, therefore, recommends the need for urban planning and land use planning for all government and public infrastructure developments. The urban authorities should respect and avoid approving plans in such critical areas. 

The committee observed that unlike the majority of previous infrastructure projects, the land acquisition for this project was noted to be in advanced stages, which was commendable, save for the seven plots of land whose owners were yet to be identified. However, high costs of land compensation were still a major challenge for infrastructure projects and where compensation disputes existed there was a practice of settling them in the absence of an arbitrator as required by law.

The committee observed that this project had taken several years as the designs and standards had to be supplied by the donors. This leaves the country dependant on donors. As a recommendation, Government should endeavour to allocate funds to enhance and build the designing capacity of our local engineers in order to avoid dependency on foreign designers and designs. 

The committee further observed that Government is investing a huge amount of funds in the routine maintenance of the old Nalubale Bridge in Jinja to improve the structural reliability and serviceability of this old existing bridge. The committee urges Government to expeditiously process the construction of the new bridge as this will go a long way in saving the funds being used for routine maintenance due to the fact that traffic overload will have been reduced, hence less damage.

In conclusion, the committee, after scrutiny of the loan request, noted that the project was long overdue considering that the old Nalubale Bridge that was built during the 1950s is currently chocked under high traffic levels coupled with overloaded heavy vehicles which have caused severe deterioration of the existing bridge structure. 

The Northern Corridor route, therefore, is very important for Uganda in terms of regional and international transportation and trade as the only route from Mombasa Port to Uganda.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Parliament approves Government’s request to borrow Japanese Yen 9.198 from the Japan International Cooperation Agency for the purposes of financing the construction of the second bridge across the River Nile at Jinja. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairman, and members of the committee. Do you want to debate it today?

6.23
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the chairperson for this report. I entirely agree with the committee’s observations and recommendations because this bridge actually has outlived its time. I just want to seek clarification from the minister or the chairperson of the committee. On page 9, observation 2, and the recommendation, he has merged the railway bridge with this loan. I want to find out, is this loan and the bridge, which is going to be constructed, going to cater for dual passage for the motor vehicles and railway?

Secondly, what will be the lifespan of this bridge, which is going to be constructed? 

Otherwise, I support the loan and we should pass it as soon as yesterday. Thank you very much.

6.25
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the ministers of finance and that of works and the chairperson of the committee. This is a good loan because the interest rate meets the World Trade Organisation and GATT rules. As it is shown here, the interest rate is 0.01 per annum. The maturity period is over 40 years with a grace period of ten years. 

I want to urge Government that this is the kind of product you need to bring. Don’t bring in this one from China of 20 years period with interest rate of 2 percent and grace period of five years. 

Despite the problems the Japanese are having, this is a good product and the loan meets international bidding. They have not handpicked a contractor. They are going to advertise. Even a Ugandan from Kyanamukaka or Tororo can get the job. 

In conclusion, I urge Prof. Kamuntu to be a professor who learns like the Prime Minister whom I respect very much. I know that before a loan of Government gets here, there should be negotiations. I am the Vice-President of Parliamentary Forum of the World Bank. I have presented papers on World Bank, Chinese and Paris issues on this matter and therefore don’t think that I am not informed.

6.26
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this loan. As somebody who uses this road and the bridge almost on a daily basis, we needed this loan earlier than yesterday. One clarification on page 7 is that given the necessity and timeliness of this loan, why are we looking at taking a full year on the tendering and procurement process yet we have already acquired the financing and the designs have already been done? Why are we taking a full year from 2011 June to 2012 June just doing procurement and tendering?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in view of the contributions made, I put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow Japanese Yen 9.198 billion or US $102.8 million for the purpose, which has already been stated to have the second bridge on River Nile.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: This is a very important project. Hon. Members, I thank you very much for your time, ideas and contributions to the matters we had. We also hope that concerning the other matter, which we started with of Dr Besigye, the Minister of Internal Affairs will facilitate those who want to access him to do so and as the Prime Minister has said, there will be a statement tonight over the same matter. The Minister of Internal Affairs will give us his statement later.

Let me again remind you of the National Identity Card project which will start in the morning in our Conference Centre here. I appeal to you to appear and give your details so that you can get your national identity cards soon.

With this, I thank you. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 May 2011 at 2.30 p.m.)


