
Tuesday, 27th April, 1993

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

PAPERS

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to lay on the Table the Financial Statement for the year ended 31st December, 1991, for the Uganda Development Bank.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for this Council Meeting to proceed when we do not form a quorum? 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not in order.  With that, we adjourn for 15 minutes.

(Quorum formed, Debate continues).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 1993

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Financial Institutions Bill, 1993, be read a Second Time.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Members will recall that while introducing the Bank of Uganda Bill, the Minister for Finance and Economic Development highlighted the weaknesses in our financial system.  He further noted that we have to deal with weaknesses if economic growth is to be accelerated and stabilisation sustained.  We are, therefore, proposing this Bill to put the above in effect.  The primary objective of this Bill is to address the existing weaknesses of the regulatory framework in order to provide more effective protection for deposit-making public.  In particular, the Bill seeks to, first of all, further increase the powers of the Bank of Uganda to supervise the financial sector.  

Secondly, the Bill seeks to broaden the coverage of those powers to include building societies and other institutions classified as financial institutions by the Bank of Uganda.  Thirdly, the Bill seeks to provide minimum capital requirements for financial institutions that will provide adequate protection for depositors.  As far as Bank of Uganda powers are concerned, the Bank of Uganda in this Bill is granted powers to take swift and stronger actions in its role as a protector of depositors’ funds when a financial institution fails to meet the criteria specified in this Bill. I would draw hon. Members specifically, in this regard to look at Clauses 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11.  These powers are necessary to ensure that public confidence in the financial system is not undermined in the even of a failure of a financial institution.

As far as capital requirements are concerned, ideally the primary objective of minimum capital requirements with low levels of capital is prone to severe insolence problems that undermine the public confidence in the financial system.  Of recent, most countries including some African countries have addressed this problem by providing higher minimum capital requirements.  Accordingly, the Bill intends to raise the minimum capital requirements as follows: Commercial Banking: 

A local person proposing to transact banking business in Uganda shall have a minimum paid-up capital of not less than 500 million shillings and for a foreign person of not less than one billion Uganda shillings.  As far as credit institutions are concerned, Mr. Chairman, the Bill seeks to raise capital requirements to transact in credit institutions as follows:

For a local person or farm, not less than 300 million shillings.   For a foreign person, not less than 500 million shillings. In case of a person proposing to transact building societies should have paid-up capital of not less than 300 million shillings. In case of a financial institution which is already in existence before the commencement of this Statute, a period of three years is granted in which to build up its capital to the minimum level stipulated in this section.

This Bill also seeks to streamline supervision procedures of a Central Bank that were not clear in the current Banking Act.  (Ref. 21-29). I believe that commencement of this Statute, together with the new Bank of Uganda Statute, will give strong and clear legal basis for us to strengthen our financial sector.  Allow me, Sir, to draw the attention of my Colleagues to a few provisions where I want them to take note.  Part 1 of the Bill deals with just preliminary war.  But Part 2 deals with the licensing.  Under licensing, I would like to draw the attention of my Colleagues, on top of what I have stated, to Clause 7, Article 4 which states that, “(a) The Central Bank shall, within seven days after its decision under (3), inform the applicant of its decision in writing. (b) In the even of refusal to grant a license, the aggrieved applicant may approach the Minister.”

This is provided so that if the applicant is aggrieved that the Central Bank has refused him/her a license, there is provision for appeal.  Capital requirements:

I would like to draw the attention of Colleagues to Clause 12 (5) which states that, “A financial institution in existence immediately before the commencement of this Statute shall be given a period of three years in which to build up its capital to the minimum level stipulated in this Section.”  This is to ensure that current institutions are not disadvantaged and are given enough time to build up the required capital which a new institution which starts after you pass the Bill will be subjected to.  This is meant not to get people out of the business, but giving them enough time to build up to satisfy the minimum requirement.  

Under 14, I want hon. Members to note that the Central Bank may, with the approval of the Minister, from time to time, review the minimum capital requirements and increase them by Statutory Instruments as circumstances warrant.  But we are stating the minimum as of the beginning.  But as time goes on, because of different circumstances, the minimum can be revised with the approval of the Minister when as Statutory Instruments is issued.  I want to draw the attention of my Colleagues to Clause 15 (3), “The Central Bank shall allow reasonable time after a minimum holding is prescribed or increased under (1) of this section to enable the financial institutions comply with the requirements.” For the purpose of this section, liquid assets are explained so that nobody can take advantage of this interpretation in order to disadvantage anybody else.  That is why we thought it is important to legally qualify what constitutes liquid assets.

There have been problems that some people in the financial institutions decide to grant loans to themselves at the cost of depositors.  This is provided against under 18, part 4.  “Financial institution shall not, without the prior approval of the Central Bank, grant or permit to be outstanding in respect of anyone of its officers or employees unsecured advances or unsecured credit facilities which in the aggregate exceed one year’s emoluments of such officer or employee.  (b) Grant to a single person any advance or credit facility which is more than 25 per cent of its core capital.”  This is intended to safeguard depositors so that Managers or Directors do not sit and lend themselves all the capital of the bank.

Trade Investments and immovable properties:  The Bill provides under 19 (2): “Notwithstanding (1) of this Section, the Central Bank, may permit a financial institution to engage in a commercial, agricultural, industrial or other undertaking upon such conditions as it may deem fit provided that such undertaking is not likely to impair the viability and efficiency of the financial institutions.” 

Under Part 4; supervision, I draw the attention of my Colleagues to Clause 27 (3) which provides that, “A financial institution shall exhibit throughout the year in a conspicuous place in each of its offices and branches a copy of its last audited Balance Sheet with full and correct names of all persons who are Directors of the financial institution and a copy of the Balance Sheet shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation.” This is intended to inform the public of the performance and Directors and owners of an institution so that before they put their deposit in such financial institutions, all pertinent information is available to them.  Where the banks or financial institutions fail, the power has been given to the Central Bank of issue orders after inspection line in 29 (b): “The Central Bank is empowered to appoint: “ a competent person to advise the financial institution on the measures to be taken to rectify its situation and shall fix his remuneration which shall be paid by the financial institution.” The role of the Bank of Uganda will not just be to try to close financial institutions.  It will be the duty of the Central Bank also to help financial institutions address some problems they may have when they are not performing efficiently so that by the time the financial institutions is really closed, its life has expired and it cannot be assisted any more.  

So, it is not the duty of the Central Bank to go around closing institutions.  Also its duty is to assist to make sure that in our country we build strong financial institutions.  However, where the management and owners of a financial institution decide to operate outside these provisions, the Central Bank is given power to carry out a censure in circumstances like in Clause 13.  

Part 6 provides for liquidation, censure and re-organisation.  I am saying this that further the Central Bank can help an institution to be re-organised in order to be viable.  So, it is not only one-way.  Under Clause 32 (4), once the Central Bank is satisfied that a financial institution is insolvent, it provides what should be done; you cannot do much more.  So, the procedures are provided for what should happen in case. When hon. Members were contributing to the Bill, they made a proposal that we must provide for insurance in order to save depositors.  So, we shall carry out an Amendment to make a provision to empower the Central Bank or the Minister to set up such an insurance provision. (Applause) 

I will move also just a small Amendment on a Clause that requires the Bank of Uganda to make decisions in respect of certain financial institutions as far as conditionalities are concerned.  For example, when you look at Clause 47, the Central Bank may make regulations and (a) prescribing prudential norms or set asset quality including bad provisions and write-offs provided for the licensing of financial institutions, providing for the minimum level of capital for financial institutions, providing for the computation of ongoing capital adequacy. Representations have been made that if you left Central Bank alone without provision of any consultation, what happens if they set such conditions that make life of financial institutions difficult? We shall make a little Amendment to make this to be in consultation with the Minister so that is one is refused and one was to make an appeal to the Minister, the Minister would have known the background of that case. Since it is Members who are dealing with depositors mostly and who are also depositors, it is better to listen from them than to spend a lot of time for them to listen from me.  With these few remarks, I beg to move, Sir.

(Question proposed).

MR. I. MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I have the honour to second the Bill.  When I received this Bill and it was almost at the same time with the last Bill we disposed of on Thursday, I looked at both at the same time.  I made an effort to visit the Uganda Commercial Bank and have some discussion with the successor to Dr. Mwine.  He could not find the time.  So, I went alone and read through the two Bills.  The one has been disposed of and I have nothing to say about it any more.  Let me say something about this one.  I have four points on this particular one.  The first one concerns licensing - the duration of the license.  The second one concerns the relationship between these financial institutions and the proposed stock exchange. The third one concerns the rural areas.  The last one is a curiosity about the Forex Bureau.  

Let me start with the last one since it is the simplest.  I have failed to know why the Ministry of Finance has not included the Forex Bureau among the financial institutions.  (Applause) In all their appearance, they resemble so much.  Unless, of course since I am not an insider, the Minister has already made a provision for the Forex Bureau somewhere else.  But otherwise, if that was not the case, I would have included them especially, having memory of their behaviour in the last two years or at least, some of them.  Let me move to the rural areas.  When they were arranging the minimum paid up capitals, they are so high that they would be more appropriate for urban areas. Although the Minister tells us that the intention is protected the depositor, that the depositors, in the rural areas are not absent. They are there, their deposits are not so high, I thought that to give some kind of incentive to ones who would start financial institutions in rural areas, that the Ministry might consider slightly lower paid up capital requirement for institutions operating in the rural areas, and I thought that the Minister would consider this. 

The next point, is the relationship between the Stock Exchange which is proposed and the financial institutions.  When you look through the Bill, especially, the Clause on Licensing,; Clause 4, you will notice that although the Stock Exchange has very close relationship with the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Finance seems to have not paid much attention to the way the exchange might behave, this is shown by requirement which will be required of institutions to be provided to the Central Bank.  It says; “tell us the addresses of the shareholders and the Directors.” The Directors are alright but the Shareholders, when the Stock Exchange begins, one will be free to buy shares of the Nile Bank, and upon hearing that the Nile Bank has a new depositor, Kakira Sugar Works, let us say, or they make an embassy, one says how do the shares look like now?  If they have increased in their value, he sells immediately.  So, the one who is a shareholder at the end of April of the Nile Bank shares, at the beginning of May, may no longer be a shareholder.  So, when we as the Nile Bank to give you a list of the shareholders, it is askingly impossible, they change frequently, they are buying and selling as needs arise, they buy and sell, so it is impossible so actually, I made a proposal which intend to circulate that we remove all the requirements for shareholders through the Bill.  

The last point is on the question of licensing.  The Minister properly points out, that the aim is to streamline the working of Financial Institutions.  I suppose also that means to make them ore reliable; since we are going to make them more reliable, it seems as if the first toll that we Central Bank has to use, the first weapon, is the licenses. It does not seem to have another one which is immediate, the others only come when something wrong has happened and the Central Bank find something wrong, but at the beginning it is the license; but this is a license which according to its Bill, is given once and forever. 

So, if I were to set up a financial institutions, and I get my directors, hon. Wanendeya, hon. Lubega, hon. Mulwanira Mutebi and we say, these are the Directors, very clean gentlemen, at that stage, the Central Bank gives us a license, when it is safely hanging on the way, we go back and invite hon. X and invite Mr. J and Mr. L whom we knew if they were included at the beginning, the Central Bank might wonder whether to give us a license or not, and now we include them among the Directors, since the license is once forever,  There is no more chance for the Central Bank to cancel it.  Alternatively, the Bill in Clause 8, simply says that, with each, universally, we shall only be going to the Central Bank to pay a fee, so like celebrating a birth day.  

I propose that these licenses be annual.  It is a departure from what already existing.  It seems - but with annual licensing, the Central Bank gets a chance to vet all the Directors and the top management, and then they continue, if nothing happens, then the following year the Central Bank gets a chance once again to look at, of course, in addition to the statement, books also would be looked at.  I thought that this, although, it appears to be a cumbersome thing should be attempted, but to attempt this last one, it requires making so many chances in the Bill.  As a matter of fact, when I went through it, I thought to effect all these I am saying, you will need 28 Amendments.  I tried and wrote some of them, but as you know, when a Member normally in this House raises so many amendments, she is looked upon as a kind of nuisance, but I dared and wrote some of them down, and I hope that this hon. members will consider these proposals with reasonable kindness and see how we move about them.  I would like to end my remarks on this same way I ended my remarks on the Investment Code last year, I said at this time, that the Investment Code was not intended to take us to heaven, but certainly it should be us out of hell.  If the Financial Institutions are properly run, we shall be on the first leg of our journey out of hell to the opposite side.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. SIBO (Nominated Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill.  First of all, I would like to commend the Minister’s effort in bringing u this Bill, for three reasons. The first reason, the Minister is making efforts to streamline the control of all the Financial Institutions under the Central Bank.  This is an effort to ensure the security of the depositors’ money. We know quite well that a number of building societies have been rather a means to the country here, and I think, I want to commend the Minister’s effort to bring these building societies under control of the Central Bank. The second reason, I also wish to commend the Minister’s willingness to give up his licensing powers of the Financial Institutions to the Central Bank.  Before the Minister was licensing, the Financial Institutions, on the recommendation of the Central Bank, and if the Minister refused a license, then there was no point of appeal, that was the end, but now the Central Bank will license financial institution, and if a financial institution is aggrieved for not receiving the license, then at least it has a point of appeal.

The third reason, I wish to commend the Minister’s effort, is the fact that he is differentiating between the indigenous and the foreign companies, foreign investors in their ability to mobilise capital funds, although, I must confess that I find the figure of Shs.500 million, a bit rather too high.  Nevertheless, I think it will discourage the frivolous adventurous with people’s money and these adventurous must be discouraged.  Now, having said that I wish to call the attention of the Minister to certain and undesirable practice in the relationship between the Central Bank and the Financial Institution, particularly now, that the Central Bank is fully independent in the control of the Financial Institutions.  There has been tendency to apply double standards by the Central Bank in licensing and supervising the Financial Institutions, in some cases, there has been or the Central Bank has been extremely rigid and reluctant to recommend granting licences.   In other case, it has been plain selling.  A case in point I think it was quoted when we were considering the Bank of Uganda Bill, that was the Orient Bank, it appeared to be extremely easy for the Orient Bank, to get a commercial licenses. Orient Bank of course, was okay, their experience was in the foreign exchange bureau, but there was no indication that it had ever handled commercial banking.  

On the other hand, if I may quote, another institution that has had problem in this case, the Centenary or Development Trust Bank took too long, very many years, it was hard and tough negotiations before commercial license was given despite the fact that it has been on the ground before such banks like the Nile Banks, Teefe, Sembule Investment Bank, the International Credit and the Greenland Bank, the Minister is fully aware of the situation - I think, this case was brought to his attention, I do not need to elaborate on it.  I also want to say that it appears that for some banks, it has been easy to be closed and for other banks.  The Central Bank has found it necessary to bail them out without difficulty.  Mr. Chairman, in this case, perhaps, if you may ask me an example, Teefe was closed and the Nile Bank was bailed out quite easily, perhaps of course, I may be -(Interruption)

MR. AMANYA MUSHEGA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, may I inform and remind hon. Sibo that when we are debating the Bank of Uganda Bill, he was contributing vehemently that the Bank of Uganda should be made independent because politicians interfere with its operations.  Now, he is complaining the Bank of Uganda, after all even with minimum autonomy, is apparently manned by humans, I am just informing him that and maybe hoping that the contradiction will be ironed out in the course of his contribution.

MR. SIBO:  I thank the Minister’s information, and, of course, my observation really did not mean that there were no good reasons for doing so.  I appreciate the Minister’s information.  

Nevertheless, my next point is the role of the Central Bank as a clearing house for the commercial bank.  Currently, the commercial bank has constituted themselves into an association, and they have made rules for membership of their association.  One of the rules is that any new member who has obtained a commercial license should submit his application and would be observed for a period of two years.  During which, his cheques will be cleared through another bank of the choice.  These kinds of regulations, of course, detract from the functions of the Central Bank, because the Central Bank is clearing house and not the bankers association.  

Secondly, the members of the clearing house, are competitors to the new applicant to subject him, therefore, to the supervision of his competitors is being unfair to say the least.  Thirdly, the granting of the license was not conditioned to the satisfactory performance within a probational period of two years.  The Central Bank should, therefore not adjudicate its responsibility to the bankers association and therefore, I appeal to the Minister to call, the attention of the Central Bank to carry out its responsibilities and call the bankers association to order.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

MR. KISEMBO (Burahya County, Kabarole): I stand to support the Bill, Mr. Chairman.  I would like first of all to thank the hon. Minister for Finance for having thought it wise to have this Bill in place.  Although it has been overdue it is better late than never.  I would like to propose to the Minister under section 23 Sub-section (1), this is where the Financial Institution is being given the powers to appoint the auditors, I would therefore, suggest that since Bank of Uganda is having the over able supervision, it should have the powers to appoint the their own auditors. That is where loopholes comes in again, once the auditors are appointed by the very Financial Institutions.  They will be answerable to them, but once they are appointed by the Central Bank.  Then they will be answerable to the Central Bank, and by doing so, people like these banks.  We have heard that they have been loaning themselves money.  They would cease to do so that in a way that they will not appear in the audit report and what has been happening, Mr. Chairman is when such money is being loaned out -(Interruption) 

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that if the Bank of Uganda as the supervising agency is to appoint Auditors, then they might be a racket in appointing those auditors from which would get some missions, and therefore, it would be professionally unauthentic for them to do that, Mr. Chairman Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA: Point of information.  The information I want to give to the hon. Member on the Floor is that Financial Institutions as companies are entitled in their annual general meeting as shareholders to appoint their own auditors.  We cannot make a law different from the law that governs companies in this country.  Secondly, auditors belong to a professional organisation and have a professional code of conducts which requires them in the course of performing their duties to protect not only the shareholders but also the government as far as taxes are concerned and other parties who may be doing business with that particular institutions. This is the information, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to refer Colleagues to read Clause 23, together with Clause 24. Clause 23 allows the Institution to appoint the Auditors, but the report of this Auditor must satisfy the Bank of Uganda, and where Bank of Uganda thinks the auditing has already been professional and unsatisfactory, Clause 24, in powers Bank of Uganda to appoint an auditor for that institution. 

MR. KISEMBO: I take the information.  Mr. Chairman, going to Clause 13, Sub-section 1; this Clause is really going to safeguard most of the Ugandans who have already suffered at the hands of some certain institutions because of closing up.  As we talk now, we do not know what is happening to the depositors in Teefe Bank and those who had even deposited their money with Equator, now Ugadev, as we are reading the papers is also having the same problems. 

So, I think this Clause is really going to safeguard the interests of the depositors.  Mr. Chairman, while the hon. Sibo was thinking of Shs.500 million being very little, with me, I was proposing to the Minister that at least, be increased to Shs.1 billion. So that whoever is deciding to go into this business, is really a worthy to do Financial Institutions.  Actually, so that, at the time or at the end of the day, once they have enough  -(Interruption) 

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that a country like Italy came behind the rest of the European Community to come up and one of the reasons is that the established financial institutions nearly all over the and almost at what I would call in Uganda’s terms at county level; which the result that, those people were able to safeguard their investments properly and therefore, as a result Italy has come out of the door drums and is one of the tope financial institutions in the world which have been developing.  Therefore, if capital requirement is 500,000,000 shillings the small institutions which maybe, established at county level may not be established at all; and therefore, it would be in the best interest of our country that, that required be lowered down.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KISEMBO:  Mr. Chairman, Uganda is Uganda and Italy is Italy, especially now when there is a lot of Mafia going on in Italy, I think I am talking in terms of Uganda.  So, with that I beg to support the Bill.

MR. LUBEGA (Butambala County, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to say something on this Bill.  I stand here to support the Bill and to thank the Government for having come out with this Bill, which is intended to safeguard the investors.  A lot of our people lost money through these financial institutions like the building societies etc.  Having said that, I want to say something on Clause 7 sub-section (2) on page 2. It seems it is not very clear when - under 7(2), the Central Bank shall for the purpose of considering and making a report or an application under this section appoint a committee of three or more member of the Board who shall report in writing their recommendation to the Central Bank.  I think there it should be to the Board that has to consider that report but if you leave it to the Central Bank, it is a bit vague.  I request the Minister responsible to look into that.

I also go to Clause 7 sub-section 4(b), when the Central Bank has refused to grant permission to the applicant reasons should be give as to why the application has been turned down.  So, full reasons must be given before an appeal is made to the Minister.  Another article is 12 Sub-section (4) on page 13 that is on building societies; considering the operations of the building societies, and also their area of operation, the type of people who invest in that, when you say the paid up capital should be 300,000,000.  I think, it is on the higher sight; unless the Government is trying to discourage these young investors to set up building societies.  

Now, when you consider the inflation currently the way it is going down, and also the way our currency is gaining power, it is my humble suggestion to the Minister that he considers a lower paid up capital for the building societies.  300,000,000 shillings is just too high; unless the government is trying to discourage these societies, it is going to be very difficult to have the.  In fact in some areas I remember hon. Kanyomozi when he was contributing to the Bank of Uganda Bill -(Interruption) 

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that while here appreciating and the ideas - the capital asset of 300,000,000 is too high, he should also realise that building societies are basically in business for construction of buildings and houses in the main; and these long term loans, if the capital base is very small and you give loans which are going to be five, ten fifteen years.  You will find a problem of recovery and you find a problem of actually ensuring that members’ funds are properly protected.  In fact, if anything commercial in the rural areas may have lower capital base but not building societies because their capital base is supposed to be strong enough to sustain heavy loans and long term loans. (Applause)

MR. LUBEGA:  That is a good information, but I still insist on my proposal that it is too high because the area of operation for example, when you go to I think in Kasese where they have come out in a big way they cannot actually raise 300,000,000 shillings they start with small people in an area who really need very little money to put up reasonable houses not these big houses the hon. Member from Rukiga has in mind.  On article 26 sub-section 4(a), it may be very difficult to implement this article 26 for sub-section 4(a), as this is an employee of the bank is appointed by the board of directors of the financial institution and now when they say the Central Bank may impose any or all of the following duties on an external auditor; one, the duty of submit such additional information in the relation to his audit as the Central Bank considers necessary. The external auditors are appointed by the board of directors or the general meeting of the board, if the information asked by the Central Bank does not please the owners of the bank.  It is likely that the external auditors will decide with the board not with the Central Bank, and that needs some clarification or some amendments.

Article 27 on page 19, I think this article should not appear there.  It does not make sense to me because when you appoint an auditor, there are certain duties you have to do, if you are appointed.  You are an auditor, you know, you have to see the books, the accounts you have do the donkey work of vouching, securities, unless you are trying to tell somebody who has not done audit what he is supposed to do but if he is an auditor, he is supposed - the moment you appoint him an auditor, he knows that he has to look at the accounts, securities, etc.  So this article should not be there completely, should be left out.  It is good that the hon. Minister is going to bring an Amendment concerning the post office, and also the insurance.  I was worried about the post office, people have put money in the post office, some lost their, passbooks they have tried to go to the post office, and they have not been assisted so with his amendment I am sure it will cover all that.  Thank you very much for allowing me, Mr. Chairman, to contribute.

MR. ZABASAIJA (Buhanguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support this Bill.  But before I do so, I beg your indulgence, to make just one remark regarding the remark made by the Deputy Minister of Works and Communications when he was in Hoima. First of all I must thank the Deputy Minister of Transport and Communications for visiting Bunyoro and for noticing and making it public that the roads there were extremely bad.  He went on to advise the Banyoro to grow a lot of cash crops like beans groundnuts, maize and the rest so that they can qualify to have their roads tarmacked.  I must say, that the Banyoro do not have to be advised this way because they have been doing this for a long time indeed and in a big way but they are soon giving it up because whatever they are doing, whatever they are producing, whatever they are trying to produce is being destroyed by vermin; baboons, and monkeys.  This may sound a very simple matter; when His Excellency the President visited our area, we raised this issue and the President laughed it off -(Interjection) Yes, but, 

I would like to retaliate here that, unless the central government comes in a big way to help us control vermin in Bunyoro, we are going to have a big problem in the future, and we are not like elsewhere.  In Bunyoro we have got two huge forests and these are the homes of baboons, and there is no way we can fight these baboons through these forests.  Even if baboons were not there, there is enough economic activity in the area towards the tarmacking of roads.  The best mahogany in East Africa comes from Bunyoro.  Bunyoro is the biggest grower of tobacco -(Interruption)

 THE CHAIRMAN: Turn to the Bill please.

MR. ZABASAIJA:  Yes, I wanted to say, Mr. Chairman, most of the groundnuts that is eaten here is from Bunyoro.  I do not know whether that is not enough to warrant the tarmacking of Bunyoro roads.

I would like now to turn to the bill. I said, I stood up to support the Bill, and I would like to thank the Minister for coming up with this Bill but I have a few complaints to make.  These regard the section of capitalization, capital requirements capital minimum.  It would seem that when this Bill was thought about there was the idea of putting Uganda on International standards, I think is a very good thing but there are our areas in Uganda where we cannot match International standards.  Shs.500 million to me looks a lot of money and many people would find it difficult to raise it to start a financial institution.  When we think of the Uganda shilling we sometimes make a mistake to compare straight way with dollar but if one wanted to know the value of the Uganda shilling, one should look at the salary of the permanent secretary, the Minister, the Member of Parliament. As a Member of Parliament, I get a salary of 60,000 shs.59, 000/=, okay, and I am supposed to live on that for sometime but if you translated that into dollars, anybody else in the world will tell you that is incredible you cannot live on that.  Therefore, when we are talking of Shs.500 million I think we are translating it from dollars into Uganda Shillings, and on the International standards that may be little money but in Uganda that is a lot of money.  

Now, I would like to observe financial institutions grow in the area where they are; now here if we limit banking institutions to - not limit, but if we set a minimum of Shs.500, 000,000 that means even the existing institutions will close.  That means there will be fewer financial institutions in the country, and that will not augur well for the economic growth of this country.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information. When hon. Members are debating about the minimum requirement of a financial institution to start a bank they should not quip it as a requirement of a person in his individual capacity so that he thinks how many Ugandan have a half million to start banking institution Shs.500 million - a half billion it is not true that is all Ugandans must leave all other things and go into banking that is one.  Secondly, it is not necessary that one man, or one person forms a company.  

So, the way we are arguing is as if one person is the one required to make a company whole minimum is Shs.500 million.  We are talking about a financial institution, it could be a hundred people who need to pull, to form a financial institution; it could be one person who feels he can raise that capital alone but also think of it in either way you are going around the country trying to collect people’s deposits.  Unless you also want to regulate the maximum deposit you can collect from people so that if you have a small capital you also do not collect many deposits.  If you are going to leave one side open, it is important to care about the other side which you are closing, and let us not debate as if this a requirement of one person.  Hon. Mayengo has just said a stock exchange is about to take off, this is an opportunity for people to gather small amounts of money to form a company; I want to correct this impression.

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, that confusion might also have been created by the drawers of the Bill itself; the draftsmen.  They state in the Bill; that no financial institutions would go on unless it is a company.  But throughout the Bill, they continue to say ‘a person, a person, a person’, almost endlessly.  So, I think the Member might easily confuse the person in the Bill with the person that they are talking about.  I understand.  It is a legal person, but not everybody is legally qualified to know that there are legal persons of that kind.

MR. ZABASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, I am aware that a Financial Institution does not necessarily have to be one - but I am thinking of a local initiative; suppose, in my county we wanted to form some kind of financial institution, which actually, we have started but this Bill is going to know us out, now it is not easy for us to raise Shs.500 million even if we collected 100 people it is not easy and yet we want money in circulation at our door step.  Now, this would mean these big institutions are going to be in places where there is big money like Kampala, Jinja and the rest. Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. A.K. MAYANJA: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that it is, of course, possible and normal, for a nationally constituted financial institution which would probably be incorporated here in Kampala, to establish branches all over the country.  It is not necessary that a financial institution operating in Hoima must be incorporated and owned and operated by Banyoro in Hoima, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. ZABASAIJA:  Thank you very much for all this information, but I know a financial institution started by the local people would serve them better than a bigger institution originating and with the Headquarters far away.  This is happening today with Uganda Commercial Bank. If you want a Loan, the application has got to come all the way to Kampala.  It would seem that these precautions were thought of because in the past financial institutions have cheated the public.  But I would imagine that this was mainly because professional ethics were not being adhered to.  People in the Banking Institutions, the professionals were not doing their work and they were not keeping their professional ethics and even the law enforcement sections of the Government were not doing their work properly, but if professionals, accountants, bankers, to carry out their work well, I am sure even if a Banking Institution has a small capital like Shs.200 million can serve the public well.  I would like, therefore, to end by giving a warning that are moving an Amendment to reduce this requirement from Shs.500 million to a lower figure.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to support the Motion, the Motion for the Bill with some reservations especially my problem too like a number of other speakers has been on the minimum capitalization. Hon. Wanendeya referred to financial institutions formed in Italy, even in earlier times I am told, priests monks and the like mobilised, poor people to form tiny little banks in their villages and these banks gave rise to additional savings of money and development of these areas.  I believe that time when these monks and priests were helping these people to form tiny banks is the period Uganda is at now.  In my opinion, we are busy decentralising, on one hand.  On the other we are busy concentrating on that sense.  

I am saying this because of the role the Central Bank is supposed to play.  Some one is suggesting that elsewhere we have devils and at the Central Bank we have angles to supervise and make things work well.  I would rather think about getting a proper people in these other areas to look after some of the functions that the Central Bank is supposed to take care of.  It is going to be very difficult.  For people to come and camp in Kampala to get this and that done before they can do their business.  A financial institution among its functions I know is to make money but also to mobilise people to save money, and I think the nearer you are to the people, the more likely you are to mobilise them to save. In my village people are saving by clans, some of then call even get - you know a family get, they save by those, and in fact some of these savings societies have done a much better job than very well capitalised institutions have done.  All you need to do is to create confidence and yet appoint the right people to look after these monies.  

Therefore, much as I would like to agree with the Minister’s concerned about financial institutions which have been mismanaged and, therefore, lead to loss of money, increased punitive share capital is not the answer to the problem.  You can even put it at Shs. 2 billion but Kagonyera’s task for money is bottom pit and, therefore, I will steal those two million dollars and still there will be money. You can also make it Shs.1 million but if you have descent people managing this organisation, it will probably do its business.  

I have fear personally that some people and I do not like to impute bad motives, but I am tempted to think that there people who think that our people who should not participate in managing their affairs.  You cannot say that because a child is going to fall and break his teeth, he should not start crawling.  We learn by mistakes and mistakes must be made in order for us to learn.  Therefore, I do not think that it is in the interest of our people to be told stopped. Before you can run any kind of financial institution you must have much money.  It is ironical.  In fact, when UCB is busy closing up branches in the rural areas and, therefore, rendering poor people helpless vis-a-vis their savings, you are also making it impossible for the ordinary people there to create their own institutions.  (Applause)

MR. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In support of the hon. Member now holding the Floor, I would like to disclose that there was a committee of Ugandans composed of very eminent bankers who were of the same philosophy as Member now holding the Floor and in order to encourage our rural people to save, they recommend that we should divide the institutions in rural and urban institutions and the banks.  In fact, if you look at this Bill, if you look in the dictionary of this Bill, I think, it is Clause 2, there are words called ‘rural area’ and ‘urban area.’  It was for that purpose that these areas were mentioned there, but mysteriously, between that committee of which I had the honour to serve and since people came here, those things have changed.  I hope that I will have an opportunity to contribute to this Bill, but it seems to me Sir, that what the hon. Member holding the Floor is saying, is absolutely true, because there was a sharp division between the Ugandan on that committee and the foreigners who were advising us in that matter and it seems that ultimately in this Bill the views of those who were advising us seem to have prevailed.  Thank you Sir.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would beg that Members make a difference of - and they should read the definition nobody has said that people in the village should not form Savings Societies if they want to save their money.  We are talking about people who want to make it their business to collect other peoples’ money and go and use that money which is not theirs, to do other businesses.  People deposit money with you, and they have nothing else until they come back to demand their money.  How is their money ensured that it is safe when they come back for it? When they deposit their money you are free to do anything with their money.  

So, it is your business to deal with other people’s money.  This is the financial institution we are talking about.  If the people in Rukungiri want to form a co-operative consumer society, or Savings Society they are provided for another law which is the co-operative society, you should not confuse that with men who come and say that our business is going to collect money from members of the public and make profit out of their money; the Government is asking you to provide for the safety of these people who do not determine the usage of their money, that once they put their money, there, whenever they want their money they should go and find their money there.  We are not discouraging savings.  When you look at savings at the Co-operative Movement, it provides on the formation of savings societies or consumer societies, where in small groups people in the villages in the small districts can go around saving their money and how to regulate; but these are people who do not know who they are but we see a bank and we go in there and we put our money there, hoping that if we want our money out next months we go to the same place and get out our money.  We should not confuse the two categories.  I thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Minister but obviously he could have waited and replied to some of these things we are saying.  Now, I said that a huge capital is no guarantee that people’s money will not be embezzled and I also said that there is evidence that no organisation have protected people’s money better than large institutions have done and that is a fact of life.  Therefore, there is no question that these punitive capitals we are trying to enact into law are necessarily going to help us.  All they are going to do is to exclude would be bona fide honest Ugandans albeit with little means to organise themselves into a company and do business. It is good.  Can I be allowed to finish Mr. Chairman?  

I think it is also good for our people to be part of the business that is done in their areas.  It is not always good for people to come and say we are putting up a bank for you we are putting up a business for you.  All you need to do is to put your money in this business, and this Bill is likely to do that kind of thing.  On the contrary what the Minister should have done is to be innovative and find out how Ugandans can actively participate in collecting and banking their money and making profits for their money rather than saying you people get out of there; there is someone with bigger money and will keep your money well for you.  

(Interjection) -I should be allowed to finish, Mr. Chairman, I have not contributed to the debate for a very long time.  Members have had the opportunity to debate.  Let me finish. 

We are told that in management small is good, and a small business can be much more managed especially, under the circumstances than huge ones. That is what we are told.  I never went to a business school, but I hear that in the corridors.  But now we are saying no that is not correct, we must decentralise everything.  In my view it is a challenge to the Minister for Finance to find out how Ugandans can participate in the banking business as shareholders; even in small business.  

In fact, I would have suggested that maybe, the Minister should have said, let people establish these small banks and every body who puts money in the bank could buy preferred shares and, maybe eventually they redeem these shares through their deposits, rather than telling us that because one or two in this country has not performed will, therefore, we cannot perform at all. I support the Minister.  I would like him as some Members have already proposed that they are going to move some Amendments to this punitive share capital so that Ugandans can be able to participate in the banking business, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. OPIO (Busia County, Tororo): Thank you Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to contribute on this Bill.  First of all I will start by saying that I support the Bill.  However, there are some areas to which I have some reservations.  The Minister has already told us that he is going to make an Amendment with regard to the definition of the financial institution.  I was going to comment on that, because in the Bill it had left out certain financial institutions which are very important in this country like Insurance Corporation, which we should have made Members know that they are part of the Financial Institution; as we have been told the Minister is going to make an Amendment to include these financial institutions. However, we should debate knowing that financial institutions include, Insurance Corporation, Housing Finance, Building Companies and Pension funds, because without that Members may be limited to Commercial Bank as if they are only financial institutions.  So, I would, therefore, say that financial institutions are very useful in attracting savings and in allocating the savings.  

However, I would like to say that for the financial institutions to be helpful, there must be conditions that make them first of all collect the funds and also to have the funds allocated to allow the people to invest.  I am, therefore, saying that some of the conditions that we must have are those that create confidence among the savers.  Of recent, in 1987 to be specific, people who were buying life insurances were contributing as savers into the pool where you could have funds for investment.  However, the 1987 monetary reform discouraged most of the people.  If someone had, for instance, a million shillings premium, he ended up with Shs.10, 000/= as premium - well since he did not withdraw it, we would assume, maybe Shs.7, 000/=.  So, if you are after creating confidence among the savers and then you go after sometime, you make such a reform, people will be frightened from saving.  I can assure you, some of us gave up paying for Life Insurance because some of our policies were about to mature and then we were told that you remove zeros.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor to make such an important contribution when the Mover of the Motion is not here?

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a Minister taking notes.  He is quite in order.  Proceed, please.

MR. RUBAALE: Point of information. I wish to inform the hon. Member who has stood up with a point of order that for the time being I am holding the Portfolio.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OPIO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am confident that there is a Minister noting our contribution, so when it comes to replying, I hope we shall get the possible answers.  What I was saying was that in order to mobilise funds for allocation or for investment, the people who are likely to save have to be made confident that when they save they are going to benefit and I was just saying that the Insurance Corporations are among the financial institutions which are there to tap savings from small savers and, therefore, allow these into a pool from which we can create capital for this country and I am saying that because of that lack of confidence we may not have many people saving with it.

The next reservation, I am saying is that, although we are told that we know that negative real interest has a big impact on the people’s savings; we are also saying that the experiences we have had especially when it comes to the previous institutions like Equator and Premier Building Societies, people have again lost confidence in financial institutions. However, the Bill is trying to create some confidence into the people.  However, I am saying that when you look at Article 6 on page 10 to 11, we are being told that when people have applied to have their financial institutions approve, that there will be a few members of the Board to look at the applications and then give their opinion.  I am saying that this is a very technical area and although I know that there will be competent members of the Board.  I am saying that possible there should be extra number of technocrats to make sure that the members of the Board alone do not really look up the applications and then recommend whether it should be accepted or rejected.  So, I am happy that the member of the Board will be properly selected but even though I think the technocrats must be involved in the assessing the applications.

Again, the Members should also know that the National Security Fund is part of Financial Institutions and I hope there will be a separate Bill for it but if not, maybe, I am right to talk about it under the financial institutions.  Again, because of lack of confidence the people who are shareholders are the workers.  Then supported by the employers. The National Social Security Fund would be one of the best institutions to tap the savings because every worker according to the law is supposed to buy a share as if it were.  Now, the confidence we have in this is almost nil because the shareholders who are the workers are the people who are not benefiting, instead, it is the managers who end up getting dividends, through their fringe benefits, through their salaries, through their good vehicles.  The worker, when he is retiring, he is told there is no money.  Even if there is money, it is so little because of inflation.  So in order to encourage people to save they must be confidence so that they can willingly pay into the National Security Fund and as I said that is a major financial institution and maybe, the Minister will have a separate Bill but I am right to think that it is part of the financial institutions.

I would like to state that when it comes to the operations we are told that the Central Bank is going to be the supervisor.  However, we are trusting as some one hon. Member has said too much for one organisation.  However, given the responsibility of the Central Bank I am tempted to say the only reason we could say is that for the Minister to make sure that he strengthen the Central Bank so that they should have a follow up.  What has happened in the past is that some employees in the Central Bank, I am sorry to say, have become so much a bureaucrats.  So, that they wait for so long before they can rescue a financial institution.  So, we are now saying that with all those responsibilities you are giving to the Central Bank we must now be assured, that the Central Bank we going to have will be a more dynamic, will be a more expensive Central Bank so that when there are crisis in the financial institutions we are assured that there will be immediate correction because with all these powers, and we are being told that all the financial institutions plus the monetary, the initiations and the implementations of the monetary policies are going to be in the Central Bank.   

With these few remarks I would like to pray that you give me one or two minutes to say something outside the Bill and this is from the border and my members. Some of my voters in the border areas, we are having a problem with one section of the Revenue Authority which appears to be having an objective of preventing trade other than collecting revenue from the traders.  We are of the opinion, that we, people on the border we are law abiding, we would like to pay taxes but the government should know that we, by nature, people on the border have what you call comparative advantage and the comparative advantage is of trading and it is, therefore, within our economic rate to trade so long as we are within the law.  Just of late, this is a very sad story, one of our traders was gunned down.  He died, two are still in Tororo Hospital, one was gunned and the two were injured because they were supposed to be smuggling. I would suggest that a smuggler should be arrested, there is a law and the law says that, if you are a smuggler you pay tax or be arrested but it does not augur well for a democratic country like ours, for a certain section of the Revenue Authority to forget that we have human rights, to forget that there are laws which we should obey.  I am, therefore, appealing to the Minister of Finance to make sure that we, people on the border do our job of trading but trading legally.  With those few remarks, I beg to support the Motion. 

DR. G KANYEIHAMBA (Rubanda County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me opportunity to contribute to this Bill.  First of all, I very much welcome the Minister for having introduced this Bill and to a large measure I support most of the provisions that are included in the Bill. As I had already said, I had the privilege to serve on the committee that made recommendation to the Minister for this Bill and we had three major principles on our terms of reference.  The first one, was to protect depositors to these banks and institutions.  

Secondly, it was to ensure accountability of management and directors of banks and institutions and, lastly but not least, it was to encourage our people, those who live in urban centres and rural centres to encourage them to do banking.  I believe that the government has achieved the first two objectives namely to protect depositors and to bring to account those who manage and administer banks and financial institutions but when it comes to encouraging banking of our people, I think that the provisions fall far short of what was expected from this Bill.

As of now there are very few banking institutions including those that are viable that can fulfill the obligation included in this Bill.  I was recently doing some little research on, for example, UCB.  As of now, if this Bill becomes law, UCB is unable to fulfill the obligation of this bank within three years stipulated in this Bill.  It cannot by any stretch of imagination reach five billion or half a billion that is required to be reached within three months as far as I know.  (Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to ensure the banking public, this House that if this law becomes Statute even Uganda Commercial Bank will comply.  The shareholders of Uganda Commercial Bank will have to meet the standard.  So the government is assuring the depositing public that the government will fulfill its role as a shareholder.  The Uganda Commercial Bank in order to provide a safe, strong, national commercial bank for this country.  So, nobody should fear that it should be impossible.  I want to assure you it will be possible within the three years to meet our statutory obligations that bank.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: I thank the hon. Minister for that very encouraging promise but then we have had many promises and guarantees usually when it comes to performance that is when disappointing voices also rise.  Nevertheless, it was the considered view of that committee which as I said was composed of very eminent Ugandan Bankers that in order to encourage our people to save and deposit their money into banks we should classify our banks and financial institutions in two categories.  There should be rural banking and financial institutions, urban institutions, and what the government has said will be foreign banks and institutions.  This was done after very careful considerations, and after the research department in the Bank of Uganda had done a lot of research in the banking, comparative research in other areas and other countries.  At that time, when we looked at the demands that were being proposed by our friends who are in partnership in our economic policies, we noted that if we were to adhere to those recommendations only foreign banks will have the capacity to operate the Uganda.  Indeed if you looked at the provisions you would see that no Ugandan institutions, no Ugandan led or shareholding institution would be able to meet these conditions.  I am, therefore, very surprised that they have found their way in the Bill.  As I was reading the Bill, Sir, I said the government did accept that it was necessary -(Interruption)

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  On a point of order.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Kanyeihamba has been a senior member of government and he knows precisely how government can carry out consultations broadly with anybody but at the end of the day it is the cabinet, it is the government’s responsibility to make its proposals to this House.  Is he in order to propose that this particular Bill has been the proposal of some foreign elements to this Assembly? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is entitled to his own opinion.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for protecting me, I think the Minister has not been listening to me.  I even welcomed most of the provisions of this Bill as being very good how can I after that say that it is foreign inspired? But I am concerned with one or two provisions of the Bill and I am aware how the government operates but that is why you bring these Bills here so that we can debate them otherwise there would be no point.  So, Mr. Chairman, I will listen to the other information from the hon. Members.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I do appreciate really that the capital base is very high but let us look at a bank, a commercial bank in this country which is going to raise a project which is Shs.300 million and it has its capital base of Shs.200 million.  You are saying that the bank should lend more than its capital base; that can be very disastrous and dangerous.  While I agree that specific rural area banks can be given a waiver and I may have to move an amendment to show that you can achieve this spectrum of the capital over a period of time not necessarily right at the beginning but I think we must be very careful looking at Shs.500 million for a whole say Uganda Commercial Bank with two hundred branches without that kind of capital and base it will be dangerous.  We are hoping to have a stock exchange soon and I am sure it will come up.  If it does and we are able to buy shares and people are able to invest in these institutions I do not see any problem why since we have and keep the economic growth that we have and ensure development, why the majority of the people cannot buy shares and raise the capital.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I think I will not accept further information, they have been sufficient and it has tended to be a debate in disguise of information.  I thank my hon. Friend hon. Manzi for debating the point not really giving information.

Obviously as I have said, we were advised by a very well researched paper, on this matter and that is why it was necessary to divide between rural and urban centres.  Obviously, whereas in urban centres very influential businessmen will be borrowing large sum of money, in rural areas people will be happy even to borrow #. 5,000 and #. 10,000 but in order to guarantee against loss, there was another proposal which I hope the government will consider very seriously that for a small depositors in the banks and financial institutions there should be a system of warranting to ensure that small depositors if they are going to loose their money there should be some insurance schemes whereby they can recover their money when management has failed them.  Because, in the majority of cases in Uganda and developing countries failures in banking and financial institutions is not caused by small capital but by mismanagement of these institutions and as hon. Kagonyera said, you can have a billion and ten billion shillings as a base, if you mismanage that, within one week that money will disappear.  

Therefore, what I like about this Bill, is the strengthening of accountability with powers vested in the Minister and in the Central Bank to ensure that a financial institutions or a bank which is in trouble can be brought to book and of course very quickly.  There is another element that we should look at very carefully and that is, the powers of the Minister.  In the Bill that we passed last week, we gave the Central Bank autonomy, almost semi-autonomy in many areas, but if we look into this Bill itself we are seen to have taken away with one had what we aver last week.   We seem to be giving the Minister a lot of powers; it seems that the Central Bank cannot supervise financial institutions without the consent of the Minister.  I think we need to look at these provisions.  If we gave the Central Bank authority and autonomy then that autonomy should be exercised within the parameter of this financial institution.  (Interruption)

MR. ADAM IMAGA: Point of clarification.  The hon. Member holding the Floor by saying that in this Bill we have given a lot of powers to the Minister, can the hon. Member refer to the section in which we gave the powers to the Minister because when we go through this Bill, I think, the Minister has no many powers.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I read many provisions, with your indulgence, Sir, I can find one but one of them, for example, I note is that the Central Bank with the approval of the Minister shall approve the increase or decrease presumably of the capital structure of the banks or financial institution concerned.  That is one are I can remember very clearly.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, it is, therefore, really I am disappointed with my dear Friend, hon. Kanyeihamba. This provision, we have stated the current minimum capital.  We are saying every time it becomes necessary to review that minimum it is not necessary to come back to the NRC, we are saying in consultation with the Minister that minimum which is now Shs.500 million can be raised.  That is the provision hon. Kanyeihamba is talking about.  It does not say that the capital of the banks will be determined by the Minister because you are already now determining what will be the minimum capital and you are saying after you pass the Bill, if it becomes necessary in future to raise such capital the Central Bank will do it with consultation with the Minister.

DR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, really I think the Minister should first listen.  That is precisely what I am complaining about.  I think the Central Bank, the point I am making, should be allowed to do it without reference to the Minister.  That is the point I was making and I do not know what point of information you are giving me because you are precisely repeating what I am complaining about.

Therefore, I feel that the Central Bank should be entitled -(Interjection) I am not accepting any more information.  Hon Members are free to make their own points in their own right time. I feel that we should be consistent and therefore, there are certain duties, including the example I have given, which should be performed by the Central Bank in its autonomous situation than involve the Minister because it is the bank which will have information as to what is happening or what is not happening.

The last point, I support very strongly the division between foreign banks and foreign institutions and local institutions as the government has stated although I have very good sympathy for those Members who have said that they will be moving amendments to reduce some of these capital requirements.  For example, one of the suggestions that were put to the government was that the rural bank could start with a minimum capital of about Shs.100 million.  For rural bank this was regarded by the Central Bank as being reasonable but now we are going to Shs.300 million so that is really a matter of opinion and a matter of research.  Having said those points, I feel that our country has not developed a great deal because we have not encouraged our people particularly the people who live in the rural areas to save in banks.  It is no good talking, the Minister saying that there are co-operative societies.  The reputation of the co-operative societies is well-known and they have let us down. In any case co-operative societies are not banks.  Banking requirements are very much different and the criteria for setting them up are different from co-operative societies.  

So, we should not bring a red herring here by avoiding the thrash of the matter that if we are to encourage our people to bank and to save we need to have rural banks which are modest enough to take in their money without requirements of inhibits and on this issue, I think this House must express a very strong view that we shall never develop, we shall remain underdeveloped until the man in Kabale, until the man in Karamoja has trusted the bank to put in his money there and he can only trust that bank if the bank is near to him not when he has to travel to Kampala by the time he comes to Kampala he will have spent all his savings, very little left to put in the bank but if the bank is near him I am also proposing, for example, that we should have mobile banking or van going round the sub-counties, collecting money pushing it in the banks you can only encourage that if the banks are established at the local level.  

I am proud to say that at least, I have been associated as a shareholder with one such bank, the Kigezi bank of commerce which is supposed to serve that region has been established they are concerned and we did not start with 300 million although now, I think we may have reached there I do not.  Nevertheless, people are very - they are saving and what we are concerned about is that the management of that bank should be accountable, should be subject to the supervision of the Central Bank and if anything seems to be going wrong if is corrected immediately that is the most important point.  I want to conclude by saying, the biggest company in the world ever, the richest company is ICI of United Kingdom it has large population in America, it started with capital of one pound as a public company, it has now capitalized all profits and so forth in billion and billion dollars and pounds.  So, let us look to management and structure of the institution rather than capital as the procedure for everything.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I support.

MRS. LUBEGA MUTAGAMBA (Women Representative Rakai): Thank you, Mr. Chairman; I stand to support the Bill and Financial Institutions.  This Bill intended to restructure the financial sector for this country and as we know the present structure of the finance sector has got Bank of Uganda at the apex, then we have got the Commercial Banks numbering about 11, we have got 5 institutions, we have got Building Societies although the present registered are 4, of date I know there is one operating.  We have got insurance companies which are about 13, we have got a Post Office Bank which is one - and I wonder whether the Co-operative Saving Union are also under this, but they are also handling credit from savers.  I am happy to note that this Bill does not seek to destroy Financial Institutions and the Minister has made it clear that he is trying to strength the financial institutions, however, I believe, that the Minister must have carried out a research to find out the consequence of the financial institutions in this country.  On my part I realise the following; Uganda is a consumer rather than a saving community. Our savings amount to less than 10 percent of our GDP; about 6 percent.  This again is not a long-term saving but overnight in most cases where people deposit to night and a week later they withdraw, it is because of consequence of the economy, the inflation, the poor remuneration of workers and all that.  There is a strong competition for saving because of the number of financial institutions, so you find that the profit margins being realised by these financial institutions are rather small and in most cases they are eaten away by mis-management and in the final analysis we end up with a net loss in most of the financial institutions. Also, one of the big problem we have in Uganda is lack of trained personnel in banking and financial management.  Given such constraint, there is a need to arrange or to mobilize savings, especially for long-term savings.  So, I recommend to the Minister that a comprehensive study is required by authority to carry out a research as to how to improve on the savings in Uganda.

I am particularly concerned about Building Societies because I think I have an interest there. Since 1986, that is since the NRM Government came into power there has been seven registered Building Societies and there were 3 more that had been registered before that brought the number to 10, but as I have said before at the moment I think there is only one which is characterised as well as linking. The problems or the performance of these Building Societies have been closures or bankruptcy or linking as I have already said, this is basically due to low capital base as the Minister has already pointed out.  Minimum participation of the population because they prefer going to these banks which are already established and also financial management and I want to emphasize lacks of - supervision, which I will emphasise because Building Societies are registered under Building Society Act and they are supervised by the Minister of Land Housing and Urban Development and yet they are Financial Institutions.  There has been a complete lack of co-ordination between the Bank of Uganda or Central Bank and the parent Ministry as to the supervision of these Building Societies and as far as without supervision a number of them have collapsed.  

So, in my research I came up with the following to try to reactivate Building Societies in particular and Financial Institutions have got a competition among themselves, so we have to give them sort of liberty to introduce skills that are going to help them mobilize savings.  For instance, Building Societies would be allowed to lend to personal customers for purposes rather than buying or building houses as you note Building Societies are specifically for mortgage loans, but if you carry out a research you find that most of the Building Societies are doing financial institution work that is accepting deposit over the counter; this is because you cannot right now undertake a development or a building loan because of the inflation and lack of capital debt.  So, if these Building Societies and Financial Institutions would be allowed to engage in lending out money to customer rather than building or buying houses I think that would improve their operation.  

Again, because of the competitions that institutions are involved in with Commercial Banks, I think these Institutions could be allowed - if we check with cheque guarantee this is one of the attractions to bank which attracts savers from small institutions to big institutions, and now that we are almost facing the same capital base I think the Minister will be able to consider issuing cheques to financial institutions with cheque guarantee.  I also request the Minister to consider for allowing Building Societies and Financial Institutions to provide for life assurance services and let them own their own stock broking firms, let them operate their traffic unit and even pension scheme all these are scheme that are introduced in other banks which are not available to these other institutions and as such the competition is not very fair -(Interruption) 

REV. AYEKO: Point of information.  May, I refer the hon. Lady holding the Floor to Clause 41 that reads; ‘nothing in this Statute shall be deemed to release a financial institution from any of its obligation under the company’s Act or Building Societies Act.’ So, to me, I think, the hon. Member’s fear is catered for here under that Act if she cares to go through maybe she will detain all these other things that she wants the hon. Minister to bring in.

MRS. LUBEGA MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to respond briefly to the hon. Member. He said that this Clause 41 caters for my worries and I want to say that we have been under the Building Societies Act and that Act does not allow Building Society to lend outside loans and does not allow building societies to undertake other commercial activities because of this Act and this is what we are asking the Ministry to consider now that we are under the banking Act, to consider whether we are going - Acts of the Building Societies and we are limited to them or we are able to open up.  I would like to talk briefly about share capitals because it has been pointed out by a number of people here. Share capital has been recommended to be raised to a minimum of Shs.300 million for Financial Institutions and to a minimum of Shs.500 million for banks, both local, it is my request that this share capital be considered. I wish the Member should recall that in our last budget estimates in the Budget Committees we had a struggle trying to get Shs.800 million for the capitalization of UDB there capital base by then was only Shs.300 million, and at the moment there is tussle going on trying to capitalize UCB even with borrowed money because their capital base is so low.  Now, if you consider UDB and UCB that were established many years back and are going to be capitalised now even with borrowed money, I think it is a bit - on people who are just trying to mobilise their funds with very little support of government and elsewhere to be able to raise the Shs.300 million.  

So, I think the Minister may consider at least to release it Shs.200 million and you know, it gives hope that maybe we attain it within the 3 years.  I also want to point out to the Minister that - the banks have been operating -(Interjection) No, there is a license for bank and a new bank is free to start if they can satisfy the conditions and pay Shs.500 million that is if it is started by a local person.  I would request the Minister to consider that, most of these banks that starts should go through the process of the Financial Institution and people are able to gauge their performance rather than having a bank come in and apply and get a license without having proved what - on the ground because this one is proving disastrous in the economy.  

So, if somebody is applying for a financial institution and eventually aims at a bank, I think there is enough time to assess that person or company their performance within the period of one or two years rather than granting a license of banking straight away. Now, about the directors I support the idea of having to scrutinize the Directors because in most cases mis-management as started at the top where Directors have become the stumbling block of the institution.  So, I strongly support their being scrutinized and strong action taken where they find mis-management.  

Now, I just want to end up with one point which hon. Mayengo raised, that is about the bureau that they should also be included in this one. I want to point out that bureau business are spot business, it is a transaction there and then we do not owe anybody money and we do not keep anybody’s money, it is the money you have that determines the type of business you are going to carry out that day.  So, I do not see how this restriction should be applied to them after all they have got their own restriction on the annual turn of how many dollars they have sold and purchased, so that confines in order to get a license for the next year.  You have got to show how much you have purchased, how much sold.  I do not think, there is a capital requirement as that one required for the financial institution.  Mr. Chairman, I thank you.

ADJOURNMENT


THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting. We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Council rose at 5.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28th April, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.)


