Tuesday, 23 April 2002

Parliament met at 2:36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we have to adjust our Order Paper to include a statement by the Minister in charge of Communication. It is not on the Order Paper, but adjust it to accommodate him.  

I will start with bad news and end with good news. Honourable Members, we have received very sad news of the demise of Maj. Amin Onzi, a former member of NRC and deputy minister in the Government of Uganda. He died today at Mulago hospital, and I think burial will be in Arua. I request you to stand for a minute of silence in his memory.

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I will go on to introduce the strangers in the strangers’ gallery. This afternoon we have two sets of strangers; I will start with the young ones. On one side, we have pupils from Green Hill Academy in Kampala - (Applause) You are most welcome. 

On the other side, we have 66 students of Uganda Police Cadets Assistant Superintendent Police course. These students are graduates from various universities and are due to join the Uganda Police force as middle managers. 

Their visit to Parliament at the time we are considering the Leadership Code should be seen as an encouragement that there is an emerging cadre of middle managers in the Uganda Police force. This institution, as you know honourable Members, is one of the major ones at the centre of fighting corruption. We welcome the cadet students and we wish you a happy stay - (Applause) You are most welcome.

Honourable Members, last week the Inspector General of Police, Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala visited me and informed me about what he is trying to do to improve the image of the Police force. From the account he gave me, I have an impression that he is doing a good job, and he needs our support.  (Applause)

During his visit, he informed me about the constraints he has in carrying out his functions. Of course I was aware of some of the constraints since the budget of the Police comes from here and we always find it inadequate. 

He made an appeal and asked, “Can’t you also help?”  He told me that a number of organisations and private people are assisting the Police to overcome some of the problems, especially on the issue of transport. This area requires improvement, so that he can move his force to patrol various areas of the country. 

He made a specific appeal to you, honourable Members. He said, “I was their colleague in the Sixth Parliament, can they come to my rescue? Say, if they could contribute 200,000 shillings that may enable me purchase the vehicles to do my work!”  

The purpose of bringing this here is to make this appeal to you. I personally feel it is noble, and the public will appreciate. So I have to inform you about that. We shall comment on this later.

Honourable Members, yesterday I hosted donors and development partners of Parliament to a luncheon in appreciation of their support for the plan for the modernisation of Parliament, to build the capacity of our legislators to fulfil our constitutional function. 

Under the first phase, a broad range of programmes was directed at strengthening parliamentarians as lawmakers and defenders of human rights. Through the initial induction and subsequent capacity building programmes, members are equipped to appreciate the intricacies entailed in their extensive duties as legislators.  

I emphasised the need for parliamentarians to be constantly aware of the international issues and participate in the promotion of development opportunities available under current arrangements such as USAID, the US’ African Growth Opportunity Act and the EU’s All Except Guns initiative. It is only with good governance that a solution to poverty, inequality and insecurity can be found. Good governance requires strong and sustainable partnership of the state, the private sector, civil society, and a mutually enforcing collaboration. 

Parliament has a unique role, as an arm of state, in harmonizing the inter-play of the treaty of actors. Our development partners assured me of their continued support to the strengthening of the capacity of legislators, and Parliament as an institution of good governance. 

The Parliamentary Donor Group chaired by USAID, and the Parliamentary Commission decided that all the support programmes to Parliament would be coordinated through the office of the Parliamentary Professional Development, to plan and execute appropriate programmes, activities and avoid wastage of scarce resources. I advise you, honourable members, to cooperate with OPPD so that they can best fulfil the responsibility of capacity building given to them.  

UNDP has willingly agreed to coordinate the mobilization of resources to support Parliament. The European Union appreciated the initiative to bring the donors and representatives of Parliament together, and pledged support to the promotion of good governance in general, and Parliament in particular.  

Honourable Members, starting with the 6th Parliament, USAID, DFID, UNDP and DANIDA have rendered assistance to Parliament in various forms.  I am happy that these donors continue to support us.  Other donors have expressed interest in the Plan for the Modernization of Parliament, which is being reviewed to take into account our needs and aspirations, and will be welcome to cooperate with us in our endeavors. This necessitated me to inform you what is happening in that line.

MR NOBERT MAO (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On this appeal by the Inspector General of Police, I hope it was not one-sided.  I am sure you also had occasion to comment about the concerns that the political class has about the Police.  For me, I support the spirit, and I think you were speaking for all of us when you pledged that you would support the Inspector General of Police.  

What we are giving cannot build the Police force.  It is a token! I think it is just a token for us to show that we recognize the dire straits in which our Police are, and we want to contribute.  But our best contribution will be in terms of fighting for a larger share of the budget for the Police.  Our second contribution will be in terms of ideas.  

The Police needs to uplift its public image after a 12-months long bashing by the Sebutinde Commission. The Police, I think, are trying their best to polish up their image.  I also know that the Police have a lot of real estate all over Uganda.  Some of these real estates actually can even be sold to private developers at high prices, and then the Police can find alternative accommodation.  

My view is that we should change the philosophy and de-barrack the Police.  I think the Police should move away from barracks.  That way, they will be less hostile when we meet on the streets.  They will hardly shower us with teargas because they will know that we are neighbours. If they know that each morning we wake up and escort our children to school together, they are less likely to shoot at us with live ammunition. But they are so rough because they live in barracks.  So, I do hope this will be supported also.  

I hope the Inspector General of Police will support the policy of de-barracking the Police force of Uganda.  Otherwise, I think the modest figure of Shs 200,000 from each of us will raise over Shs 60 million. And if I may get leave of the Speaker, may I move that each Member contribute a token figure of Shs 200,000 towards the fund for procuring vehicles? And if the Government corresponds by waiving some of the taxes, we may get more vehicles actually out of Shs 60 million.  

Since the Minister of Finance is here, if they can pledge to waive some of the taxes, instead of two vehicles, we can easily get four. Members are usually targets of criminals. I have seen some Members of Parliament parking their new vehicles here because they cannot drive home after dark for fear of robbers. So, I think this is a matter which really concerns us. I have seen, especially the lady Members, with very beautiful cars, failing to drive at night.  They have to hire taxis for fear of armed robbers.  So, it is really in our own interest to support this initiative of the Inspector General.  I am in support, Mr Speaker!

MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to endorse your proposal and my honourable colleague’s kind words to the Police. I also support the idea of Shs 200,000 deducted from source; however, there is a slight problem. 

I hope the Ministry of Finance will not frustrate the Police force in this small contribution of ours in the same way they have done with other contributions, especially from abroad.  I learnt with deep regret that the Ministry of Internal Affairs mobilized over 15 million dollars from certain donors to assist the Police with accommodation, but the Ministry of Finance has turned down this kind offer because of macro-finance problems. 

I hope, Mr Speaker, when we make our humble contribution to the Police, again Ministry of Finance will not turn back that money to say they cannot absorb it. So, Mr Speaker, I would like to support the idea and I am glad you have brought it to our attention, and I am ready to do the necessary as far as contribution is concerned conditionally.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are the head of the Legislature. You are the head of this House and you did make a commitment on our behalf.  But before I make my specific pronouncement about the commitment, I would like to raise certain issues concerning the economy of Uganda. 

The first one is that of an impression that has been created in the public that Members of Parliament, apart from earning money which they use for themselves, do not contribute to various harambes that take place in this country. I want to tell the public and this House that the politics of individual merit makes Members of Parliament directly shoulder problems that would have been otherwise shouldered by Government. 

In our respective constituencies, we do make a lot of contributions towards building schools and roads, for example. Somebody will say that after all we are paid back with votes! But the public should know that that is a genuine contribution. 

At this time, I also want to raise the issue of the micro economic figures, which they are giving us about the growth of Uganda’s economy. An economy that cannot sustain its Police and instead leaves Members of Parliament to contribute to it must leave a lot to be desired! These growth figures that they keep giving us, are they genuine - if we cannot buy patrol vehicles for our Police?  

I want to tell the honourable members who are new in this House that during the Sixth Parliament, hon. Butime did stand here, he was a Minister of Internal Affairs then, and he said he lacked resources. When there were rampant thefts and increased insecurity in Kampala, the issue of the budget came up and he said, “Hon. Members, when I ask for 100 percent and you give me 40 percent of the budget, then you should also expect 40 percent of the security.” It was a whole minister who said it! And eventually we started having those problems that were affecting members.

On a positive note however, I want to thank the Inspector General of Police for the revamped image of the Police force. (Applause). I must thank him for that image and also for the positive care exhibited, especially when issues concerning Members of Parliament are raised. When some of us are picked and dumped in Police cells, he has responded positively. 

I want to tell the public that there is a bigger problem, which you should look at beyond this financial contribution towards raising money for vehicles for the patrol of Uganda. 

When it comes to the issue of the budget, honourable members, I think it is progressively becoming useless for the whole Parliament of Uganda to stand here and we budget for this country! We pass a budget and two months along the way you hear every ministry complaining that the budget has been slashed by 60 percent! 

The other day I read in the papers that Shs 27 billion had been cut from the Ministry of Health’s budget. That means there is a bigger problem!

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Dombo, and I believe that the image of the Police has improved.  But I do know that the people of Tororo may wonder about your statement. Yesterday but one, the minister, Henry Obbo, and I had a constituency meeting in Mela sub-county. The people there unanimously said that they have reportedly told the Police in Malaba that there are illegal guns in that sub-county, and Police has turned a deaf ear. And they are suffering; they are not sleeping in their houses, there is insecurity. So, hon. Dombo, I do not know whether the people of Tororo would take you seriously.

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much. Let me develop my point. I wish to agree with that, because I also come from Tororo. One thing I know, however, is that the constituents always say that, but nobody points to where the guns are. Nobody knows exactly where the guns are, but they have made these reports to me too as a Member of Parliament.

Nevertheless, I want to say that there is a revamped image of the Police and we must join the Inspector General to tell the public that this is moving in the right direction. 

On a more serious note, last week I met members of a patrol team in their vehicle, and the whole windscreen bore bullet holes. I took the time, stopped and asked the Police officers who were manning the patrol and talked to them. I asked them, “If the bullets penetrated this windscreen like this, what happened to the occupants?” And they said they have lost many of their colleagues in hot pursuit and exchange of crossfire with thugs. I told them, “We get armored carriers here in Uganda, is it not possible to also buy bullet proof patrol cars so that the Police can be protected while in hot pursuit in performance of their duty?” (Applause).

Whereas the above sounded like a good idea, the policemen said that instead of importing bullet proof cars, they would prefer bullet proof jackets because in some situations you have to jump off the car and confront the thieves directly. 

I wish to call on the Inspector General of Police that as we make this noble contribution, and as we thank him for the good work that he is doing, a lot more should be invested in ensuring that the occupational hazards of the Police are reduced to enable them do their duty well. 

Otherwise, Mr Speaker, thank you for our representation. You did comment on our behalf and we cannot let you down. We shall support you and make a contribution to the Inspector General of Police. I thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank you, Mr Speaker. It is important to take this occasion to make some pertinent remarks. 

First of all, I think this is an important occasion to let the general public of Uganda know that Members of Parliament are one single group, which has made very serious voluntary contributions towards self-help activities. In the Sixth Parliament, we conducted extensive fundraising drives to assist in delivery of public services like schools, health facilities, roads, water and so on. Today, to the specific appeal of the Inspector General of Police, Parliament overwhelmingly agrees that this appeal be supported.

My concern, however, is the general public, Mr Speaker, which seems to ignore this very important role being played by the Members of Parliament. When it comes to talking about our remuneration, they talk in a very derogatory manner. They talk as if much of this money does not go into supporting their own self-help efforts. They talk as if we, Members of Parliament, are not taxpayers. They think we are swindling the taxpayer’s money, but we are also taxpayers! 

I think this is a very good indication of our goodwill, and I would like to send this message that Parliament is a single most important and active participant in voluntary contribution towards self-help efforts.  

Voluntary self-help contributions by either the private sector or Members of Parliament is really not the best way to finance public service delivery, but under the circumstances in which we are operating, it leaves us with very few options. 

I would like to suggest, Mr Speaker, that since Parliament now has the power to influence the budget process, the state of affairs of the Police in whose duty and responsibility we are all interested must be looked into very seriously. If possible, whatever budget framework was provided by the Ministry of Finance must be amended by Parliament in order to cater for the Police more adequately.  

It is not going to be the best practice that the Inspector General of Police goes asking for charitable contributions which might later on affect their enforcement of the law with the same charitable groups.  You know it is not the best approach, and I think that we must take a budgetary measure while we are accepting this.  

I do know obviously that this does not compromise our relationship with the Inspector General as public servants, but when you start going to the private sector, it then raises quite a lot of questions, Mr Speaker, particularly when we are about to adopt the Leadership Code.  One may not know whether there is no peddling of influence from the other direction to the authorities.  

I wanted to mention this, apart from, of course, also complimenting the fact that under the circumstances, the Inspector General of Police is doing his best; we should all support him morally or otherwise.  I thank you.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I wish to add my voice to the voices of my colleagues, if I may take on from where hon. Okulo Epak stopped on the budgetary allocations in line with the Government priority areas.  

Honourable Members, Uganda’s Poverty Eradication Plan  (PEP) has got four pillars.  The second pillar is good governance and security.  Of course good governance encompasses institutions like that of the Inspector General of Government, the office of Ethics and Integrity and the rest of that.  But then when we come to security, there is a tendency to mislead the population to make security equal to military and defence matters.  

Mr Speaker, the budget provisional figures which the minister laid before Parliament three weeks ago, are a very, very clear indication of what the Government thinks about what security is.  I would like to interest members to look at the annexes and look at the vote, the preliminary indicative allocation which has been given to Police vis-à-vis the other votes.  

Mr Speaker, just to raise members’ interest, I will give you a very small example.  The Ministry of Justice has been given a preliminary indicative allocation of Shs23.8 billion; President’s office, Shs33.4 billion; State House Shs36 billion; Internal Affairs Shs8 billion - this is excluding Prisons and Police because they have got their own votes; and the Judiciary, Shs16.8. The IGG where we are saying we want to strengthen good governance is being given Shs5.8 billion.  

Now, hon. Members, I will not mention the figure for Police and Prisons.  Why?  So, we the honourable Members get that book - you remember the white book which hon. Ssendaula laid before the House?  Go to that book, look at the vote, look at the money which has been put for Police, look at the money which has been put for Agriculture where we want to modernise and increase incomes, and then we shall come back to what hon. Okulo Epak is saying.  Our early intervention in the budget making process shall go a long way to pushing some of these things, because you cannot talk about security.  

What I forgot to tell you, honourable Members, is that there is Shs 241.6 billion for Defence!  

Mr Speaker, if Members may remember, when we had our induction course at the beginning of the 7th Parliament, the Inspector General of Police took it upon himself to ask for a slot in our programme to come and brief us on what he was trying to do to modernise the Police.  The Inspector General of Police asked for an interaction with us, and if we may remember, I think he is the only person who has done that.  So, there is Wamala Katumba the person, and there is Police the institution, both of which need to be supported.  

I would like to agree with my colleagues who have already spoken that Shs200,000 from our emoluments is just a token.  But it is for us to show our support, not only for the Police force, but for the person who is trying to revamp it against all odds; because we know very well that the Police’s name has been and is continuing to be deliberately soiled and deliberately misrepresented to the population. 

Let us get up and support these people.  If they do not do a good job after we have supported them, then we shall have a basis to blame them.  Mr Speaker, I agree with the proposal of contributing.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable Members.  I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, and the honourable Members who have supported this motion.  When hon. Members of Parliament rise to an occasion like this, the public tends to follow, and I think even if we call it a token, this shows that the Members of this House do care about the Police.  

Mr Speaker, the Police problems have been historical: When I was a kid, our local police did not even have shoes; they used to put on something called patilis and when we went on, they were given a cap which was made of metal and they did not have shoes.  Then they moved on and as modern age caught up, they moved from the number that they were from 3,000 to now nearly 15,000 people.  

I think the colonial system of maintaining the Police must also be reviewed.  Is this the best way to maintain the Police?  In some countries like the United States, Mr Speaker, the public also maintains the Police and they also contribute towards making sure that the Police do its work very well.  In other words, the people themselves also become part of the Police; it is not misleading the public.  

The security situation in this country must be studied and then we decide which one should take priority.  And if you are in Government, one takes priority over the other. My friend, hon. Aggrey Awori, a few minutes ago was saying he prefers Police, but without the Army, he would not be sitting in this House today. It is very important that we realise that the Army has brought people around the table to discuss the security and peace of this nation. 

Therefore, to those, when Maj. Gen. Katumba was made the Inspector General of Police, they went to the newspapers and said, “The Army should not be in the Police, the Army should not do this”. I am happy now they are the ones who are applauding Maj. Gen. Katumba as a good Inspector General of Police. The man is proving himself. He does not only come and talk to us; he has also shown that probably the Army has got good cadres who can even run a Police force. 

Our voluntary contribution and a distortion in our economy - because I heard some people talk about the distortion in our economy. Our job in this House is to try and get these distortions streamlined. We must work as a team. I therefore, agree that there should be more budgetary provisions for our Police. 

When we were passing the Police Bill, I requested for a metropolitan Police. The Police that work in urban centres should also be supported by the local governments. If you take Kampala City Council, it supports a group of people called askaris. This money should be given to the Police to enforce both the Penal Code and the byelaws of the Council. This money can go towards paying the Police and improving their standards of living. I therefore, propose that local governments should also get involved in making sure that the Police, both in urban centres and rural areas, are provided for. 

Once again, I support the motion, and I would like to thank hon. Mao for bringing this proposal here. I think Maj. Gen. Katumba should be applauded, not only by this House, but also by the people of this country. Thank you.

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion by hon. Mao.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR SEBALU SITENDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I had an interface with the Deputy Speaker today and we agreed that she would allocate me some 30 minutes to raise a motion of national importance under rule 42. Now that you were not in our meeting, I would like to seek your guidance so that you can also allocate 30 minutes to us to debate this important motion about hawkers, vendors, hire taxis, higher rent charges which are making Kampala a dead city. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Sebalu, I did not attend that meeting, but I understand from the clerk here that you have a question that will be answered on the same subject matter.  Since we have a researched answer, why do we not wait for tomorrow so that the matter can be dealt with comprehensively?

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance concerning the Order Paper. Two days ago, I expressed my appreciation for the good work of your office for giving us the work programme for the Committees. I also requested your office to give us more information on the Order Paper before it comes to the House. However, there is a much more serious situation pertaining to what you have just said regarding questions to the Ministers.  

Notwithstanding the call from your office asking the honourable colleagues from the Front Bench to answer our questions on time, up to now some of the questions put to them have not been answered. Is it possible, for instance, for the questions that have been acknowledged by the ministries or by the ministers to be compiled and circulated to us as the programme we are going to be dealing with in the following week? 

For instance, the question of my colleague, which you have just given guidance on, is coming up tomorrow. It could have been useful for us to have it in advance so that we know Minister so and so is going to answer this or that question tomorrow! Otherwise, we just sit here waiting until it pleases the honourable ministers to come up with the answer.

THE SPEAKER: I appreciate your suggestion, and I think there is no harm. What we can do is for the office of the Clerk to list all the questions that have been filed with him and the name of the minister to whom the question was directed so that we have this with us. You can always ask what the position is. I think we can examine your suggestion and see how we can –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, on the issue of questions, we agreed last time that if a minister does not answer a question within the time provided in the rules of the House, we would move a motion to record our displeasure with the performance of that Minister. 

In keeping with that particular resolution, I want to report that I have three questions. Two of them were asked last year; one was on mob justice, another was on street children. Recently, I asked a question on the Bujagali Power Station in view of the difficulties now facing AES. The Clerk wrote to me giving me an exact date when those questions would be answered by the Minister. That date came and passed and there was no answer originating either from the Minister or another Minister as requested by that Minister. I think in view of this, I want to take your leave so that I move that motion.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Mwandha. I have nothing to add to what you have said. But I take it that this is the last notice. Or, you could put whoever is concerned on notice that you sent the questions a long time ago and they have not been answered. You have said that you passed that procedure. I think you should give them the last chance to respond, and if they do not –

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I appreciate your guidance on this matter. When we decided, we did not have the procedural method of bringing this kind of motion. But in view of your guidance, I want to give notice that tomorrow I will bring this motion, Sir. (Laughter).

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I did hesitate, and I rise with a lot of hesitation, but I am obliged to clarify this position.

What was discussed in this House was not a resolution but it was input in the draft Rules of Procedure. These draft rules have not even been passed and adopted by this House. As a very seasoned parliamentarian, hon. Mwandha knows that unless and until those rules have been passed and adopted as part of the rules that govern this House, he cannot proceed tomorrow as he says under such a motion.

Having said that, I also want to request members to proceed with caution. Not all the questions that have been forwarded have actually found space on the Order Paper. Some questions have not yet even appeared on the Order Paper. Some questions have appeared on the Order Paper but have not been attended to for good reasons, which the Speaker is aware of or has been made aware of at the material time.  Therefore, it is my humble prayer that a distinction is made and each case is treated on its own merit. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but I think what hon. Mwandha was saying is, if you are a minister and you are supposed to answer a question that was sent to you a month or two before and you have not answered it, does it require rules of procedure for a member to move and say that the minister has not done his work, he has not answered my question? Really, you can treat it that way. 

I think your observation is taken, and I think the ministers concerned will look at their tables and see which questions have not been attended to so that they can promptly come and answer the questions. If it is a question of the Order Paper not accommodating, then the Speaker will be able to explain that the answers are ready but we cannot accommodate them because of the nature of business we have.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance. I would like to assume that a question for oral answer is supposed to be different from a matter of public concern raised on an emergency basis. 

This afternoon, I was equally disturbed when hon. Sitenda Sebalu, I assume, wanted to say something about the scuffle that took place yesterday in the city of Kampala, on an emergency basis. Why should a case of an emergency of that magnitude be postponed when there is need to discuss it there and then? I need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: This was business for hon. Sebalu Sitenda, and when he was given an answer, he was satisfied. I have no business to consider - (Laughter)

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to make it clear that although from time to time there have been wrong doers, the frontbenchers have tried their best to answer the questions.  

Let it be clearly understood, and I want to point out that hon. Mukwaya, for example, was ready to answer the question today, but it was not possible.  The space was not there. 

At the end of the day, you are going to find that unless we have a whole day of answering questions, there will not be space. And when there is no space, the problem should not be attributed to the frontbenchers wholesale. I want to put it to members here present that we have answered the questions efficaciously.  I thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very glad that the Prime Minister has actually said part of what I wanted to find out. 

After going through a lot of pressure - and we also know that ministers could be busy here and out there - and then once in a while one of them shows up in the House, is it possible for the House to be a little bit flexible to allow us to use that available opportunity? 

I particularly want to refer to the case of the local council elections. This morning in the Committee of Public Service and Local Government, we were looking through the policies of the interim budget. We wondered who was going to give us ground information if we do not have the Executive, if the councils are not functional, and all those issues.  

Appreciating that there is also a time element and then the burden of work and pressures that the ministers have, could the House afford to be flexible at one instance, just to allow a particular minister, when they find time, to quickly give us an answer and we will be through? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We are always flexible. If we are approached in time, we can.  That is why today when we started, I adjusted the Order Paper to accommodate a minister who had a statement to make.  That can be done. 

As for the youth elections, I think the Minister will give an answer tomorrow. That was hon. Kidega’s question.  

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The oaths were administered to:

Mr Alonga Othman Haruna.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, with great pleasure, I beg to move that the bill entitled “The National Planning Authority Bill, 2002” be read a First Time. (Applause).  

Sir, along with it, I lay on the Table the financial implications certificate as required under section 10 of the Budget Act.

THE SPEAKER: I want to congratulate the Minister for this achievement, for which this House has been waiting for a long time. (Applause). The bill stands committed to the appropriate committee for consideration so that they can report to us.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HOUSING (Capt. Francis Babu): Mr Speaker and honourable Members, last week the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications was requested by this House to give a comprehensive ministerial statement to Parliament on the train accident that took place on the 9th of April, 2002 at Mukwano level crossing.  

My senior colleague is attending a road conference with donors at this moment, and he could not be here. He asked me to kindly read the statement to the House, and some of the questions that were asked are also included.  

On 9 April 2002, at around 18.05 hours or 6.05 p.m., there was a fatal accident involving a train and a fuel tanker at the Mukwano roundabout level crossing. 

Train No. V54, which was heading to Port-Bell, was knocked by a fuel tanker, causing fire. The train was hauling sixteen wagons of which eight were carrying maize, two carrying coffee and six were empty.  The coffee and maize were for export.  

Casualties:  

All the six members of the train crew sustained serious injuries and were admitted to various hospitals in Kampala. One of these six people died in Mulago Hospital on 16 April as a result of burns he sustained.  The Corporation took care of the casualties’ welfare.  

It was established that the truck driver and his assistant were also injured. 

Besides the train and the truck crew, there were no reported injuries to members of the public.

Action taken and Rescue Measures:  

The fire was put out at about 9.00 p.m. that day by Police, Mukwano Industries, and Civil Aviation Authority fire brigades. Twelve wagons were pulled back to Kampala yard before they were checked for damages. The wreckage was cleared early the following day to enable normal traffic flow.  

We are grateful to all those who fought to put out the fire, and those who assisted the casualties.  Special thanks go to Uganda Police, Mukwano Industries, the Civil Aviation Authority and the various hospital staff where the casualties were admitted.  

Property and Material Damage:  

Four wagons and their contents were extensively damaged. The fire and the impact also damaged the locomotive, but it is repairable.  There were also some minor damages on the permanent way. 

It is noted that the Railways’ capacity to fight fire is limited to fighting on-board train fires and fires within their yards. My colleague, the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, can ably comment on the general fire-fighting capacity in the country.    

Train accidents that have taken place within Kampala since July 2001 to date can broadly be classified as follows:

(i) Derailments:  

Within the specified period, an average of three derailments have occurred every month in Kampala area. These have been mainly in Kampala main yard, Kampala goods shed and sidings.  

Such derailment halt Uganda Railways Corporation performance whenever they occur for about two to three hours each, as the derailed wagons are re-railed and the track fixed.  Most of these derailments are caused by poor formation of tracks, especially during the rainy season.  

(ii) Level Crossing Accidents:

Twelve accidents occurred at level crossings at various points in Kampala. Of these twelve accidents, three occurred at Access Road (near Kitgum House). That is when you leave the roundabout at Kitgum House going towards the Industrial Area. 

Three accidents occurred at Mukwano Road, two at the main Access Road, another two at Namuwongo and one each at Sembule Road and Nsambya Road. In these accidents, two people died and seven were injured. 

It has been observed that accidents at level crossings are normally caused by motorists’ failure to observe the level crossing signs. According to section 125 of the Traffic Road Safety Act 1998, it is the responsibility of all motorists and other road users to stop at level crossings, clear of the railway lines, and to ascertain that the line is clear before crossing. The Uganda Railways Corporation statute, 1992 section 42(5) also gives trains the right of way at level crossings.

The railway statute provides that the corporation cannot be held liable for damages or losses arising out of failure of the public to keep off any level crossing to allow free passage of trains at all times. The public road users are therefore required to exercise maximum care at the level crossings.

However, the Uganda Railways Corporation has the obligation of putting in place physical measures that ensure public safety at places where the railway crosses public roads. These measures, which should be within the established railway safety standards, include level crossing signs, gates or barriers, as may be necessary for the safety of the public.

(iii) Capsizements:

During the same period, three capsizements have occurred at the Mukwano level crossing and two at Kampala yard. 

The above mentioned Mukwano level crossing accidents were investigated and a full report of their causes, recommendations and disciplinary action to be taken among others, were given to the Board of Directors for appropriate action, and it was carried out.

(iv) Damage to property:

A number of trains that have been involved in accidents have been damaged. These have included locomotives, wagons, the track and other obstacles such as vehicles that have come into collusion with the trains.

How accidents were addressed or are being addressed:

(i) On property damaged:

Where railway wagons were involved, repairable ones have all been repaired and for those extensively damaged, they are surveyed and boarded off. For road vehicles, which collided with trains at level crossings, Railway Police took up individual cases. For damage to cargo, the normal process of claims is instituted and where acceptable to Uganda Railways Corporation, compensation is made. 

(ii) At level crossings:

From mid 2001, all major level crossings in the city had their road signs refurbished and improved. The traditional railway/level crossing warning sign has been changed to an ordering sign by addition of the words, “Stop Danger” with the picture of a train.

(iii) At Mukwano Road Level Crossing:

At this road level crossing, Stirling International Civil Engineering limited was contracted at a cost of Shs 26 million to reconstruct the carriageway so as to be at the same level with the railway.

(iv) The measures taken following the accidents of 9 April 2002:

(a) All the five major level crossings are now manned. They are:

- Access Road, that is the one near Kitgum House.
- Mukwano Road.
- Nsambya Road.
- Main Access Road, at Namuwongo.
- Old Port Bell Road (Wankoko).

(b) At the above five major level crossings, the barriers which had fallen into disrepair are now being repaired or replaced and should be ready for re-commissioning in about two weeks’ time from Monday 18 April 2002.

(v) Establishment of Safety and Environment Unit:

As a way forward, Uganda Railways Corporation is in the process of establishing a Safety and Environment Unit. Consultations have been made with our partners in Kenya and Tanzania in this respect.

Secondly, Uganda Railways Corporation has embarked on the sensitization of the staff on safety with the message that any interruption in operations leads to poor performance. This means no revenue, which directly affects individual earnings and benefits.

Government measures to minimize Transit Traffic accidents:

(i) Kampala Northern Bypass Route:

Diverting transit traffic out of the city centre, a measure Government is seriously pursuing, to minimize accidents and traffic congestion in the city. I am glad to report that there is progress on the Northern Kampala by-pass route. 

The report on the public inquiry was submitted in January and the route has been confirmed, and soon the by-pass construction corridor shall be gazetted. The final road design is expected to be complete by the end of this month. 

Compensation shall start towards the end of this financial year, and by the end of the next financial year, 2002/2003, 90 percent of the claims will have been met. At this time, contacts agreement shall be signed.

(ii) Transit Traffic Parking Yards:

To ensure safe parking of transit trucks and enhance road safety, the Uganda Revenue Authority has gazetted transit-parking yards. The parking yards include Busia, Nakawa, Masaka, Luwero and Ntungamo. In addition, night movement of such trucks is prohibited between 10.00 p.m. in the night and 5.00 a.m. in the morning.

Train accident situation at level crossings for the whole country: 

This was also a question asked by one of the members. From January 2000 to date, 26 accidents have occurred at various level crossings in the country, leading to the death of 11 people and 17 injuries. The breakdown of these accidents is as follows:

• In the year 2000, there were 11 accidents; two of which seriously caused injuries to five people.

• In the year 2001, there were a total of 11 accidents, three of which were fatal, one serious and seven minor. Ten people died and six were injured.  

• From January 2002 to date, four accidents have occurred; three of which were minor and this last one at Mukwano Road level crossing, which was fatal.

Lastly, our thanks again  go to the members of the public who co-operated with the Fire Brigade during the time when they were putting out the fire. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. minister.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking your guidance on the matter of ministerial statements, their accuracy and seriousness of purpose. 

With due respect to my honourable colleague who has just read a statement, not long ago in this House, the Minister of Internal Affairs made a statement on a certain matter pertaining to a Police station. That statement was disputed as an unresearched report. No sooner had that one been dismissed as not researched, another statement was made in this House by another senior minister, this time in charge of Defence, correcting an impression I had conveyed in this House that that was an agreement between us and Sudan expiring on a certain date.  However that date was corrected, extended and it has since expired.  We have since been told that we were in the process of re-negotiating the extension of that agreement.  

Again, Mr Speaker, why I am disputing or worried about ministerial statements is that the other party that is supposed to be a signatory to that agreement has disputed that particular notion.  I am beginning to wonder; when ministers come here, they make statements, we take them at their face value then later on they are disputed by other parties!  Now in this case, I am aware of the association of the insurance companies in this country that has made serious reports on matters pertaining to communications and the dangers of fire. Especially, pertaining to that area in Industrial Area where there have been three consecutive accidents within a very short period. Thank God the area did not turn into an inferno by sheer luck.  

Mr Speaker, are we going to see another statement from the association of the insurance companies again disputing what we have just heard?  So, on the score of the three statements, I am beginning to wonder about ministerial statements in this House!

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure in terms of Rule 37(2) of our Rules of Procedure, which prohibits debate after a ministerial statement and only allows elucidatory questions from Members with the permission of the Speaker.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you for the observation.

DR FRANK NABWISO: Mr Speaker, while being thankful for the ministerial statement on the recent accident, I am wondering if the Minister could elaborate on how much was lost in terms of cost?  

The second question is whether we can continue to allow these train accidents which are taking place; they are taking a heavy cost of the expenditure of URC and the Government as a whole.  Sometime back we were told that URC is going to be divested in order to minimise the costs which the taxpayer is meeting, including derailment which is a normal occurrence.  So, may we find out what is being planned on the question of divestiture?  

The other question is; what is really Government planning on railway transport in this country?  Because it appears to me – (Interjection) – I am about to finish, Mr Speaker. It appears to me that the taxpayer is paying a lot to maintain the URC when it is not cost effective.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR OMODI OKOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Train transport is supposed to be a risky one in the sense that normally the train moves at a very high speed, so the community that uses the road around should take extra concern about train speed.  

I would wish to know from the Minister as to whether presently there is good maintenance and track cleaning team, who have got to supervise and make known the condition of railway lines that pass through a place. I want to also know from the ministry concerned why there are tendencies of building human settlements almost near the railway lines.  These days, Mr Speaker, when you move just near here, you find people who are selling, sometimes, food items staying almost on the railway lines, and as they continue, their minds are taken by the business, and that is when accidents occur.

I would want to know from the ministry concerned the condition of the lorry; was it in good running condition?  Was the driver a sound, competent one?  Mr Speaker, it is important to know the condition of two moving objects so that you can judge appropriately.

Finally, I would like to know from the minister concerned about his ministry’s future plan for railway lines upcountry.  We have railway lines in the northern part of Uganda whose properties are being vandalised to this present day.  Does the Ministry have any plan of putting back or selling away these properties?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This should be a limited question.  I had said hon. Opange and hon. Lukyamuzi and then we see how we proceed.  

MR LOUIS OPANGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the Minister on two issues. One, in the 1970’s and 80’s, there were train guides at the junctions who were manning the train signals, but now even in the busy roads, there is nobody who can show that the train is coming, and these drivers do not even hoot while reaching the junctions. 

Then the other thing is, the officers who were involved in this accident are really in a pathetic situation. Two of them are from my constituency; they were dumped in the open ward with all those burns, and there is no privacy at all for those people.  So I seek to know from the hon. Minister whether fellow officers should not be given a decent ward where they can be treated without any problems?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Reports on the accidents which the Minister was trying to speak about have already reached us and nobody should deceive us.  What I have noted out of those reports that circulated at large was that there was total negligence on the side of the Uganda Railways Corporation.  

Aware of the fact that that was so, why should the Minister come in this House to report to us that everything has been done to ensure that no accidents of that nature occur?  According to what I have read, the ministry must have spent a lot of money to ensure that a, b, c, d is done.  So my question is why does the Ministry act only after a tragedy of that magnitude has happened?  

MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mine is a short one and I am only wondering what the Ministry is doing to regularize traffic rules concerning the railway operations.  

Just four months back, Mr Speaker, one of my constituents was run over by a train, and I was asked to go and seek for assistance from the Uganda Railway Corporation. When I reported to the O/C URC, he told me that I would find it very difficult to get assistance from URC because according to the report they had, it was actually the 54 year old man driving the trailer who knocked the train.  Therefore, I found that very, very perplexing.  You may actually find that when you go to read the report concerning the latest incident, it was the trailer that knocked and not the train that knocked the trailer.  So, I am just wondering what the Ministry is doing about regularizing these traffic laws.   Thank you.

MR MUZOORA KABAREEBE (Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for the report, and I only want to believe that these figures are correct and well researched.  But I would like to ask him a question, that since Uganda Railways Corporation transports fuel and has fuel tankers sometimes in its shed; does Uganda Railways Corporation have any fire fighting equipment?  

Two; in the report he mentioned all those who assisted in the fighting of the fire and managed to put out the fire five hours later.  If this accident had occurred near Shell, it was going to be a catastrophe.  Are there measures which the Ministry is putting in place to make sure that such a catastrophe does not happen on the fuel tankers and in the storage areas in the industrial area?  Thank you very much.

MS MAGOOLA ZIRABAMUZALE (Woman Representative, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank the Minister for presenting that statement, but I have got this to say, that while the Railway crossing is required to have a red banner or whatever colour is chosen and then a signalman and a signal bar, those things are no longer anywhere in Uganda.   At least where I have traveled, I have not seen any of those things.  

If I heard very well, the Minister was saying that whoever is moving to a railway crossing road should take care. That is good and we usually do that, but I would like to urge the Ministry to make sure that those required things are put in place so that they warn the walkers, the drivers and whoever is crossing the roads.  

My second point is about the 10 O’clock ban on movement of vehicles.  These vehicles usually cause accidents in the rush hour, when people are rushing home between 7.00pm and 10.00pm. Now when we say that they are going to stop moving at 10.00 pm, the rush hours will have passed.  So the accidents that may occur between small and big vehicles will have gone. We shall not have saved people’s lives as we are intending to do with this kind of ban that these vehicles stop moving at 10.00.o’clock.   

May I propose that if we are going to use this change of time, we put it from 6.00 o’clock, if not 6.00pm may be 7.00pm, and those big vehicles should stop moving because as I have already said, they are the ones which actually cause a lot of accidents.  People are not sure where to pass because they are always at very high speed.  Thank you very much.

MR REX AACHILLA(Jie County, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On that fateful day of 9th April, I was one of those who ran out of this House very fast accompanying the Prime Minister. We ran very fast and even helped the police to open our new gate that has just been rehabilitated.

I would like to thank the Minister for giving this elucidatory statement.  On that day, I was about to get alarmed, and in fact I was surprised- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, as you heard, hon. Mao referred you to rule 37. I have been allowing this and the other, but strictly, in this rule you can only ask a question on a point that you are not sure of rather than narrating.  Please, finish up.

MR AACHILLA: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance, but that was just a preamble to the question I am going to ask the hon. Minister. 

It seems that the Ugandans today have developed some way of behaving towards accidents.  You can remember very well the accident at Iganga and this recent one.  When the fire had broken out, most people instead of running away from the fire, they were running towards the fire and this is a very dangerous experience.  I do not know what the Ministry has put in place to educate these Ugandans from avoiding the fire, rather than going for the fire.  

Hon. Minister, you know very well this kind of experience, you have told us that you have been giving sensitization to the staff of the Railways on precautionary measures on accidents.  What has the Ministry put in place to save the rest of the Ugandans who do not seem to know the consequences of fire in circumstances like what happened on 9th April this year?  Thank you.

REV. DR KEFA SEMPANGI (Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I do not know how much importance we attach to these supplementary questions, because hon. Ndeezi raised a question on this fire brigade; that if something took four hours before it was settled here in Kampala, what if the fire took place somewhere else?  And just a few days ago the same thing happened in Jinja, there was no water and the driver was not there.  

My supplementary question will be - because there was a question here whether the fire brigade could be privatised.  In Mukono alone, we have had four fires without any attendance from the fire brigade.  The question still is, can the fire brigade be privatized so that others can get services?

THE SPEAKER:  No, as you heard the Minister’s statement, he said the portfolio dealing with fire brigade is not his; that is part of the Ministry of Internal Affairs; that is how he answered it. We may have to direct a question to the Minister of Internal Affairs to give us his capacity to deal with such situations. But the point is made.

MRS SEBAGEREKA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister for the report, and I acknowledge the signposts that are on the scene of the accident. But still, there is a lot to be desired because there are just the signposts and nothing else has been put in place. 

I want also to know from the hon. Minister, how have these people been taken care of? The driver in that vehicle must obviously not have had an insurance policy. I do not know whether the owners of the truck are looking after the people who were in that vehicle.  

Furthermore, there was a very nasty accident when the Kayunga/Mukono road was being repaired. Three people drowned and we have written and made appeals, but nothing has been done for the families of the victims, and even the survivors. I would like the Minister to assure us that in such cases when drivers of the trucks and trains are involved in accidents, their families are taken care of. I thank you.

MR KASIANO WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have two issues on which I would like to seek clarification from the Minister responsible for transport. While today we are nursing the wounds of the accident we experienced on 9th of this month, there are a lot of inadequacies in the road safety provisions in this country. 

You will realise that 14 years along the road, after Mabira forest was reclaimed from those who were encroaching on it, the trees have grown to the extent that they have formed a canopy on the highway, therefore, making driving very difficult and cumbersome on that road. Even this morning when I came, the road was half blocked because a tree had fallen on the road. May we know who is responsible for road clearance?  

Secondly, if that person is there, are we waiting to have another very big accident like the one we had on the 9th of this month before that organisation or Ministry can act?  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank those who rushed on the scene to put the fire out - Mukwano industries, the Police and some Members of Parliament (Laughter). However, I would like to seek clarifications from the hon. Minister –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate your statement that some Members of Parliament -? Anyway, proceed.

MR OMACH: Thank you. I would like some clarification from the hon. Minister on one or two things. 

Mukwano Industries was able to inform the Uganda Railways Corporation about this accident within four minutes. Uganda Railways Corporation, however, responded after 35 minutes and yet the scene of this accident is barely 100 meters away.

The loss that accrued would have been staved off if Uganda Railways responded immediately by bringing in at least one of the engines to pull back the one which had had the accident, so that by the time the fire was coming on, the train would have been pulled away. Why did it take them so long to respond and then later on get another train from Port Bell to come and pull away one of the wagons that was under fire?

Uganda Railways Corporation used to have fire fighting equipment up to the year 2000. What has happened to this equipment? If a small place like Mukwano industries can have their own fire fighting equipment, what is the problem with Uganda Railways Corporation?

I understand that some of the problems are being caused by the delay in the privatisation of Uganda Railways Corporation. Can the Minister make it clear to the staff so that they know their fate? Can it be made clear to the workers so that when they are repairing the railways, they have faith in the industry.  

Finally, the Government of the Republic of Uganda would like to more than triple the production of cotton. The hon. Minister in charge of Transport one time told us that the train going to Pakwach was stopped because cotton production had gone down. With the assurance by the Government that we would like to increase cotton production from the current 100,000 bales to about one million bales per year, that means that the train to Pakwach would be reactivated. Can he tell us when this will happen and why some of the slippers and rails from Pakwach were removed, and why the property there is being vandalised? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the statement was about accidents, not activities of the Railways. But, anyway, you have put the question and he will be able to answer. Let us end there and let the Minister respond.

CAPT. BABU: Mr Speaker, thank you very much.  Hon. Members, your questions are all taken care of. Uganda Railways Corporation is a very big corporation and its activities, if so required, can go through the committee concerned. We can ask Uganda Railways Corporation to come and answer some of the questions asked. I agree entirely that the Members of Parliament deserve those answers when the Committee on Works, Housing and Communications invites Uganda Railways Corporation.

I would like to start off by saying that hon. Awori should not fear because accident investigation does not stop the day the leakage is removed. Accident investigation is an on-going process. It is carried out, not only by the Railways Corporation, but also by the Insurance Company and other different groups. If the Insurance Company finds that what is reported is wrong, they will inform the Railways Corporation and the Ministry accordingly, and we will inform this House. I just wanted to make that point very clear that even when an aircraft has an accident, the investigation continues. The experts come in and explain it technically. It will be explained in the due course.  

How much was lost? Unfortunately, as I said, they did not quantify the whole accident in terms of what it is going to cost to repair the track and so on and so forth. However, this will be given to the Railways Corporation and Government after competent authorities have carried out the assessment. 

I would like to say that the Privatisation Department of Government has got a programme. And if you so wish, Mr Speaker, the Minister of Finance could be requested and the Privatisation Department will tell us exactly how they are going to privatise the different parastatals of Government, including the Uganda Railways.  

At the moment, I know the process is ongoing and they will be telling us when they are going to start to do it.  As you know, they have been handling different parastatal bodies, and the Uganda Railways is one of those. And if we so wish, I can request my colleague, the Minister of Finance, to make sure that this information is available.

Hon. Omodi, I just want to assure you that the speed of these trains is not the highest.  According to international train speeds, our speeds are still very low. And it is just that our railway tracks have become so old and some of them require to be rehabilitated. They will cost a lot of money, and the Government has been rehabilitating them in parts. 

The one going to Kasese has more or less been abandoned at the moment because the refurbishing of that will cost us a lot of money. The Government continues to look for people who can invest in that sector and we will get them. But we have continued to repair the one from the border with our neighbouring country, and that is the one which we are still using. And some others have been stopped until the privatisation process takes place.

Now, the illegal structures and the illegal traders: This unfortunately, is a new culture in this country. People have a tendency to break even the rules they know.  People build illegal structures in the wrong places, and they trade in the wrong places. What we have to do is to try and enforce the law, and the railway Police has been doing it. 

Just past Namuwongo, we have had a lot of problems trying to remove people from the main track, and some people are even building houses just next door to the track. But with time, and I hope with a better culture, our people will be able to move away. But we have to handle it as we go on so that our people do not think that we are just being unfair to them. They are being sensitised, they are being asked to leave and the enforcement is taking place along the train track. In some countries, they actually fence it. But we cannot afford that yet.  We hope that in future, as the purse enlarges, we will be able to put fence around it.  

Property being vandalised, yes, it is true, and the Railways Corporation is taking action and we hope they will be able to salvage some of the properties.  

The welfare department of the Uganda Railways Corporation will be asked to look at the welfare of the drivers; I have just received that information. The information I received is that the Uganda Railways Corporation were attending to them, but if they are not being attended to we shall request them to do so.  

Now, for the other drivers, I can only go and inquire whether the company that owns the truck will be able to look after its own drivers.

Hon. Lukyamuzi, “negligence by Uganda Railways Corporation”. That was an unfortunate statement from a Member of Parliament! Because, in my statement I made it very clear that there are two laws, and for purposes of hon. Lukyamuzi, I will repeat them. 

The train has a right of way.  That means that anything else stops. Now, a train is something that moves with inertia. In basic physics it means, it takes a long time to stop.  I just wanted to make this very simple for people to realise that that is why the train has a right of way. And if it has a right of way, it means everybody else must stop and the train passes. The traffic laws are very clear; the railway statute is very clear on this issue.  I thought I would bring that one out.  

Now, “the Ministry to act after the tragedy”.  A corporation, a parastatal is an independent body.  We have a board of directors, we have a chairman, we have everybody and we would only come to you, honourable members, to inform you of a thing like a tragedy.  Otherwise, we do not carry out the day to day running of a corporation. You can call us to order on our appointing the chairman of the board of directors and the other people, but they are the ones who run it day to day.  

The reason why we came here to give a statement is because some honourable members requested for that statement, and therefore, we had to make it because we are responsible to this august body.

Now, the Ministry -(An hon. Member rose_)- I will not take that information, Mr Speaker. I will ask the honourable member to wait until I finish and then probably he can come in.  

Now, hon. Mabikke, your question was very good. I agree that the Traffic and Road Safety Act and the statute for the railways should be - we should sensitise the people of this country to know who has got the right of way. 

The last time I was here, I actually brought the traffic law and even today in my statement, I quoted from sections of those two Acts and statute. I would like to request you kindly to read them again. But we have a Road Safety Council. The job of the Road Safety Council is to sensitise the public on the use of the traffic code.  

As I said in my statement, the Railways Corporation does not have full fire-fighting equipment and they need one. Anything to do with fire fighting, we should request the Ministry of Internal Affairs to give us a statement on that, because fire fighting is under them. However, I know for sure that private people are allowed to run their own fire fighting equipments. Like Mukwano indeed came out and helped us to put out the fire.  I know that the fuel companies do have their own fire fighting equipments and many other companies like Kakira Sugar Works have their fire fighting equipments, and therefore, they can be given to private people to operate. I thought that might come out very clearly.

Now, the signposts are very clear.  If there are no signposts on any level crossing, they should be there and therefore the people should be requested to make sure that they check.  So, we are going to ensure that the Uganda Railways Corporation checks all level crossings to make sure that these signposts are there.  If wishes were horses, Mr Speaker, we would have not only signs but also we would have lights, we would have barriers, we would have everything there.  Unfortunately, they cost a lot of money and therefore we go by the old system whereby we use only signs to make sure that we separate traffic from the train.

Inadequacy of road safety and making sure that the environment is clear of like for example the trees, we have a problem. We do clear our roads, and the Ministry of Works clears the tarmac roads.  We have clients that work on the Northern Corridor which is from Jinja to Kampala, for example, and there are people who remove those trees. I am quite sure the honourable member will realise that by today, that tree will have been removed. 

However, we have a problem. If we make a mistake of cutting the trees without the permission of NEMA, the first person to stand here will be hon. Lukyamuzi. We have to balance environment with road works. 

Near the road, they have allowed us a certain distance, and that distance is supposed to be a clear way; it is something like 15 metres. But I will crosscheck and make sure that the one in Mabira Forest is looked at and we get a report on it.  

There was an hon. Member who thanked the other fire fighting people, including the Civil Aviation Authority. I am very grateful because the Civil Aviation Authority had to drive all the way from Entebbe. They were the only ones who had the foam which could put out the fire, which was a fuel fire. 

A fuel fire is more difficult to put out than an ordinary fire. It requires special foam, and it is the Civil Aviation Authority truck that helped us bring the foam that did put out the fire. That is why I am so grateful to them for having come all the way to do it.

Civil Aviation Authority had a special arrangement with the American Government, and we probably have the best fire fighting equipment at the airport. These are special equipment, and those are the kind of equipment we should have here. Somebody under the Ministry of Internal Affairs will explain to us exactly how this will be carried out.

The other questions were on how Uganda Railways Corporation operates. I am going to request hon. Members to possibly bring up these questions through our committee, and Uganda Railways Corporation can come and give their performance.  

They can even tell us what is happening to some of their services, for example like the one about going to Pakwach, which was a very good question. They would explain why they are not going there now and whether when the cotton comes up they will start going. This could be brought up during that time, and since we are going into the budget time, we will be free to request each sector to present some of these questions.  

I would like to thank the honourable Members of Parliament; they have asked some very good questions and some of them are to do with sensitisation. We have a Road Safety Council which does that, and we will continue when funds are available.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, hon. Minister.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LEADERSHIP CODE BILL, 2001

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, we have been dealing with this bill since last week, and when we adjourned, a report was given that we had processed six clauses. We stopped on clause 6, so now we are starting with clause 7. I want to make this clear. Clause 7 was not dealt with. We are dealing with it now.

Question put and agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8:

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Chairman, I propose that clause 8 be amended as follows: 
Instead of the current sub-clause (1), we insert a new sub-clause to read as follows: 

“A leader shall not put himself or herself in a position in which his or her personal interest conflicts with his or her duties and responsibilities.” 

I further propose that we renumber the existing sub-clause (1) to become sub-clause (2) and amend it to read as follows: 
“Conflict of interest shall be taken to arise where –

(a) a leader deals with a matter in which he or she has personal interest and where he or she is in a position to influence the matter directly or indirectly, in the course of his or her official duties;  

(b) the position the leader holds and the services he or she gives to a person or private body is or are in conflict with his or her official duties.”  

I also propose that the current sub-clauses (2) and (3) be deleted following the amendments in (1) and (2). 

I further propose that the current sub-clauses (4) and (5) of clause 8 be transferred to clause 9, because that is where they would fit properly for purposes of good flow. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I need some clarification before I can give the chairman green light. “Conflict of interest shall be taken to arise where -  
(a)	a leader deals with a matter in which he or she has personal interest…” 

I am rising in search of clarification for one reason. There are two categories of leaders. If you are dealing with a Member of Parliament who merely deliberates and passes laws through debates, that category of leadership is different from a chairperson who has jurisdiction to take action and decide there and then. To me that person is more likely to be compromised other than a person who merely deliberates, like hon. Ken Lukyamuzi. 

I need some clarification. Which particular leader? We have many categories covering the Leadership Code. You have a Member of Parliament, you have chairpersons, CAOs and especially leaders who take decisions and they have specific powers.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, can we really go on to the specifics. I think a Member of Parliament is a principle leader. If you are probing a committee where you also have an interest, you should indicate that perhaps you are the committee’s lawyer or you are this and the other. That is the kind of thing that is envisaged here. 

We may not really be able to detail all the specific cases, but once you fit yourself in that situation, then this affects you. I think that is what it says. Do you want separation of these rules?

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, Members of Parliament like other leaders are consistently involved in decisions that impact on the lives of people. The Members of Parliament in committees deal with matters in which they could have conflict of interest. For example, select committees.  

If you are investigating a matter and the party being investigated has business with you, I think it is important that in such a matter, a member disqualifies himself. Members of Parliament like other leaders can find themselves in situations of conflict of interest. 

MR MAO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. With apologies to my chairman, I wish to move that the new clause 8(1) have the following addition at the end. After the word “responsibilities”, insert, “and where such interests exist, the concerned leader shall declare them.” 

The reason is that a leader shall not put himself or herself in a position in which his or her personal interest conflicts with his or her duties and responsibilities, and where such interest exists, the concerned leader shall declare them.

In all responsible bodies, especially Parliaments, there are bound to be such conflicts. I do remember the case of SWIPCO where we had with us here lawyers for SWIPCO. I know that there are many who are members of boards of directors of many companies. We discussed tax matters. I have been in the past asked for a register of interests. Today I am taking this opportunity to add this phrase so that members are required to declare their interests. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MWESIGE: Hon. Mao’s concern is catered for in clause 8(4), which we are now transferring to clause 9. It states that, “before a leader deals with a matter in the course of his or her duties in which he or she has a personal interest, the leader shall inform the person or public board or institution concerned, of the nature and extent of his or her interest.” So your concern is catered for in the law.

MR MAO: Mr Chairman, on that note, I beg to withdraw my proposed amendment.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, I have no objection to these amendments in the report.

THE CHAIRMAN: After one has declared his interest, does he necessarily have to resign? (Interjection) No? Okay. I now want to put the question to the proposed amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8 as amended agreed to.

MR MWESIGE: I am sorry, Mr Chairman, I omitted to amend the title of Part III, which I had proposed should be amended to read, “prohibited conduct”, instead of “conflict of interest.” 

Our justification was that not all conduct in this part is conflict of interest, yet conflict of interest is part of prohibited conduct. Therefore conflict of interest is just an aspect of this part. There are many forms of conduct that are prohibited under this part. Mr Chairman, I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment on the title.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in clause 9, we should introduce new sub-clauses (4) and (5), which were transferred from clause 8. In other words, the current sub-clauses (4) and (5) of clause 8 now become the new sub-clauses (4) and (5) of clause 9. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.
 
MR MAO: Mr Chairman, the import of clause 9(1) would be that any member who has an interest shall not participate in the deliberations. I would like the chairman to clarify on the import of this to deliberations of the House, to this committee of the whole House. 

Assuming you are discussing tax where you have an interest, assuming you are discussing your emoluments, what interest could be more personal than that? Mr Chairman, do all the members then disqualify themselves from discussing such matters? I seek the clarification of the chairman and the Minister on that important implication.

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Mao, I think I asked this question earlier. You had raised an amendment, which you withdrew, and I asked the question. If you declare your interest, then you are dealt with accordingly. It could be that we are in the House here and we are dealing with a subject where you as a Member of Parliament are supposed to participate. The intention is for you to say, “we are dealing with this subject but this is the interest I have in that organization.” 

The purpose is to make us knowledgeable so that when you make a contribution, we are aware of your interest. But we cannot exclude you from participating in the debate. That is why I ask the chairperson whether if you declare your interest you must necessarily stand down.

MRS MATEMBE: The example that has been brought to this debate by hon. Mao is in fact of much relevance to why we are making this law in this way. I remember the case of SWIPCO was a very strange case, the likes of which we would like to deal with in this bill. 

The honourable members in this House were opposing the way the contract of SWIPCO was made. Among the honourable members in this House were those who of course stood and declared their interests and then continued to debate. When they debate and do so to support the motion, they are not told that, “please keep quiet because you are debating in your favor.” And they are not told to go out, even when voting comes. 

In that particular case, eventually Parliament took a decision that the government should form a committee, which should go and discuss with the members of SWIPCO. Do you know what happened?  My office was in that committee and when we went to meet SWIPCO to negotiate, who was there? The honourable members of this House were advocates of SWIPCO and it was a terrible and strange thing. I refused to continue the discussions because it was completely unethical. 

When I wrote a letter and refused to continue with the discussions, the honorable lawyers, who are advocates by practice, which I am not, challenged me very seriously. They said I did not know the law, that since they had declared their interests here, it was okay that they proceed in that manner.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, it is such scenarios that we are bridging by this provision. We want to see here how we can cure a situation of that nature.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, I agree. But, for instance, me as a Speaker who chairs Parliament, if there is a subject of, say, winding up a company where some members are accountants or lawyers, what shall I do?  Shall I say, “You Member, you have declared your interest as an accountant, I exclude you from the deliberations of this House?” Can I do so, under what law?  

MR MWANDHA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think it is also the practice under company law that if a director discloses his interest in a matter which is before a board, he does not have to leave the board when the board is deliberating on that matter. I also think that the case which the hon. Minister is quoting is an extreme case of indiscipline, which I believe is isolated. 

There is no way I can declare my interest in a matter and I rise and speak strongly in favour of a matter in which I have a conflict of interest. Even the people around me will bring me to order and say, “Is it in order for this hon. Member to deliberate on this matter and even support it when he has already expressed his interests?”

So, if we are to maintain this phrase in this law, probably we better do the same to the Company Law so that members of boards of directors declare their interests and also quit from board meetings because these are also leaders. Therefore, I would like to propose that the words “and shall withdraw from the meeting and deliberations” be deleted.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Under Article 9, I am seeking a clarification from the Chairman of the Committee. In this House, we have a Member of the High Command, a Member of the Army Council, an Advisor to the President on defence matters chairing the Committee of Defence. How do we handle this conflict of interest?  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: But then we are losing track. Hon. James Mwandha made a proposal, why do we not exhaust that and then we continue with other matters? He has proposed to delete a certain portion, I hope you heard it. Let us get the response of the Minister on this particular proposal.

MR MUTULUZA: Is it in order for the House to continue debating on this bill when actually we do not have a quorum? Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I don’t know, but I will ascertain that. Definitely, it will not be in order if we are out of quorum. At the same time, hon. Members - I should have mentioned this before - Parliament is due to be prorogued. In fact, it should have ended towards the end of this month yet we have a lot of pending work, which should be considered before we prorogue, and wait for the President’s State of the Nation address. 

Therefore - I am not prejudicing your point of order - I am only saying that we should give our time to this work so that some important bills like this Leadership Code, the Political Organisations Bill and others are completed before we prorogue. The public may not look at us favourably if we leave some important work undone. But let us ascertain the issue of quorum. Ring the bells. 

(The Bells were rung and Quorum was attained.)

THE CHAIRMAN: We have ascertained that the number is over 98. Therefore, we have the quorum. I now put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. James Mwandha to delete those few words in Clause 9.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended agreed to.

Clause 10:

MR MADADA: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification on Clause 10(2), which reads: “A leader may accept a personal gift or donation from a relative or personal friend to a certain extent and on such occasion as is recognised by custom”.  

Is it in conformity with the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1970 Clause 18(2)? It reads as follows: “It shall not be a defence to any offence under this Act to establish that any such gratification as is mentioned in this Act is customary in any profession, trade, vocation…” 

MRS MATEMBE: This provision is very much in conformity with that one as long as that customary gift is not later on proved to be a bribe. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 10 stands part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I propose that clause 11 be amended by re-numbering the existing sub-clause (1) and inserting a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “(2) A leader shall not give to any person, a gift which is likely to influence or compromise the decisions or actions of that person, and any leader who fails to comply with this provision commits a breach of this Code”.  

Mr Chairman, the reason for this is that much as we prohibit the giving of gifts to leaders; leaders should also be prohibited from giving gifts to people in order to influence favors for them.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

PROF. MWAKA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I do not think this is workable.  Our work as honourable Members of Parliament of giving gifts is part –(Interjection)- yes, let us not hide our heads in the sand! Giving gifts is part of our development of our countryside voluntarily.  I can pay school fees for children of other people but with something in mind. Come 2006, they will know I have worked.  So, if I do not give gifts, they will say, “she has done nothing”.  So, what you do, you do long-term investment from year one to year five and budget for it as part of investment.  

Now how will you differentiate a gift genuinely given to my people for development from a gift - after all they are all inter-linked; the more you give, the more votes you get!  So, do we wait for long term campaigning and then you sweat and whatever have you?  May I be clarified?

MS CHELANGAT: Mr Chairman, even in our African traditions, when someone visits you, you give a gift.  So, I do not agree with that provision.  Thank you.

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I hope the intention of that law being inserted now is not intended to make us undisciplined in our cultures.  We are leaders; our people have elected us and they even know how much we get, and then you go there and tie your arms and say, “I cannot give you anything because the law prohibits me from giving you anything?”   I think that is being unfair when you say that the leader must comply with the provision of the law. 

When you are leader, according to African culture you are supposed to provide whatever people want!  For instance, it was last Friday when our President gave 100 cows to the Kabaka of Buganda; as it is for Ankole custom, the Banyankole around that place gave 270 cows to the Kabaka of Buganda as courtesy.  Now you stand and say, “a leader shall not give?” I think this law is not necessary.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, I am certainly cultural because I also come from a cultural background, and at the same time, I am a Member of Parliament in accordance with hon. Mwaka’s statement and therefore I know what we are talking about here.

Mr Chairman, I have been laboring so hard to tell the Members and everybody who listens that in our fight against corruption we have got quite a lot of constraints. One of them is specifically based around the area of conflict of interest, and the second one is around gifts.  This provision we have just passed allows customary gift which covers - like what His Excellency the President did.  

In fact, I think Mr Kaguta Museveni in Rwakitura in his customary way of managing affairs of cattle keepers, he gave 100 cows to the Kabaka of Buganda and that is the ordinary way of handling matters which is catered for in clause 8.  

Now, in this particular clause we are saying “A gift which is intended…” and by the way, Mr Chairman, when hon. Mwaka was explaining, she was saying, “We give these people these things so that they can vote for us.”   Is that what we want?  Because the outcry about monetization of elections has been here, and I think it is even the subject of the Committee on violence in elections.  Now I was surprised to hear the hon. Member standing actually and saying that by nature we politicians –(Prof. Mwaka rose_)

PROF. MWAKA: Mr Chairman, I do not want to be misunderstood; I said this is long-term.  As an MP, you cannot just sit back when somebody is wedding and you do not give because people will misinterpret the intention. Who is going to read my mind to know my intention?  

As I was completing, I said it in the last part that in order to avoid this business of monetizing elections, as a clever MP, you will be with your people, working together. But if you work together, somebody else may interpret it that you are bribing them, when actually you are working with them!  So, how would you differentiate bribing them from working with them?

THE CHAIRMAN: Actually the problem as I see is this. As you know, currently there are many candidates sitting for ‘O’ and ‘A’ level exams and they are being asked to pay registration fees.  A number of them have problems in their families in that their parents cannot pay for their registration fees and they will miss exams.  Now, they go to a Member of Parliament and say, “My mother has no money and I am missing exams; please I want you to give me fees so that I register because the last date is at the end of this month”.  

Now the Member of Parliament says, “Well, I do not want this person to lose,” he pays for the exams and in four years’ time this candidate will have passed the exam and he will be a voter.  Now are you going to say –(Laughter)- this is a practical case; I think I wanted to bring it up.  What is going to happen? Are you not going to pay this fees because you are going to influence this person in four years’ time to vote for you?

MRS MATEMBE: First of all, I would like to say that this provision does not concern only Members of Parliament; we must get that clearly.  It concerns leaders and this bill –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, they are using a clear example which is near them to demonstrate the problem.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, I wish I could be given a hearing as I give a hearing to the honourable Members.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, proceed!

MRS MATEMBE: I think we need to read properly the importance of this provision because people give gifts, and others receive these gifts, and these gifts are clearly covered in that provision which we have just passed.  

Now we are trying to look at a leader who is going to give a gift aimed at influencing somebody taking a decision concerning that person. 

Once this law is there, it does not mean that somebody reads the law and says, “yes it is over”. No! Circumstances are brought before the IGG who calls witnesses and they give evidence surrounding the circumstances under which this gift was given. If this gift falls under clause 8, which we have finished, then it is okay. 

If it is found that actually when you were giving that gift, you were expecting this particular person to take a decision in your favour, and therefore, you were giving it to influence that person’s mind to take a decision accordingly – (Interruption) 

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Minister. The Bible says that it is better to give than to receive. Even if you are giving with a good heart, it might be very difficult for anybody outside your heart to judge what intention you had in giving the gift.  

First of all, when you are giving away, you are losing. I find it difficult to see how this law can be implemented. When somebody is giving a gift, there is already a law on bribes and on other means of giving which are not lawful. I would want to use the information from the Bible - let us not limit anything in giving.

MRS KABAKUMBA MATSIKO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Minister that you can give a gift to influence, but you can also give a gift in appreciation. 

As hon. Elly Tumwine has said, it is very difficult to determine. I want to give an example. Over Easter, I gave a very nice church cloth for the altar. It was very nice and expensive, and the people appreciated it. I did this because I had prayed there before, and I realised there was something missing in that church. These are the people who appreciated me, welcomed me well, and I decided to give that tablecloth out of appreciation and to say “thank you” to them.  But as of now, they are talking about my name and they are saying “come 2006, no change, Kabakumba” – (Laughter). 

My intention was not to influence anybody. My intention was to appreciate and to give them a gift for Easter. How will you differentiate this when it comes to this law? I do not want that malicious constituent to come here and testify before the IGG saying that Kabakumba gave it to influence us to give her votes. If you could convince me on that point, I would maybe go along with you. Otherwise, I oppose that amendment.

MS ERIYO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have listened to what my colleagues have said about this particular aspect here. My understanding is that where a leader wants to get something that may be looked at as a case of corruption, he can bribe somebody else he wishes to corrupt. 

I wish to give an example here. I think so many of us have examples of people who are responsible for giving out tenders, and they are people who influence district council chairmen, and district tender board chairmen by bribing them or giving them gifts so that they can give them tenders. How are we going to deal with such people if we remove this clause from this bill? Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I should put the question. You have heard; the policy behind the proposal is to stop corruption, but other people are saying it is not easy to enforce. Somebody may have a long-term plan of quoting this incident in future, how are you going to deal with him? I think you know the pros and cons. Don’t you think I should put the question to this proposed amendment by the committee?   

The amendment is: “A leader shall not give to any person, a gift which is likely to influence or compromise the decisions or actions of that person and any leader who fails to comply with this provision commits a breach of this code”. I put the question

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: It means this proposed amendment has been rejected. What I do not understand is that it was saying that the existing clause is to be re-numbered as sub-clause (1) and insert the following new sub-clause (2). 

MR MWESIGE: Now that the amendment, which was supposed to be the new (2) has been rejected, I think 11 should remain as it is.

THE CHIARMAN: Clause 11 remains as it is. Now I want to put the question that clause 11 stand part of the bill

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 12:

REV. DR KEFA SSEMPANGI: Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the chairman or the Minister on clause 12(1)(b). When you have a donor whose moral integrity is in question, you have a problem. In 12(1)(b), as well as 15(1)(e), what is the role of the IGG in determining a contract or a country whose interests are against the national interests of Uganda? 

MRS MATEMBE: We have not got what he is raising. What is it exactly? 

REV. DR SSEMPANGI: Clause 12(1)(b) says, “A leader, a leader’s spouse, agent or company…
 
(a) any foreign business organization where the contract is likely to be in conflict with the public interest.”  

That clause talks about a contract, but 15(1)(b) talks about a foreign business or a foreign government. My question is, what is the role of the IGG in defining the moral integrity of the foreign contract or a foreign government? We are talking about it on this side of the leadership; what happens with the foreign business or the foreign government?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, the word “foreign” is defined in clause 2, the definitive section. If you read, you would understand the meaning of “foreign”.  

The company does not only have to be foreign, but its interest must conflict with the public interest. And in clause 15, which you are quoting, what is prohibited is accepting or being involved in acceptance of gifts, benefits or advantage from any such company or firm which is owned or managed by foreign citizens. And “foreign” is defined in the definitive section.

MS AANIMU ANGUPALE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have some doubts about clause 12 and I would like to seek clarification. 

My interest is in “a leader’s spouse”, given the fact that there are properties which we do not share with our spouses, and given the fact that some of them are businesses. 

Given the fact that most of the leaders - even seated here in the House - have got some local NGOs which they coordinate to send developmental programmes of public interest at the district level, how can we defend the position of the leaders who are channelling such developmental programmes to the district?  

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson.  During his submission, he mentioned “a foreign citizen”. I would like to be educated what that one means. Somebody may be a foreign citizen, I do not know -

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, we talk about a spouse who may not be a leader, she has her company or his company, they call for tenders in a corporation falling under a Ministry where the spouse is a Permanent Secretary or a Minister, and this spouse who is not a leader makes a bid to supply and wins, what will happen? Who will have committed the offence, the spouse or the leader?

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, these provisions you see are very crucial in as far as fighting corruption is concerned, especially within the central government and local government. 

We are bringing these provisions against a practical experience where, for instance, I am the Minister here, and my wife –(Interjections)- Oh! My husband now. I was not referring to myself. Thank you for your correction. I was referring to a minister. 

For that matter, if my husband is employed in a company to supply books and I am the Minister for Education, certainly even before I go any further, when tendering is being done - to begin with, how do you ensure that even the prices, the reserve prices and everything is not communicated to my husband? Even to begin with, by the time he tenders, he knows everything because I am there to brief him. Finally, he tenders together with others.  Certainly, I am in a position to influence! 

It has happened very seriously in many cases. I did not come with a whole list of all these places where it has happened, but it does happen, and honourable Members are aware, and they know that even in the districts, these things are happening very seriously. This is what we are trying to cure.  

Honourable Members, if you think that you are not taking this, then I do not know how we are going to manage to fight corruption, especially within the districts and the central government, which is finishing the economy of this country. That is all I can tell you. If we are debating – (Interruption)  

MRS JANAT MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and my colleague. I think the problem members are finding, and what I am also finding rather a problem is, when we wanted to improve our politics, we decided that civil servants vie for positions and they only resign when they have been appointed, in order to improve our politics. 

Now when it comes to business, we are tying our children not to participate, we are tying our spouses not to participate, and yet we know that it is only Government that actually invests! 

I want to clear my mind. Unless it is detected that ones’ tendering is fraudulent, any Ugandan should not be locked out from genuinely participating in business. That is my understanding. So, I seek clarification from the Minister.

MR MAO: Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from the hon. Minister. I have understood her clearly. The purpose of this, in my understanding, is to dissuade people to seek positions of leadership for financial gain so that those who now want to be in business will avoid going to politics and so on. As far as I am concerned, I would like her to clarify on the question of companies. 

As our economy becomes more capitalist, we have companies that are in the stock exchange. We have shares, for instance, in various public companies: BAT, tomorrow Stanbic is floating, Uganda Clays and so on.  This means that if Stanbic Bank where you have a share applies to BAT contractor to receive money on behalf of URA, by virtue of the fact that you are a leader and you have 0.001 percent proprietor interest, this company shall be knocked out.  It is a clarification which I require from the Minister, and I hope the Attorney General is at hand to clarify on this matter, and thereafter I will move to remove “company and agent or business enterprise” on that ground. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I think this provision relates to clause 4.2(b), where in fact a leader has got to declare interest, not only of his own but also the personal liabilities of the spouse, child, dependant person and so on.  What I would like to suggest is that the provision as it stands here will be extremely prohibitive even to people who are removed from leadership. And since their assets and liabilities will have been declared at the time of doing business with the Government where conflict of interest might arise, we can still make a provision for the person seeking to do business with the Government actually to disclose his interest. But otherwise, I think it will be wrong to lock out everybody by virtue of the fact that he is a spouse of a leader.  

I think here, the question that is still difficult to determine is whether the offender is the leader or the person doing business where the leader has an interest.  I think it will have to be the person doing business where the leader has an interest.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Members, I think the problem here is the company belonging to the spouse and the leader is not jointly owning the interest in that company. Because, if he was jointly holding interest in the same company, then this leader maybe may know what is going on, but the company, say, belongs to the spouse and the spouse reads in the papers and makes a bid and wins it, then the leader is blamed.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, if you really look at (a), this concerns where the leader controls or directly participates in decision making, because there you are likely to influence what happens, that is the crux of the matter in this bill, Mr Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, let us read it and analyze each term here. It says, “a leader, a leader’s spouse, agent” - that is agent of a leader or agent of a spouse or a company or business enterprise in which any of them–. So, it need not to be the two but either the spouse - in this case the spouse has a proprietary interest – “shall not accept or hold any contract with any Government or public body which the leader controls or directly participates in the decision making of its…” So is that clear?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE CHAIRMAN: So, in this particular case it means the leader must have participated in awarding –(Interjection)- yes, I think I have made it clear.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, the leader would be either the one controlling this Government body where this company of his spouse is coming into a contract or he will be the one to take the decision and we are saying in such a case it should not happen.  Otherwise, Mr Chairman, this is the crux of the matter in this bill.

CAPT BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, we have an example. There was a censure here in the Sixth Parliament where the Minister controlled some shares in ENHAS and he sat on one side to decide on the contract.  So, this is the crux of the matter. If we remove this thing, we would have derailed the Leadership Code.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, the leader must have known about this award?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it clear?

MS KIRASO: Mr Chairman, I want to give some information –(Lt. Gen. Tumwine rose_)

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to move an amendment –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let us first dispose of her –

MS KIRASO: Mr Chairman, I am getting disturbed by the way we are understanding this thing, because really it is becoming dangerous if we do not interpret it the way we should, so that it is in line with the rest of what we have already passed.  

I worked as a procurement manager in the Government Central Purchasing Corporation before I came to Parliament. I am looking at myself now as the procurement manager, who has prepared the bid documents, who has got in mind the reserve prices, sitting on this side and sending out a bid.  Now, my husband or his company or the company where I have got interest comes and bids, and you think that you, hon. Member with your company, without the information which I am privy to as somebody who prepared this document, that you are going to compete favourably with my spouse’s company or the company where I have got an interest?  

Hon. Members, let us look at this in that light because that is what it is talking about. You are on this side of the table, your wife or your husband or your agent is on the other side. How do you rule out the possibility that you agreed on a position last night before you came to this table where you are hoodwinking the whole world that you are doing something in the interest of the nation?  How do you draw the line between the information which you could have given him when you were at home and what you are trying to do on the table?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, I think the operative word, which you should now appreciate, is ‘controls’. The law is hinged on any government or public body, which the leader controls or directly participates in the decision making.  So, this means that the leader was aware of the spouse’s bid and participated because of control in the decision making. I think it is clear.

LT GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Mr Chairman, we live by precedence and make decisions according to what have happened before. I would like to move an amendment to say, except in exceptional circumstances, in which case the Inspector of Government should be informed.  Let me give an example. I am a designer.  That flag you see there is mine, the East African Flag. The flag of the army you see is mine; the camouflage uniform at one time was mine. 

Quite often -(Interruption)- just listen. Quite often Government departments, including the Army, come to me and I refuse sometimes. But sometimes they say, “Nobody else is able to do it.  Do it for us”.  An example is the OAU - I am giving this for you to get information and that is why I am saying I am in full support of this provision. And I am declaring an interest in this because as a designer, there are two categories of people in this world: There are those who follow what others have done and there are those who do what is not there.  

In exceptional circumstances - I am moving this, Mr Chairman, because you might find that somebody who directly participates, like in this case me who is in the Army, has a good idea which he or she would like to put across and the institution itself requests you and you declare your interest. You write to the Inspector General, “I have been requested to do this, can I go ahead and do it?” In such exceptional circumstances where the Government and all the authorities are informed, you do not deny creativity. You do not deny the only possible provider of that commodity that a Government or a department might need. (Laughter).

MS MARGRET KOMUHANGI: Mr Chairman, I am disappointed at this level.  Honourable members, we are looking at this legislation in the interest of fighting corruption, not fighting individual interests as leaders! And if we take this trend - Mr Chairman, I am so disappointed and I think we should look at this in the interest of fighting corruption, but not individual interests as leaders in some areas.

On the gifts, Mr Chairman, though passed, we lost it because some leaders give gifts in favour of other things that are in the interest of promoting corruption. How could we have lost that kind of amendment? 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you have heard, this law will only operate where the leader controls and directly participates in the decision-making. If the leader is not controlling or is not participating in the decision-making, namely of awarding the contract, then he will not be blamed.  I think it should be understood that way. 

MR MAO: Mr Chairman, my question has not been responded to.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Please, raise it.

MR MAO: About public companies. A company of 500,000 shareholders.  Are you going to sabotage its contract because the leader has one dollar worth of shares? I think -(Interruption)- assuming I am a Permanent Secretary and I also have one shilling worth of shares in a company owned by half a million people like Uganda Clays, are you saying that Uganda Clays will no longer provide clay for renovation of Parliament because some people here are shareholders? I think this matter requires a legal and professional response, and I beg the Attorney General to take on this one, as the Minister seems to be reluctant.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Mr Chairman, I was trying to find a legal way with the Minister to try and arrive at a solution to answer the hon. Mao’s question, whether a person who has got one share in a public company would be in trouble with this provision. 

If we are going to take control as the criteria for measuring the involvement of the leader, and also participation in the decision making, then I think we should be able to ensure that this leader will, if he does not have the control, simply steer off in the process of awarding the contract or participate in the decision making. 

In other words, the PS may have a share or a Member of Parliament may have a share but does that mean that he is actually in control?  Does it mean he directly participates in the decision making to award the tender?  That is really the crux of the matter.

MR MAO: Mr Chairman, I think with due respect to the Learned Attorney General, the operative words here are “a proprietary interest”. It does not matter the percentage of your shareholding.  Even one cent worth of shareholding is a proprietary interest.  Now, this law says if any of you leader, spouse or agent or company or business enterprise, if you have a proprietary interest in any company, that company shall not get business from the department where you control. I would like us to pass this knowing its implication.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you think it will help if we restrict this to a private company, because there is a difference between a private company and public company? But I think the situation is talking about, say the PS’s wife bought shares in Hima and this is one share in cement, what happens to that? You mean the Permanent Secretary in Ministry of Works should not allow Hima Cement because the wife has one share in that factory?  I think that was the question. Do we restrict it to private company or it is all-inclusive?  I think that is his question.

MRS MATEMBE: For me, as long as you made clear what we are dealing with, I see no more confusion here. Because even in the outside world where things go well, they have such provisions. Because the matter is either you decide to be a public leader or you go into your private business. 

If you find yourself in a public office, then you should ensure that your personal interest does not prevail over the public interest, because you went there to serve the public. Like hon. Tumwine was saying here, he does not participate in the award of contracts of these flags. Somebody somewhere tenders for flags and his company makes them. He tenders and those concerned make the decision, he does not participate in that!

Even the situation that hon. Mao is talking about suffices. If one is not in control, that is different. If for instance you are a personal assistant somewhere in a department and your wife works in Standard Bank which is interested in a tender, and you have nothing to do with this tendering business, then they enter into contract with this organisation where you work, as long as you are not –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. minister, the problem is this. The case is of a supplier, say, Hima Cement. Hima Cement has 1,000 shareholders and the spouse has got one share among the 1,000, and you are a Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Works, therefore you are in control, you make decisions. Would you decline and say, “Hima Cement cannot supply the cement because my spouse has got one share among the 1,000?” I think that is the point he is trying to raise, of whether it would make a difference. 

The issue is that it would make a difference if this were a private company. Under our laws, a private company is restricted to about not more than 50 shares, so this is a small group. I think that is his concern, that there should be a difference between interest in a public body like BAT (Uganda) and Uganda Cement, and a small enterprise. I think that is his concern, but let us get clarification from the Minister, because she is the owner of this particular bill.

REV MBABAZI KABUSHENGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I understand what hon. Mao is presenting about a public company where the individuals’ share is insignificant. I must however say that rewards in business today are performance related. 

You could have a situation where you are in a public company, you are one of a half a million shareholders, but the fact that you have dragged in a million dollars by your influence, it could get you a big reward regardless of the number of your shares. 

It is, therefore, important that that aspect also be protected. You need to declare interest and make sure that you do not influence it to benefit yourself. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAO: Actually, if the hon. Member knew company law, he would know the term “dividends”. Dividends are what you earn from your company investments, and they are directly proportional to your shares. Maybe what you are talking about are the commissions and so on. But I still insist that we look at this closely because we are legislating for the future. 

UTL is going public. Assuming a spouse has shares in UTL, that means Parliament must no longer contract for UTL lines because one spouse of a commissioner, yes, or the spouse of a permanent secretary or of a Minister, has shares in UTL! Here we have a Parliamentary Commission which decides on tenders; we have permanent secretaries who decide on tenders. It would mean that the permanent secretary, by virtue of the spouse having shares in UTL, should not contract UTL to supply telephone lines. These are the scenarios that I would like us to open our minds to. And the only cure for this is for the definition of “company” under clause 2 to be changed to mean a “public company”. 

If it is agreeable to the chairman, the Attorney General and the Minister, I would be contented. The private profiteers definitely should be barred, but those who have humbly bought shares from public companies should not be denied the right to do business with the government, especially if this business is legitimate. 

I think we are fighting underhand dealings. What is wrong with the spouse of somebody benefiting dividends of say $300 a year from UTL, a company owned by 1,000,000 people, earning $20 million a year? This rigidity I would like to warn the hon. Minister against, because you may lose the whole clause if you insist. (Laughter).

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I think hon. Mao is raising quite a good point, which we should analyse seriously. Let us clearly define what we want. The spirit of what we want to achieve is clearly taken care of. 

If we remove the public aspect of it in terms of companies and restrict it to the private concern, it should be appropriate. Because when it comes to a private concern, there are fewer people and chances of underhand dealings are higher. But when you expand it to the public companies, we will end up making a bad law, which may not be practically enforceable. So let us make a good law, targeting a clear category of people who are underhand dealers and these are the people we are trying to fight. Let us make that distinction; it will have achieved what we want to capture.

MR AYUME: Mr Chairman, as far as public companies are concerned, hon. Mao has a point. If you have a share or two or even 30 in a public company, you really do not have a controlling propriety interest. Therefore you should not be in a position to influence events. Decisions can be taken whereby with your one share, you have no say at all. You are probably just presented with a cheque of dividends maybe the following day, but you do not really participate in the actual decision-making. 

I propose that we make a distinction between the private companies and those public companies where the leader has got some controlling propriety interest. In which case, we shall deal with the private companies, which are really tied to the leader, and those public companies again where the leader has got controlling propriety interest.

THE CHAIRMAN: So what is the amendment to effect what you have said?

MR MWESIGE: I wish to move, Mr Chairman, that: “A leader or a leader’s spouse, agent or private company or public company in which the leader, leader’s spouse or agent has a controlling interest-.” That is the amendment I would like to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think this solves the problem. I now put the question on the proposed amendments.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended agreed to.

Clause 13: 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I propose that Clause 13 sub-clause (1) be amended by inserting, after the word “property” appearing at the end of the first line, the expression “under his or her personal use”. The Clause should now read: “A leader shall protect and preserve public property under his or her personal use and shall not use such a property or allow its use for any other purpose other than authorised purposes.” 

The reason for this amendment is that the Clause as it is, is too wide. It punishes a leader for property that does not necessarily fall under his or her control. I beg to move, Mr, Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 15 (1)(a) be deleted because misappropriation of public funds and property is catered for under the Penal Code and the Prevention of Corruption Act. 

Sub-clause (c) should also be deleted because the definition of “highhanded, outrageous, infamous, indecent or disgraceful conduct” is not defined and to make it a breach would be unfair. 

We thought sub-clause (g), which reads, “impede the efficient running of government and any public body through omission or commission or neglect…” would be catered for under the general penalty of abuse of office. 

We also thought that sub-clause (i) “engage in any violation of any law or of the rights and freedoms of the individual” is catered for under the general law of Tort and of Human Rights. 

Sub-clause (j), “participate in any activity designed to undermine the integrity of the government...” is too wide.   Mr Chairman, it is not defined and it would be unfair to make it a breach.

We also propose to amend sub-clause (d), which we have retained, as follows: “act to the detriment of government by refusing or neglecting to settle his or her lawful financial obligations to government or any public body”

Sub-clause (d) as it is in the bill reads, “act to the detriment of government or any person by evading taxes or refusing or neglecting to settle his or her lawful financial obligations to government or to a public body or any person.  

We thought that “evading taxes” is catered for under the Tax law, and therefore, it should not be here. “Neglecting to settle the financial obligations to government” is also catered for under the Law of Contract, and “neglecting to settle financial obligations to any other person” is also catered for under the Private Law of Contract.  

So, we propose to amend (d) to read: “act to the detriment of government by refusing or neglecting to settle his or her lawful financial obligations to government or any public body.”

Mr Chairman, I also beg to add “ethnic grouping or area of origin” to sub-clause (f). “practice favouritism or nepotism by giving preferential treatment to any person for personal advantage or gain for himself or herself, that of his or her relation, friend or agent’. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MS KIRASO: Mr Chairman, the clarification I am seeking from the Committee chairperson is on sub-clause (c). He proposed that because highhanded, outrageous, infamous, indecent or disgraceful conduct has not been defined in the definitions of the bill, therefore, we should delete (c). 

I was thinking of people who are in high authority, who hold high public offices but use them in a highhanded manner to take some decisions or impose some decisions on their subordinates to their own advantage. How do we then deal with such people? 

Other than removing it because highhandedness and the others have not been defined, why don’t we keep it and instead include this highhandedness, outrageous, infamous, indecent and disgraceful conduct in the definitions?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, there is a law on abuse of office.  Abuse of office is exactly what you are saying. When you do in the way you do, that is an abuse of office.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, in fact we had agreed with the Committee that this provision be retained and we define these words because some conduct like ‘disgraceful’ may not satisfy the definition of abuse of office but nevertheless disgrace the office. We agreed, Mr Chairperson. What happened?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, we did not agree with the Minister because as a lawyer, I find it very difficult to make a penalty for a breach called “highhanded, outrageous or infamous conduct”, when they are not defined. As the Chairman clarified properly, “conduct”, which borders on these issues, is well punished in the Penal Code as abuse of office. I do not see how I can legislate for highhanded, outrageous, infamous, disgraceful conduct as a breach without clear definitions. If there are satisfactory definitions, then maybe we can take it. But in the absence of clear definitions, I have a problem with adopting her provision.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16: 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I propose that the heading of Part IV which reads “Employment” be amended to read “Post Employment”. The reason for this amendment is that the part mainly deals with acts of a leader after his employment with Government. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, in line one of clause 17, I propose to remove the words “switch sides” for better flow. So it would read as follows: “A former leader shall not, by acting for or on behalf of any person, entity, association, offer advice or participate in a negotiation or case to which the Government or public body is a party, and where the former leader acted for or advised the Government or public body”.

I also propose that sub-clause (3) be transferred to clause 18(2). This is for purposes of the smooth flow of the bill. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MS KIRASO: Mr Chairman, if you may allow me to use practical examples, does 17(1) mean that Mr Bart Katureebe, the former Attorney General, who is now in private practice, may not – not even within a specified time but at any given time as long as he lives - defend somebody or appear on behalf of somebody who is suing or being sued by the Government of the Republic of Uganda? Is that what it means? I am sorry to use his name, but I wanted us to capture the meaning.

THE CHAIRMAN: But I thought Katureebe was in the office of Attorney General. It is the office of the Attorney General.  

MR MAO: Before we attack former leaders, I think current leaders also need to stand on firm ground. I do know, Mr Chairman, that you also have a law firm and so do many members, including the chairman of the Committee. (Laughter).  

I also know that there are many people who are consultants, who are experts in agriculture, engineering and construction. I also know people who write professional and learned research papers for pay for Government and international bodies and of course not to leave out professional clothes designers. (Laughter).  

I would like to seek clarification from the Minister and the Committee. If this is how far you are willing to go for former leaders, what is the status of current leaders? You do not choose whom you are going to sue; you act for your client! 

Assuming that somebody approaches me in my capacity as Nobert Mao, Advocate, and I really consider myself to be a good lawyer, is this law going to say I should close down my law firm?  

What if the most lucrative cases are the cases where I am suing the Government for wrongfully arresting people, where I am dealing with election rigging and suing the Electoral Commission? I think this thing needs careful consultation. What is the status of current leaders? 

I do know that the hon. Minister for Ethics and Integrity is in another category, because she has never got a practising certificate as an advocate though she is a lawyer. Let me declare my interest and request for clear clarification.  

MRS MATEMBE: But the hon. Member helped this House to defeat the other provision, which was catering for them as they stay! He knows that.  

On this particular case, to respond to hon. Kiraso, if this Attorney General was already defending the Government in a case and he goes away, that is why the word “switch over” was put there, although it has been removed because it was bad drafting. 

Today you may be on this particular case defending or advising Government on it and then you quit and immediately you join a company which was involved in this very case or negotiation, and you use this information which you were using for Government to now defeat this thing here. It is in relation to that particular matter and not beyond.  

THE CHAIRMAN: It must be a specific case handled.

MRS MATEMBE: Yes. It says, “…in a negotiation or case to which the Government or public body is a party and where the former leader acted for or advised the Government or public body.” It is on that particular matter.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is clear. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended agreed to.

Clause 18: 

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I propose that the existing clause 18 becomes sub-clause (1) and we insert a new sub-clause (2) to read as follows: “A former leader who contravenes the provisions of section 17 or subsection (1) of this section commits an offence.”  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like clarification from the Chair on the sub-section (1), which says: 

“A former leader shall not within a period of one year after leaving office- 

(a) accept appointment to a board of directors of or employment with an entity with which he or she had direct and substantial dealings during the period of one year…”  

I am looking at a former MP who has left this House and he had substantial dealings with the Parliamentary Commission for his emoluments.  Now he comes back looking for employment from the Parliamentary Commission, which is a new commission anyway, does this provision affect that MP in his request for employment?  

MR MWANDHA:  I have looked at this provision and I think government organisations may be denied expertise of former leaders if you are not going to allow them to sit on boards of special statutory organisations by virtue of the fact that they have been former leaders. 

Let me just give an example. Tomorrow the Minister for Constitutional Affairs may set up the long awaited Equal Opportunities Commission, and this is a commission to look after the interests of people who are marginalised like the disabled, the women and the youth. If you have a good woman who actually has expertise in this field, are you going to deny the people the services of this person with special expertise to be on that kind of commission because of this law?  So, I think it can deny organisations people who have gained experience and expertise by virtue of being political leaders.  Thank you.

MR OGOLA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to express reservations on that amendment because leadership essentially is a continuous process, and you cannot say for one year, you will not want to be a leader or that you will not be wanted to give advice.  A leader who is appreciated is appreciated all the time unless he proves otherwise.

In most countries that I know of, most people serve their country even after, in the former office in which they were held.  In France, for instance, ministries have what they call, “cabinet”.  The cabinet is made of people who served in that ministry, who have the know-how and they continue advising in accordance with the interest of the Government.  

So, to say that for one year you will keep out in a closet, knowledge and ideas, that is finding solutions with problems, Mr Chairman.  We are here to find solutions to problems but we should not seek to find problems with every solution. And this one, if it is maintained, we would simply be too anxious to find problems with every phrase of the law, and this will be a law with an eye. And I think it will be wrong, Mr Chairman.  Thank you very much. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what is your proposal?  

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Chairman, we do not understand the intention of this provision.  I would like to move a motion that it should be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is a motion, you can oppose the motion then you explain in the context of the motion. Now, if you are opposing the motion and you think your clarification is going to – (An hon. member rose_) Let him speak and then you come in.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, a former leader should not be someone who is not usable. And I do not see why the period of one year was fixed.  What is the implication?  Does it mean that after one year that person ceases to have the influence?  He can only benefit after one year, what is the period of one-year embargo for?  It is meaningless if it is supposed to be that, but if I had created a situation in which I expect to benefit, is that situation not useful?  In fact, if I had the intelligence to create that kind of situation for the interest of the country, then I am the best qualified person to steer it when I am out of the other leadership position.  

So, Mr Chairman, I think some of these provisions of this Code are really not in good faith and they presume too much about the quality, character, and integrity of our people. And this is one of them, which I think should be deleted. I beg to move.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, hon. Okulo Epak said he wants to move a motion because he does not understand the provision  –(Interjection) Please, can I be protected?

THE CHAIRMAN: You are protected, hon. Minister.

MRS MATEMBE: So, I am standing here to clarify to hon. Okulo Epak so that he may change his mind.  Mr Chairman, provisions in this bill are completely in good faith. They have no ill motive but they are brought against practical experiences of what people have been doing.  

You find a leader who is in a certain position, and he is aware maybe of a job that is going to be there in that place –(Interjection)- yes it is like a deal now.  He sits here and plans and manoeuvers how to get the benefits of this job out there. And by the way, he is using this information in this office which is to the detriment of this body where he is employed for the benefit of the other. Immediately he quits, he goes on the other side. In fact it is like the other one that we passed; he goes there and benefits at the expense of this body where he was working. 

Now because we wanted to cure that mischief and at the same time recognize the potential and the ability and experience of leaders, we put provision 19. Provision 19 is to help and balance the mischief that we want to cure, that you look at this gentle person – man or woman – he applies to the IGG, he looks at the circumstances, he investigates and finds that actually you are a genuine entrant in that job and your existence in this other job did not have any dealings with the other one.  

Please, I implore you, it is very important; and practical experience has shown that leaders have abused their positions in such a way.  Since there is provision 19, it can in fact reduce the period even to zero or even to two or three months. Please, I implore you, let us take it – it is more important than leaving it out.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. Okulo Epak.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 20(4) be amended to add at the end the following words to read: - “A complainant shall be entitled to be informed of any action the Inspectorate intends to take or has taken in respect of his or her complaint, and shall be afforded a hearing”.  The purpose is to accommodate the rules of natural justice.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment – (Interruption) 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of clarification. 

THE CHAIRMAN: On this proposed amendment? 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Yes, on 20. I need some guidance. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But why do we not conclude the proposed amendment, because it is to afford the person concerned a hearing. Why do we not deal with that then we come to you –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am not rising on that but I have – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes I know, but why do we not dispose of this first? I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us have yours now, hon. Lukyamuzi.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman I have a specific concern. In the circumstances where a person like me absolutely refuses to declare property in accordance with –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Please, will you help us specify the actual part of –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: It is slightly ahead, perhaps I should wait. Mr Chairman, it is still ahead, I will come up with it later.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 20, as amended, stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24:
 
MS KIRASO: Mr Chairman, I want to know whether clause 24 as is put here is in line with banking ethics, because banks are ruled by the Financial Institutions Statute. They have got their regulations and rules, which regulate the banking industry. So how does that tally with 24(1)?

THE CHAIRMAN: Would you read the specific part of this 24?

MS KIRASO: Clause 24(1) says: “The Inspector General may, during the course of his or her investigations or as a consequence of his or her findings, issue an order placing such restrictions as appear to him or her to be reasonable, on the operation of any bank account of a leader or any person being investigated for the purpose of ensuring payment to Government or public body, or prevention of dispensation of any monies derived from or related to the violation of this code.”  

Why I am asking is, banks are under obligation to protect the accounts of their clients.  So here I am looking at somebody accessing your account. Is there another provision earlier to this one either in this bill or another law, which empowers the Inspector General of Government to go ahead and access our accounts and do with them what he wants to do with them when we fault certain laws? I want to know if it is in conformity with the other laws, which already exist.

THE CHAIRMAN: You remember that in the 6th Parliament there were amendments, which were made to the Penal Code, and they dealt with instances when either the DPP or any other person can deal with bank accounts. So it is not only in the Financial Institutions Statute. There are a number of laws, scattered in a few places, where sometimes the bank accounts can be dealt with. 

I think it is being proposed here that this power be given to the IGG in certain circumstances too. This is how I understand it. Whether it is good or not, that is a different matter. So I put the question that clause 24 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25:

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, I am concerned about this particular clause 1(b), the one in respect of rewards. 26(1)(b) reads -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: We are on 25. I want to put the question that clause 25 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26:

MR AMURIAT: Before I was interrupted, Mr Chairman - sorry for that - I was referring to clause 26(1)(b), which makes a reward subjective. I wish to move a motion that let a reward be an obvious case, a must. The amendment shall read: “A person who provides information to the Inspectorate shall be rewarded for his or her information…” and the rest continues as it is. I beg to move.

MR MWANDHA: I have no problem with the sub-clause as it stands. Reason being that if you say that everybody who gives information to the Inspector General of Government shall be rewarded, some of the information may be useless. Some of the information may be information that the Inspector General of Government already has, some of the information may be public information. So, really, I think we should leave the discretion to the Inspector General – (Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Can I speak to the motion, Mr Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, speak to your motion.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, in a country where there is a lot of corruption, and considering that Government has lost a lot of money in the process of fighting corruption due to lack of information, if this is adopted by the House, it would serve as an incentive. 

If somebody, Mr A, steals a certain amount of millions of dollars belonging to Government, and it is in his or her possession and this is a powerful person, he could utilise what is stolen from Government coffers to corrupt and influence people who would otherwise have provided information to Government. 

I think that if this provision is adopted, and this House adopts the motion, even people working with the Inspectorate of Government will be motivated. Because some of the information is lost from within the Inspectorate of Government. I think an incentive like this could bring out information that would otherwise have been lost.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you have heard the policy behind the motion for amendment. 

(Question put and negatived.)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I need some clarification on 26(1)(a). Let us be open. On a number of occasions when there are debates here in this House, I happen to criticize one or two ministers on the front bench, and on several occasions when I am walking out in the corridor, I have been blasted openly by one or two ministers. What guarantee, therefore, Mr Chairman, do you give me that if I blow out information to the Inspectorate, I will be protected under a scenario which is so fluid, embedded with the politics of Movement versus multi-parties?  What guarantee do you have?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, the provision is mandatory; “shall be protected”.  So, the law is protecting you.  But I think you are saying an individual may fail to follow the law. 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am arguing that it is not enough to say, “shall be protected”, in which way?  What guarantee do you give me that I shall be protected?

THE CHAIRMAN: Sub-clause (3) says, “Any person who unlawfully discloses the identity of an informer or victimizes any person for giving information to or assisting the Inspectorate, commits an offence.” Therefore, you are protected. But if he is not protecting you and you are injured as a result of failing to enforce that provision, then (3) will come into play and then he will be punished.  Is it clear?   I now put the question. 

MR NANDALA: In sub-clause 1(b), I want to move an amendment saying that a person who provides information to the Inspectorate will be rewarded for his information if it is useful at the rate of 10 per cent of the value got.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR MUZOORA: Mr Chairman, I am on 26(2).  “A person who in good faith gives any information to the Inspectorate or assists in the exercise of its functions shall not be punished in any way for doing so”. Why do we put this if we are already rewarding people above? Do you need to say that again? So, this one is irrelevant.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think this is saying if you give the information but the IGG finds it useless, he should not punish you for wasting his time, if it was in good faith.  I put the question that Clause 26 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27:

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 27 is amended to read as follows: “Subject to the provisions of this code, the Inspectorate may, after consultation with the Minister and the Attorney General, make rules regulating its procedure under this code.” 

The purpose of the amendment is to benefit from the professional expertise of the Attorney General.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28:

MR AACHILLA: Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the Chairman of the Committee on Clause 28. When we say the Inspectorate shall observe the rules of natural justice, does it imply that when somebody has been implicated in corruption while in office, and at a certain moment that person maybe falls sick, should that person naturally be understood, despite the fact that he has stolen?  Is that what the Inspectorate is being advised to do? Can you explain?  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is, what is “taking into account the rules of natural justice”?

MR MWESIGE: Well, Mr Chairman, even in criminal law, the thieves you are talking about are always afforded the rules of natural justice, namely, notice. They are given notice of the crime they have committed. A charge is read in court, and the suspect gets to know what kind of crime he has committed and the implications. Then after the prosecution has adduced its evidence, the suspect is also given his right to defend himself.  That is what we call the right to be heard.  So, we are conferring the same rules to the Inspectorate when making inquiries on allegations made before making decisions.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 28 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
	
Clause 29:

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 29 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Clause 30:

MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: Mr Chairman, in Clause 30, I would like to insert an amendment to read: “The Inspectorate shall award costs against the person who makes allegations under this code if the Inspectorate finds the allegations to be malicious or frivolous or vexatious or made in bad faith.”

The justification is that some individuals may maliciously infringe on the others rights and get away with it. Such allegations can stop somebody from standing in an election, and if somebody is stopped from standing in such an election, the person who brings such malicious allegations should not walk free.

THE CHAIRMAN: You have heard the amendment.  I put the question.  

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, you can see there are quite a number of words here.  There is “malicious”, there is “vexatious”.  Now, when there are such words, it is a serious matter. In other words, “frivolous” is simple. So, that is why they are saying, “may”. If it is found that actually the information you are giving was malicious, then they award costs against you.  But if you were joking about or you did not –(Interruption)- yes, that is what “frivolous” means really - then he does not award.  You know this word “shall” is mandatory.

MR MAO: I seek clarification from the Chairperson of the Committee and the Minister as to whether there is no contradiction between Clause 30 and Clause 26(2); that a person who in good faith gives any information - and I assume that includes alleging.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Mao there is no contradiction because there is good faith so it cannot be malicious. The other one is in good faith but you find that maybe he was mistaken. For this however, it is intentional, it is malicious and frivolous. That is the difference.

MR MAO: Mr Chairman, this provision may actually discourage people from disclosing information, in my opinion. And I speak as somebody who once defended a little girl who alleged that some members of the armed forces of Uganda had mistreated her. She spent several months in jail and came out and soon thereafter, died. From that experience, and aware of the wide powers that we are giving to the IGG, I do think that there is a potential of this being abused. 

You know that if you make an allegation and the person against whom you have alleged comes to you and says, “you better withdraw or else you risk paying heavy costs,” it is intimidation. I therefore think this Inspectorate should not be given the powers to award costs against somebody who has made an allegation. That is my argument because it is likely to discourage those who have information. So I really oppose this provision on those grounds.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think your suggestion therefore is to delete this. We have two amendments but first of all let us deal with deletion. I put the question to the motion by hon. Mao that we delete this.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment by the Member for Isingiro North that we put “shall” instead of “may”.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32:

MR MAO: Mr Chairman, I do think that these powers of inspection are being given and we are authorizing the delegation of these powers. This, in my opinion, is very strong power and, actually, I had reservations about the previous provision also. I would have preferred that the IGG only inspects with the authority of court. Even Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala cannot come and search my house without a search warrant! 

If the Inspector General of Government can call upon his small boys or girls and say, “go and check on that account,” and he signs and seals a document to that effect, that could be wayward! I think it is enough that we have authorized the IGG to have the powers. Further giving him the power to delegate it is a bit too much in my opinion, based on the argument that this is a power, which must be exercised judiciously. That is why judges cannot delegate their powers to registrars. They can write a judgement and the registrar can only read it and issue it, but the judges must read the judgement themselves. To allow the Inspector General of Government to authorize any person under his or her control –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one are you dealing with, because –(Interruption)

MR MAO: 32(1).

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we passed 31? Okay, it is 32. Proceed, hon. Mao.

MR ERESU: Mr Chairman, when I look at the committee’s constitution, hon. Mao is a member of that committee. Now he is very busy trying to challenge what the committee, to which he belongs, has put here. May we know whether he is discussing a minority report or he has not been attending committee meetings?

MR MAO: I assume that is a point of order and from my long experience in this House, points of order must be based on express provision. Since he has not quoted any provision of our Rules of Procedure, which I am purportedly violating, I take it that he is just interfering and disrupting my debate.

THE CHAIRMAN: The practice has been, and I think this is clear, that normally when a report is presented by a committee, its members do not actively participate in debating it, unless they come in for clarifications and so forth. That is why sometimes you see that when the Chair gets to know that a member of the committee has stood to contribute, the opportunity is given to other people who are not members of the committee. 

This is a clear practice and I assume that members of a committee are part of the report. In fact, earlier when you wanted to defer with your chairperson you said, “I beg the chairperson to excuse me,” for that is what we normally do. That is why hon. Eresu perhaps raised that issue, that he is aware that you are a member of the committee. So you should abide by the report of the committee.

MR MAO: Mr Chairman, I am much obliged by your guidance. I beg the indulgence of this House, basing on the wide support that many of my proposals have got from the members of the House. (Laughter). 

I want to accept that I am a member of this committee and I do not want to bring a minority report. In any case, people are free to change their minds, and above all, this is the final arbiter of all legislation. So committees do not pass laws. It is the entire Parliament and I think when we are here we cannot gag someone –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, if you have a serious matter, please make your observation and we consider it. Otherwise that is the practice. But if you have a serious observation to make, please, make it.
 
MR MAO: Mr Chairman, my viewpoint is that the IGG should not be allowed to delegate these sweeping powers to inspect bank accounts. My argument is that it was bad enough that he got the powers to authorize him to inspect bank accounts while all other law enforcement organs need powers from court. Are we now going to aggravate the situation by allowing him to authorize any other person to inspect share accounts, purchase accounts, expense accounts, including expenses with your doctors? For this is what it means! In my opinion this power should be curtailed and restricted to the IGG as a person, with no power given to him to delegate.

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, this institution of the IGG is operating throughout the country, how do you expect the two people now holding the office to do these functions of inspecting accounts throughout the country; things that are happening in Kisoro, happening in Yumbe et cetera? Really, I think the IGG himself should not carry out all these inspections. The purpose was to enable an institution to really operate and that is why these powers are there for the public servants operating in the office of the IGG to perform. I think that is the intention.  Otherwise, the IGG will not be able to operate.  Is that okay, hon. Mao?  You see, the policy behind this is that physically the IGG cannot -(Interruption)

MR MAO: Well, Mr Chairman, upon your explanation, I think I had misunderstood the whole import and narrowed it down. I will go with the provision as it stands.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, thank you! I put the question that Clause 32 does stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 33:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I propose that Clause 33(1) be amended to read as follows: 
“Where a Member of Parliament is in breach of this Code, the authorised person shall be the Speaker or Deputy Speaker of Parliament, and in case of the Speaker, the authorised person shall be the Committee of Parliament on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.”  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

I also beg to move in sub-clause (2) that we insert after the word ‘sub-county’ appearing in the fourth line the words, “municipality or a member of a tender board or district service commission.” 

I have abandoned the amendment in (3).  In other words, it will continue to read that in case of the district chairperson, the authorised person shall be the district council. 

And in (5), I beg to move an amendment to read as follows: “In case of the district speaker or deputy speaker and a member of the executive committee or councillor, the authorised person shall be the district council.”  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in Clause 37 in paragraph (a), sub-clause (8) be substituted by sub-clause (7) of Clause 4.  

In other words, it would now read as follows: “In case of a breach under sub-section (7) of section 4, have the excess or undeclared property confiscated and forfeited to Government”;
And in (b), “in case of a breach under sub-section (6) and (8)…” - we are trying to make the wording consistent because the breaches in 4 do not relate to 8.  They relate to 7 and in (b) they relate to 6 and 8, not 7 and 9.  We are just correcting the error. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Clear?  I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that sub-clause 1(a) of Clause 38 be deleted.  The reason is that this is provided for in the law of criminal defamation. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

The First Schedule agreed to.

The Second Schedule:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that in paragraph 11 of the Second Schedule we add “and Speaker and Deputy Speaker of a district council.”

In paragraph 31, we replace “or” with “and” after the word “member”.  We replace or we say “a member and secretary of any Commission or Board.”

And in paragraph 33, I am dropping the amendment.  I think the Secretary of the Bank of Uganda should also be subject to the Leadership Code because he is also a leader. 

And in paragraph 34, we add “and Director, deputy Director, Principal of a post graduate institution” among the leaders after 34.  I think “tertiary” would be better. So, instead of “graduate”, we put in “tertiary” institution.

Paragraph 38, we insert “board members” after “chairperson” and in the last line, we add “and contracts committee”. 

In 41 we add, “controlling” before the word “interest” to make it “controlling interest”. Mr Chairman I beg to move.

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to move an additional amendment that –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don’t we finish these amendments then we come to yours?  

MR MWANDHA: I have a feeling that this list may not be comprehensive. Isn’t it necessary to make a provision for any person we understand is a leader whom we have not necessarily mentioned here, after all, as time goes on, new positions of leaders and titles will be created? And if somebody is not here, he may say, “no, I am not a leader” yet in the spirit of the law, he is a leader. So, how do we handle that?

THE CHAIRMAN: For the time being, let us consider these leaders who have been identified and then put that embracing clause later on to tie up future developments.

MR KABAREEBE: Mr Chairman, the worry expressed by hon. Mwandha is provided for in Section 41.

THE CHAIRMAN: “The Minister may, by statutory order made after prior approval of Parliament by resolution, amend the provisions of any schedule in this Code.” Okay, thank you. Why don’t we first deal with the Committee’s proposal for an amendment, then if there is any Member with an amendment, he can bring it? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I was on the Committee’s amendment No. 11. I do not know whether I am procedurally right to continue. The chairperson of the Committee tried to mention the inclusion of the Speaker, Deputy Speaker under that. I want to make it clear that they just talk about chairperson and members of the council. That will include the district council members and sub-county council members and chairpersons and even municipality. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, these are the offices of Speaker and Deputy Speaker, which are created in the Act. What harm does it cause to mention them?

MR OMACH: Mr Chairman, I want a general provision like that because under what the Committee has put, it means that members of a municipal council and sub-county council will not be subjected to this Leadership Code. Only the chairperson and vice-chairperson.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you appreciated his amendment? What is it?

MR KABAREBE: Mr Chairman, according to what he is mentioning, if we take it like this, the municipal councillors are not there, there is only the mayor. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you want to broaden it? Okay, you can amend that without changing the other, if you want the councillors of municipalities and sub-counties. Do you want to go down to the sub-county?

MR KABAREBE: Mr Chairman, maybe you do not know what is happening at the sub counties. But, because of the influence of these councillors, the district councillors, municipal councillors and the sub-county councillors must all be involved.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, make the amendment and I put the question.

MR KABAREBE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Chairperson, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, the Vice-Chairperson and the district, municipal and sub-county councillors shall all be included.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to make an amendment under paragraph 18 to include all officers in government departments. Then paragraph 22, where they say “Army Commander and Member of UPDF Council”, to include “from the rank of 2nd Lieutenant and above”. 

This is because under 25 you are saying “Inspector of Police”, which is the lowest person in the Police: “Inspector General of Police, Deputy Inspector General of Police and officer of or above the rank of Inspector of Police.”  You can see.  

In paragraph 27, you are talking of “RDC, Deputy and Assistant RDC and the District Intelligent Security Officers (DISOs)”. 

In 28, they are talking about “CAO, Deputy CAO, Assistant District Administrative Officer, Town Clerk, Assistant Town Clerk, Treasurer, Deputy and Assistant Treasurer.” I am adding here, “Chief Financial Officer”, and Financial Officers and Revenue Officers. That means from the rank of officers and above at the district.  

In 29, they are saying “Head of District Directorate and Department.” I am also adding “from the rank of officers and above”. 

In 33, we have talked about heads of division of banks only, but even banking officers are leaders. So, I am adding here, “from the rank of banking officers and above.”

THE CHAIRMAN: But don’t you think it requires time to study the influence of the various cadres you are mentioning to see whether it is proper – because it is something serious to include somebody in this Leadership Code? Instead of naming everybody without trying to see whether he has a way of –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA: Mr Chairman, in 32 they are saying, “Assistant Revenue Officer and above”. This is a rank of a graduate. So, he is not different from a Banking officer and above. And these are also leaders in a sense of the positions they hold. You have talked of sub-county chiefs under 37.

Lastly, in 40, I am saying you have talked about Project Manager –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But do you think these Members have followed all these lists? 

MR NANDALA: Yes, they are following. We are talking of “Project Manager, Coordinator, Administrator, Financial Controller and Accountant.”  We are saying even Procurement Officers should be included under 40.  Thank you.

MR AYUME: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to give the honourable member who has just been on the Floor this information in case it might comfort him.  If you look at page 25 of the bill and Clause 41, which we have passed, it reads: “The Minister may, by Statutory Order made after prior approval of Parliament by resolution, amend the provisions of any schedule to this Code.” 

I am drawing his attention to this provision because it is possible that as of now, the list is not exhaustive and we may not be in a position to exhaust it even after his amendments have been received. 

I wish, therefore, to suggest that at an appropriate time after a new list has been compiled, we can look at it or the Minister can look at it and bring it here for us to approve.

MR NANDALA: Thank you Attorney General.  But since I have known some which can be included, let us include them and wait for the list to be amended later. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, it is not a question of listing. You have to make a case why you are proposing so and so, so that each case is studied to see who that leader is.  But the way you are doing it now, do you really think that Members, apart from listening to the list which you are making, will understand the policy why you are including so and so?  So, is it not better that a list is brought later, you scrutinize it, you see what type of job this person is doing before you really decide?

I put the question to the proposed list by hon. Nandala.

(Question put and negatived.)

MS ALICE ALASO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I still would like to propose something on Clause 22 to cover the people who are holding positions of responsibility directly linked with, say, the public in the UPDF. Supposing we said, all officers? I am reliably told that the officers have always been there in practice. So, it is a question of formalizing it.  If we simply said “all officers in the UPDF” that will take care of the division commanders, it will take care of the paymasters, it will take care of all those since it has been happening.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, I move an amendment under Clause 28 of the Second Schedule that sub-county chiefs, division heads and division councilors be included. Now, this is in realization of the fact that sub-counties are now receiving a lot of funds for development as well as for recurrent expenditure. And division heads, like in Kampala, are now at the same rank as municipalities.  We need to capture this category of persons so that they are also accountable.  

MR KALULE SENGO: Mr Chairman, how do we treat cases where you go to an office, especially accounting offices, and you find that an accounts assistant owns a fleet of vehicles? He also owns several houses and he is getting a meagre salary of about Shs.100,000? How do we accommodate such cases within this law?  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: But honourable Members, do you think you can only find people who have misappropriated funds by using the IGG?  Is it the only way out?  There are many ways. If you suspect somebody of having embezzled, you do not have to use only the IGG to deal with that case. So, this is not the only law under which you can really deal with that situation. That is why you heard the chairperson mentioning in the report from the committee, other laws that can be utilized to deal with different situations.

MR NANDALA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to move a motion that we suspend dealing with the Second Schedule until a proper list is put before Parliament. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that we do not deal with the Second Schedule until a proper list is brought.

(Question put and negatived.)

The second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Third Schedule:

MR MWESIGE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that paragraph 29 of the Third Schedule be deleted because it is covered under paragraph 6 of the same schedule.

I also beg to move that paragraph 30 be moved to paragraph 6.  In other words, paragraph 6 will now read: “The National Political Commissar and Directors or Deputy Directors under the Movement Political System.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, paragraph 17 talks about the Director General of Central Purchasing Corporation.  I am informed that Government sold this corporation to its former management. Does its Director General still qualify to be listed among Government officers when it is a private company?  Otherwise I move a motion that paragraph 17 under the Third Schedule be deleted.

MS KIRASO: Yes, it is true that this company was privatized, but Government still has got interests there, not in form of shares.  There are programs, which are being handled by the Government Central Purchasing Corporation where the Central Purchasing Corporation has to keep disbursing funds to the Consolidated Fund.  For example, under the Japanese Import Support programme, there is the Australian Import Support programme. Well, the Members’ scheme was for the 6th Parliament; it expired. So, because Government has got an interest there, I would really be hesitant to support the amendment that we delete them. Otherwise, we will have no way of following up and cross-checking on those monies, which are still with -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (GENERAL DUTIES) (Okumu Ringa): Mr Chairman, the company known as Government Central Purchasing Corporation does not exist now. It is under a different name. So if we are including it, then we should include it as a private limited liability company, which is under a new name. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment to delete – (Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: I want to know who appoints the Director General?

THE CHAIRMAN: We have been told that company was sold – (Interruption)

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman since I moved the amendment, can I justify it?  

THE CHAIRMAN: There is no justification. You have been told by the Minister that the company does not exist. So we delete. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Third Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

The Title:

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the title be amended to read “The Leadership Code Bill, 2002”.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that title be amended to say “2002” instead of “2001.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled “The Leadership Code Bill, 2002” and passed it with amendments.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mrs Miria Matembe): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

 (Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LEADERSHIP CODE BILL, 2002

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 108(1) of our Rules of Procedure to move that this bill be recommitted to consider the question of who implements the provisions of the Leadership Code. 

I am opposed to the Inspector General of Government being the implementing agency, and I am in favour of a Leadership Committee discharging this important duty. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Which particular clause?

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, in this case, the whole bill will stand recommitted because wherever the word “Inspectorate” exists, that body I am proposing will have to be inserted. It starts right from functions of the Inspectorate and declaration. 

I move to commit the function of enforcing this Code to a Leadership Code Committee and remove it from within the ambit of the Inspector General of Government, an individual, whose discretion has sometimes been questionable. His judiciousness and impartiality in determining certain cases has also been questioned. In other democracies, such Leadership Code Committees comprising men and women of integrity discharge the function of enforcing this Code of Conduct.  

The hon. Minister is asking “where?” but I am sure she has read about the United Kingdom where this kind of body discharges the function of implementing this important code. It is for those reasons that I move that the entire Bill be recommitted for the consideration of this proposal.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have heard the motion by hon. Mao, that we recommit the entire bill for reconsideration by the Committee. I want to put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Clause 9 and 12 be recommitted to consider the sections again. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Tell us why?

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, if I have the Floor – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Let us allow her to put her case.

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, I would like to recommit Clause 9 and 12 for just minor, but important amendments. If you permit – (Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not allow her to justify her case and then you can come in?

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, these amendments are very small.  We passed the provision allowing a leader to participate in the deliberations where that leader has interest. We just wanted to put in a small amendment to disallow that leader from participating in taking the decision. He can debate but when it comes to deciding, he is not party to that decision. 

On 12, it is also a small amendment bearing in mind the reasons why we were bringing the issue of the conflict of interest where a leader’s spouse has shares. You remember hon. Mao’s argument of the public companies, and the chairman brought in an amendment to say “controlling interest”? He said a controlling interest means 51 per cent!   

It is not in many cases for a spouse or a member to have all those shares. In many of the cases, they may have 20 or 30 percent, and certainly it is substantial enough to influence a decision.  Therefore, I would like to beg that we reconsider it.

THE SPEAKER: Making of decisions in public companies is not governed by the way you think but by the shares, because you will therefore, have so many votes. That does not arise. It is in a private company where when you have the controlling shares, then your votes are commensurate with the number of shares you have.

MRS MATEMBE: I take your guidance, Mr Speaker.  Certainly I am not a practitioner, but what I know is that when you have 51 percent, you appoint directors. You are really in control; you control a company. The way I understand a public company –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, since we are going to reconsider it, I think you will explain this.

MRS MATEMBE: I just wanted to say at least 25 percent, which is a substantial interest and is good enough to influence the decision. Otherwise, if we say, “controlling interest”, we shall have lost what we wanted to deal with in this law. I beg you, please.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, this bill is a Government bill. The Minister responsible for the bill feels that there are some important matters that we should reconsider in the bill. It will not be fair for us to simply brush her aside. 

Knowing that it is now 7.30 p.m. for us to begin considering new issues at this time, we are bound to make mistakes. I would like to appeal to you, Sir and hon. Members, that at this material time, we adjourn and tomorrow we consider the proposals by the Minister in a cool manner. 

Obviously if we are satisfied with the merits of the proposals, I do not think there is anything wrong in going ahead to consider her proposals. I would like to move, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is fair enough that at this stage when the Minister was going to move a motion for the Third Reading, she comes in with a motion for recommitting. That is the only business we shall consider tomorrow in respect of this bill and then we proceed.  

At this juncture we come to the end of today’s business. We shall pronounce ourselves - because she has to justify her motion for people to understand it. Tomorrow, when she has sufficient time, it will be a question of justifying so that we decide whether to recommit or not to recommit. 

With this we come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.31 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 April 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)

