Thursday, 28 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I welcome you and I have got an announcement here from the Budget Committee. Members of the Budget Committee will meet tomorrow, Friday, starting at 10.00 a.m. and again on Monday starting at 10.00 a.m. You are, therefore, encouraged to attend this important meeting so that we can finish the budget process.

Honorable members, I want to appeal to you again that the period of handling important issues affecting our country is an emotional period. As I indicated at the beginning of the session, we are dealing with the Constitution, and we are dealing with the transition. I appeal to you that you cooperate, you love each other, you consult, and you talk to each other. Each of you has something to contribute to the well being of our country. 

Tempers flaring, this and the other will not help us. I think it is better that you allow somebody to say what he wants to say, listen to him, he allows you to also say what you want to say, and you listen to him; and then think about what you have discussed. At the end of the day you then make the best judgment you can over the matter. Otherwise, emotions, this and the other, will not help us to do a good job. What we need is the quality of what we produce, be it the review of the Constitution or the other laws that may come to us. So, please the 302 of us, currently 301, let us act as brothers and sisters in whatever we do.

2.36
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, you may recall that on the 18th of August last year I raised an important issue in this august House about the health status of the Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) who are living in the IDP camps. The hon. Minister of State, General Duties, assured me that the medical team, which should be going to check on these IDPs, would be sent soon. 

Mr Speaker, to-date I have never seen any action as regards this request. Thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I will ask the minister concerned to handle this matter and advise the member about what is being done.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing on a point of procedure in regard to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, I understand Ndeeba road is going to be fixed next month.  

MR LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Was it the issue?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, very briefly, last year in February, on behalf of about 10,000 people I presented a petition in regard to the unaffordable electricity tariffs. The petition was sent to the Natural Resources Committee. I happen to be a member of that committee and I wish to report that the report has long been ready for presentation. As I speak now the said people have given notice that they are going for another demonstration. Why do we not stop that demonstration by listening to the contents of that report? We are representatives of the people, and whenever it is possible let us give an opportunity to the voices of the people to be heard.

THE SPEAKER: Please carry my message to the members of your committee to expedite the process.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 53(3) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT FOR RESCISSION OF THE DECISION OF PARLIAMENT ON A MOTION MOVED UNDER ARTICLE 74(1)(a) TO REQUEST THE HOLDING OF A REFERENDUM FOR THE PURPOSE OF CHANGING THE POLITICAL SYSTEM

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, as I remember yesterday when we adjourned, there was a motion moved by hon. Dr Okulo Epak to improve the motion, and his proposal was to delete resolution 2, which appears on the second page of the motion. The debate is open.

2.41
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have carefully listened to your communication and taken it very seriously. I have been approached by several members who wondered why I was speaking as if I had an extra pair of lungs. I pledge to speak very calmly today.  

The procedure under which I rise is under the authority of rule 47, and I beg to read it verbatim: “Any debate interrupted by adjournment of a House shall, on coming again before the House or a Committee of the House, be resumed at a point where it was interrupted as if it were a continuous debate; and any member whose speech was interrupted has the right to speak first on the resumption, but if he or she does not avail himself or herself of the right, his or her speech shall be taken to have been completed.” 

Mr Speaker, when we adjourned the motion that was on the Floor was a motion for reconsideration of the conclusion of Parliament on the question put by the Speaker on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to request the holding of a referendum for change of political system. 

The motion that we are starting with today is different because it is a motion moved under rule 53 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament for rescission of the decision of Parliament on a motion moved under Article 74, to request the holding of a referendum for the purpose of changing the political system. The motion that was on yesterday’s Order Paper that we were debating, and this one, are two totally different motions. Under rule 47 we are supposed to start from where we stopped. So, I need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honorable member.  My guidance can be found in the interpretation I gave in respect to the notice that the issue was raised here. As far as I am concerned, the issue for a motion under rule 53(3) is for rescission, therefore, the motion is for rescission. (Applause)
 
2.44
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday you gave guidance precisely the way you said, and then when you temporarily adjourned the House, the expectation was that we would return and proceed the way you had said. At that time you said that if resolution No. 2 was excluded, then the motion that remains is the motion upon which your guidance leans. Unfortunately, that resolution has not been excluded. 

When the minister came back after your short adjournment, he insisted that they were going to proceed with the motion as it were. In other words, it was very clear that your interpretation of his intention was different from his real intention, which was to proceed with the motion as it was. In light of that, can we still insist that your guidance is what is best, or the position of the mover of the motion?

THE SPEAKER: I thought the purpose of hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s motion was exactly to do what I had said. I still maintain that the business we have for purposes of rule 53(3) is an appeal for us to rescind a decision so that the matter can be dealt with. Therefore, if it is true, hon. Okulo Epak moved his motion and I have said it is the motion, which we have now, which we want to dispose of and then see how we proceed. (Applause).

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of clarification. Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Can we proceed with the motion of hon. Okulo Epak? Those who want to make a contribution - he moved it, he finished his work, he left it for us. If there are no contributions then we should see how to proceed. But if anybody is interested in making a contribution, please stand. When you catch my eye, then we will proceed.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mine is a procedural point.

THE SPEAKER: There is no procedural point at this stage. You want information? But as I see the procedure is to deal with the motion, which we have.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, is it in order for an honourable member to insist on a matter you have ruled upon, and do so repeatedly?

THE SPEAKER: It is out of order to be repetitive. Hon. Okulo Epak moved a motion; honourable minister, you said you still stand by your position?

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I did duly move my motion yesterday and it was duly seconded. The motion is before the House for its consideration, it is open of course to members’ consideration and input.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, since I see nobody to make a contribution to the motion, I want to put the question –(Interjections)- please, honourable members, I appeal to you to be orderly. I do not intend to do this and the other. Last time somebody brought a placard here for hours, I ignored it. I could have taken a step; I do not want to do this.  I want to treat you as honourable members. I had a way of dealing with it; I decided to ignore it. So, do not do something that I will just ignore.

2.48
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember almost five times yesterday the Chair ruled that we should deal with rescission rather than consideration at the same time. However, the minister who moved the motion was also in this House and five times he defied you. I think that was out of order but because the minister happens to be a very good friend of mine, I did not want to call him to order. We would move more happily if the minister would concede to withdraw resolution No. 2, and I am requesting that the minister –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if it is to break with practice, I want to praise hon. Okulo Epak for having moved the motion. Since I have not seen any person wanting to contribute to this, I want to put the question –(Interjections)- honourable members, what we have as far as our records are concerned, was a motion by hon. Okulo Epak to delete resolution No. 2 from the motion. Is there anybody who opposes or wants to support it?

2.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE, GENDER AND CULTURE (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Mr Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to the motion moved by hon. Okulo Epak.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let him say what he wants to say, honourable member.

MR BITANGARO: The nature of the amendment is that I would like the resolution to read –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the motion was that we delete resolution No. 2 from the motion as tabled by the hon. Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

MR KATUNTU: The Executive –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, if you can, protect me from hon. Bakkabulindi who is jeering at me and you have said we need to follow the rules.

THE SPEAKER: I am protecting you; be sure I am protecting you, honourable member.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Executive is governed by rules of collective responsibility. The hon. Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs has categorically said that he insists on the motion. Is it in order, therefore, for another honorable minister to come and depart from the position of his colleague?

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, please calmly listen to what the honorable member has said. You have put your point across but I am here to preside over a House of 301 Members of Parliament. I am not here in a Cabinet room. Therefore, I am not concerned with the behavior of Members of Cabinet. I am concerned with the behavior of Members of Parliament. If what you say is true, I know there are people here who will take appropriate action against that. But I am accepting him as a Member of Parliament, let him make his contribution.  (Applause).

MRS MUSUMBA: Clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You stand up then I recognize you, and you take the Floor. I will give chance to anybody who wants to speak, but do not give yourself the Floor.

MR BITANGARO: In the first place I would like to thank you for that very wise ruling, and I will duly accept the punishment the Prime Minister will give me. Mr Speaker, I propose to move an amendment to hon. Okulo Epak’s Motion in these terms. Instead of the deletion of resolution 2 of the motion of the hon. Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the resolution should read as follows: 

“Now, therefore, be it resolved by Parliament as follows; 

That the conclusion reached by this Parliament on the 21st of April 2005 in regard to the motion under Article 74(1)(a) of the Constitution seeking a resolution to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the purpose of changing the political system, be rescinded to allow this honorable House to reconsider the said motion during the current Session of Parliament.” I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Could you justify it?

MR BITANGARO: I have carefully listened to the debate and objections to the motion presented by hon. Mwesige Adolf in this House. I also had the benefit of listening to the amendment moved by hon. Okulo Epak, and the debate that ensued after that amendment. The motion I have moved seeks to harmonize the position of the minister and the amendment moved by hon. Dr Okulo Epak. (Applause). 

The resolution as proposed by me clearly captures the desired effect of rule 53(3) of our Rules of Procedure and cures the seeming ambiguity, which appears in resolution No. 2 of the minister’s motion.  

Further, this motion seeks to address the anxieties and concerns raised by my learned colleagues, who I heard yesterday submit here. So, I appeal to my colleagues to support my motion for amendment, and also to remind my colleagues that these Rules of Procedure are not an end in themselves, there are just handmaidens of the debate on substantial issues in Parliament. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)
 
2.59
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by hon. Sam Bitangaro, and the reasons for my seconding this amendment are reflected in the very fact that the drafters of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament, under rule 53(3), did envisage a situation where Parliament would at some point wish to rescind a conclusion. Therefore, this rule 53(3) was made to facilitate us, Members of Parliament, to be able to make this particular decision on rescinding a particular conclusion. 

My second reason for supporting this particular motion is embedded in the guidance, which you gave to this House, whereby you ably guided us that we should first deal with the rescinding of that particular conclusion in order for us to be able to do any other thing. Therefore, I believe that it is in light of that particular guidance that you gave to this House that we as Members of this Parliament would be acting in a prudent manner by supporting this particular motion. I humbly beg that members of this august House do support this motion. I thank you. (Applause)

3.01
MR AGGREY AWORI (Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not going to address the technicalities of this motion but I am going to talk about the political import of this motion and the destination we are heading. 

Procedural matters are important; it is a path to where we are going. But the most important item in a procedure or on a way to go to a place is where you are going and the purpose, which is taking you there. You cannot get bogged down. Whether you are going by boda boda, by yellow bus, helicopter or whatever means, the most important thing is your primary objective: “I want to go to Entebbe”. A lot of us here, with due respect, including myself, are perhaps not familiar with the technicalities and procedural issues arising from this presentation or amendment by my honourable colleague. The issue here is that somebody wants a referendum in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. 

We have no problem with that. Mr Speaker, I do not want to be misunderstood by somebody seconding or clapping or pushing or this and that. When I say there is no problem, it is a matter of constitutional obligation. The question is how to get there and the purpose of going there. If the purpose of going there is to reverse, to roll back what has been achieved so far in this august House, Mr Speaker, some of us are going in that direction with great trepidation. We have done a lot of things in a way of establishing –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honorable member, we have not come to the stage of deciding whether we rescind or not. Here we are just streamlining the format of the motion, then we shall come to that debate.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for your guidance on the mater. But if I may repeat this for the purpose of clarity in my presentation, it is the destination. My interpretation of this amendment to the motion is purely procedural. It is a preamble to the main motion, which we have cut off from the main motion in accordance with hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s motion. But, I keep repeating myself notwithstanding your ruling and your direction, the political import is the issue. Let us look at it from that colour. We are saying that if that is the final destination you are aiming at, there are other options provided in the Constitution. Why do we not exercise other options instead of doing this legal and constitutional gymnastics on this Floor?

Mr Speaker, these gymnastics we are indulging in are causing concern to some of us. It is like somebody has decided to forego all other options and go to the masses, manipulate them, massage their ego, intimidate them and then get a - I recall yesterday and I read it again in the papers today, His Excellency the President said, among other things, “No matter what Parliament does, we shall use all means possible including … – I do not know the word in Luganda, but in English it means tricks –(Interjections)- I do not speak Luganda fluently, my father used to, but the word amounts to tricks.  

As I said, the main item we should be focusing on is the political import of this motion and the way it has been amended. The destination is more important than the means of getting there. If the purpose of this motion, among other things, is to roll back what we have achieved so far, Mr Speaker, some of us, for the purpose of that destination, are saying no. The procedure is most important. Just like I said, the means, I am repeating this for the purpose of –(Interruption)

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. Hon. Awori is looking at the import of this amendment and he is saying that the responsibility can be easily done here maybe even at the districts, according to him. But I would him to clarify to me, where else does this Parliament have the power to do it if 74(1)(a) is not followed? 

If you look at 74(1)(b) it reads, “If requested by a resolution supported by the majority of the total membership of each of at least half of all the district councils.” Who is supposed to do it? Suppose the district councils do not want to do it? 

Then if you go to –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, at a certain stage we shall come to the merits of the motion. What is before us now is the amendment of hon. Bitangaro, which has taken care of hon. Okulo Epak’s amendment because it is no longer quoting resolution 2. Just talk about whether you support the amendment or not; the owner of the motion will come to tell us why he wants us to rescind what we did; that will come later, not now.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As much as I agree with your ruling and for this purpose your guidance, I keep repeating that the means of going somewhere are most important to me, whether it is a yellow bus, a red bus, I have to know. Procedural things, no matter what you say, will determine how people are going to vote. I oppose the amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I want to welcome Al Hajji Moses Kigongo, the NRM Vice-Chairman. He is in the distinguished strangers’ gallery. (Applause).

3.09
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember the Motion that was moved by hon. Dr Okulo Epak was to delete resolution No. 2, and the amendment that has been moved by hon. Bitangaro is saying nothing but still repeating the prayer in resolution No. 1 of the motion. In my opinion it is not adding anything new to hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s motion because resolution No. 1 of the motion moved by hon. Adolf Mwesige is seeking for a rescission of the decision taken on 21st of April 2005, and that is exactly what the amendment is also saying. 

So, in my opinion the amendment is redundant in as far as resolution No. 1 of the hon. Adolf Mwesige’s motion still stands. So, I beg to oppose the amendment as moved by hon. Bitangaro. 

Two, I want to observe and comment on the statement that hon. Bitangaro mentioned while moving his amendment that rules are not an end in themselves. I would like to say that if we start demeaning these rules or deviating from them, we are setting a very bad precedent. We can say no, but we are setting a very bad precedent. We must learn to do the correct things the correct way. For example, now we are dealing with this motion seeking for a rescission of that decision taken, and yet we are now assuming that the notice was for rescission and yet it was for reconsideration. Are we going to -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. As hon. Dr Epetait is submitting, I hear so many Members of Parliament, belonging especially to the Movement Caucus, booing hon. Dr Epetait -(Interjections)- the same way they are doing now. (Laughter) I do not whether it is in order for Members of Parliament to shout like frogs in a well while others are talking? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, honorable members, it is out of order to - you talked about the Movement Caucus, I do not know about that but be it the Movement Caucus or anybody, it is out of order to shout at any Member of Parliament.  

DR EPETAIT: So, Mr Speaker, I was winding up with a prayer that really this House should not set a bad precedent. We should do correct things correctly. In as far as we start adulterating and diluting our own Rules of Procedure, I think you are aware that other courses of action may be taken and we do not want decisions of this House to always be a subject of litigation. Over these rules we have all agreed that it is the way we should go, but not to start amending them and say, “They are not, after all, an end in themselves”. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.14
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you, Mr Speaker, and I think also we must thank the Executive, the caucus or the Cabinet for re-thinking. Let me submit like this: 

Yesterday you already ruled that according to our rules, resolution 2 cannot be pronounced upon. That was your ruling; that it requires a substantive motion under an appropriate notice. You had already ruled –(Interjections)- oh yes, it is in the Hansard. I assume, therefore, that we were, according to that - you are free, Sir, to deny whether or not you ruled that way. If I am misquoting you - we were going to deal with only resolution 1. 

My motion was to save the situation whereby you would have a resolution hanging in a motion and then we would have to decide how we are going to pronounce ourselves on that motion. Do we pronounce ourselves traditionally on the whole motion, or do we pronounce ourselves according to each resolution? That was the main purpose of my motion. The present so-called amendment to my motion has nothing to do with the amendment of my motion whatsoever. I, therefore, take it that my motion has not been amended. It has been left in abeyance.  

In that sense, if you decide to leave it in abeyance it saves me from the position where I wanted to withdraw it myself. But I want to categorically refuse to accept that this is an amendment to my motion. This is an amendment by Cabinet to its own motion, and they should be courageous enough to admit that. Although it is not moved by the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, it is still moved by a Cabinet Minister. I think at the Cabinet level they can appoint anybody to move a motion for amendment to their own motion in order to avoid embarrassment to the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. So I want to say categorically that that is not an amendment to my motion.

Secondly and finally, Sir, the implication of the amendment, which should be clarified is, what is the purpose of the explanation that you are asking for rescission so that you can re-submit? What is the purpose? I thought that would be a statement in defense of the motion. I have never seen a motion explained in that manner in my life. You see, a motion states what you want to achieve and then you have to explain why you want to achieve it. That is defense of the motion. So, technically I find it not acceptable that this is an amendment to my motion, but I like the spirit of the Executive to reconsider their own submission in the manner they have done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bitangaro, does your motion conclude the motion or resolution 2 still remains?

MR BITANGARO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The spirit of the motion is such that it retains resolution 1 but imports resolution 2 to be able to come to terms with rule 53(3). The effect is that it captures resolutions 1 and 2 to bring it in conformity with rule 53(3).

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

3.19
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to oppose the proposed amendment by hon. Bitangaro but before I say the things I wanted to say, I feel it is very important to re-emphasize what two of my colleagues have already said. 

In the first place, if somebody proposes to delete resolution 2 and you wanted to amend that deletion, in my fair view you would say that instead of deletion let us reformulate resolution 2. That would be an amendment to the proposal to delete.  

Hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s motion does not touch resolution 1 and, therefore, when you amend it and you touch resolution 2, that is your own substantive proposal to amend what was proposed. In my honest view, what Dr Okulo Epak said, and I really commend him because if it were hot heads like some of us he would have stood up to withdraw his motion. But he was decent enough to say, “I am not withdrawing the motion but I give you notice that I do not accept that what you proposed as an amendment to a deletion is true”. 

But more importantly, this amendment arises from what happened yesterday. When we came it was pointed out that the notice for the motion that was on the Order Paper yesterday was not about rescission. It was also pointed out that the Order paper was not about rescission. The Rt. hon. Speaker tried to help and made his pronouncements. 

After yesterday’s debate the Executive has options. The clear option is to recognize the ruling of the Speaker and go and reformulate a specific motion for rescission, and that is why I oppose this particular amendment. In my view this is probably the first time that this Parliament debates the issue of rescission. Therefore, it is so important that whatever precedent we set, we set it correctly. This is absolutely crucial. 

If in this process we seek to make this motion relevant by amendment in total disregard of our Rules of Procedure and in total disregard of the import of starting rescission of whatever we have done in this Parliament, we would have set ourselves on a dangerous track. Of course when the substantive motion comes I will oppose the issue of rescission, but I want to arrive there in such a way that the country, other Parliaments in the world will look at us and say that, “These people are truly a worthy Parliament”. 

I cannot be part of that Parliament –(Interjection)- I have not finished my statement; let me speak –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, listen to his submission.

PROF. LATIGO: I cannot be part of that Parliament that shoots itself in the foot. I urge you, because it is very simple to pass it the way it is but the records will be clear, the notice will not be the motion. The Order Paper of yesterday will not be the motion. The substance of what is in our records, the Hansard, will not be a defence of this particular motion. It takes one day to write a notice, it takes three working days to arrive at that motion, why can we not do it correctly so that the country is saved the agony of thinking that all that is happening is hogwash and a road to total chaos? 

It is up to you because you have the numbers, but I will oppose this motion not because I do not want you to proceed with the motion for rescission; I will oppose this motion because rescission is such an important thing that when we arrive at the motion, debate it and we draw our conclusion, it must be based on orderly and systematic steps. The way it is, Mr Speaker, it will be very unfortunate in the history of this Parliament if we proceed. Thank you.

3.25
CAPT. (RTD) MULINDWA BIRIMUMAASO (Bukoto County West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Yesterday after the problem we went through and hon. Dr Okulo Epak came up with a motion to delete the second resolution, I supported him. We discussed it after that and I thank him because he did it or he appeared to be doing it in good faith. 

After careful analysis, Mr Speaker, I find that Dr Okulo Epak’s motion, if passed as it is, was to leave everything in balance and I think he agrees with me. So, the amendment by hon. Bitangaro improves and gives indication of what is likely to come next because that is where my worry is. Should we just leave it open or we should be aware of what we want to achieve?  

Mr Speaker, I want to inform those members who are now in government and those who hope to come in government that there are five pillars on which a successful government sits. The first one is the pillar of the political elite, and here we are, those in the Movement who are the vanguard, and those in the opposition who tickle the Government when it becomes sleepy. I thank the opposition for doing your job; the political elite. 

The second pillar, Mr Speaker, is the civil society. The civil society consists of the informal advisors, through the press, public seminars, bimeeza; the civil society is the informal advisors.

The third pillar are the donors whose influence determines at what level the country is politically and economically. The more the influence is an indication that the country is not stable economically and politically. 

The fourth pillar, Mr Speaker, is the army.  The army guarantees the stability for the rest to operate, and when the rest mess up, you tempt them to come in and rescue the situation.   

Finally, the central pillar, the shock absorber of politics in a democracy, are the people -(Applause)- when you are in any doubt of what you are going to do politically, it is better you refer to the people. This is why when I see hon. Bitangaro’s motion giving an indication that finally we are going to refer to the people, I support him-(Applause)- when things go wrong it is the people who suffer.  When you political elite play it rightly it is the people to give you more votes. Why are you fearing to go out to the people -(Interjection)- I retired from the Army, so, I am now a free citizen. I am not threatening her, but she should keep quiet.

MS KIYINGI NAMUSOKE: I was carefully listening to hon. Birimumaaso.  First, he talked about the Army among other things being a pillar in democracy, and then he pointed his finger - he was wagging his finger at me and saying that he has retired from the Army.  Is the hon. member in order to threaten me when I am also an elected Member of this House?

THE SPEAKER: I think that is how he speaks, that is mannerism. (Laughter)

CAPT. (RTD) BIRIMUMAASO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I do not intend to do any harm and I am friendly.  The most important question would be: Are we prohibited to do what we are doing by law?  Under Rule 53(3) it would appear- yes except if you do what we are doing.  So, legally we are doing the right thing, we are in the right place and we are not breaking any law.

Two, the failure of the other motion, was it because members voted against it?  Were they voting against the spirit?  The answer is, no.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, the other motion will come when we are dealing with the merits of the motion.

CAPT. BIRIMUMAASO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.  I beg to support the motion.
3.34
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Maj. Gen. Muhwezi Jim): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by hon. Bitangaro. 

Yesterday I also listened to the arguments that were brought by the honourable members after hon. Mwesigye Adolf had moved his motion. I noted, Mr Speaker, that you said his motion was proper and it had no problem as it was.  However, honourable members felt that it was not proper to bring two resolutions in the same motion seeking to reconsider and then rescind the conclusions of this House. This is why we took seriously the motion moved by hon. Okulo Epak because it sought to solve that problem. The Executive came up with hon. Bitangaro’s motion, which we believed was answering the issues raised by hon. Okulo Epak and the other honourable Members of Parliament. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Bitangaro who has brought a motion that resolves this problem. We think this will harmonize his motion. 

I, therefore, propose that even if hon. Okulo Epak now thinks that the motion moved by hon. Bitangaro does not answer his problem, but since we think that his problem was this one I have explained of bringing two resolutions in one is now resolved, I think this House should go ahead, vote on hon. Okulo Epak’s motion, defeat it and we go ahead with hon. Bitangaro’s motion. Thank you very much.  

3.36
MS AMONGI BETTY (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.  I want to start on the point that I think the amendment to the motion by Rule 42(5), which reads: “Any amendment to the motion which a member wishes to propose under this rule may be moved and seconded at any time after the question upon the motion has been proposed by the Speaker and before it has been put by the Speaker at the conclusion of the debate upon the motion.” 

 Mr Speaker, I think this amendment is defective. This amendment should have come at a time when we have deliberated on the amendment moved by Dr Okulo Epak and after the Speaker has put the question on motion.  Rule 42(5), I beg the mover of the amendment to reconsider that rule. 

Mr Speaker, I want to move –(Interjection)- I am not taking your information.  I want to move on the defectiveness by the Rule of Procedure again on the same amendment by the Minister. 

Rule 60(2) reads: “It is out of order to anticipate a motion by discussion of any matter directly relating to the subject matter of the motion prior to the debate appointed for the consideration of the motion.”  

Mr Speaker, the same Rule 53(3) pre-supposes –(Interjection)- I am reading the rules. I do not see why you should give me information on Rules of Procedure, honourable member, which you might not have. You can read and you get informed yourself- (Laughter).  

Mr Speaker, I want to support the amendment moved by hon. Dr Okulo Epak because the motion moved yesterday by the Minister, the first three paragraphs of the motion deal with the question of reconsideration. 

According to Rule 53(3), if you want to reconsider a question or an issue that has been concluded, you first need to bring a motion for rescission.  When this august House has passed a motion for rescission, you can then bring a substantive motion for reconsideration.  Therefore, –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I respect my honourable colleague.  But, yesterday, my sister was here in the House, we have been repeatedly reminded that the Speaker ruled and his decision was not challenged.  So, is she in order to revert back to the issue that you ruled on yesterday? The motion is properly before the House unchallenged and now she is taking us back.  Is she in order to do that?

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, I do not know how many times I am going to repeat this.  Apparently we are mixing issues.  We have not started dealing with the substance of the motion. The substance of the motion will be considered when the owner of the motion has justified why we rescind what we did; that has not come.  It was the formulation that is being improved on.  

Yesterday, hon. Okulo Epak put a motion to delete resolution two and I asked you to make a contribution.  The first contribution that came up this morning was his contribution when in his own words- I do not know whether it is true or not- he said he was improving what hon. Okulo Epak was saying.  Hon. Okulo Epak says he is not satisfied that this is – this is something, which you will consider when we come to pronounce ourselves to the way forward. You should not go into whether there is a case for rescission or not, that will come.  

The purpose of this Rule 53, which we put in our Rules of procedure, was that once you have disposed of a matter you are not allowed to come to it again in the same session.  But I think we put Rule 53 that in case you want to revisit the matter over which a conclusion has been reached during the session, you must move a motion to rescind so that you are able to reconsider the matter.  

The purpose of this motion, if it succeeds, is to reconsider the matter over which we closed during the session.  I think this is clear. The debate should be whether you support the amendment or not, then we go to deal with the substance of the motion as amended.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  As I conclude, I agree with you because this particular amendment brought in by the Minister has nothing to do with amendment brought by Dr Okulo Epak to delete because it still brings –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, I do rise on a point of procedure under Rule 58(7), which authorizes you to allow me to interrupt debate on a point of procedure –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I allowed you and I know; put your case.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Sir.  The point upon which I want to raise is that the record of this House is reflecting what the hon. Betty Amongi has told this House, which is both wrong in fact and in law.  

She has quoted Rule 42(5), and she has stated that it is erroneous for this House to entertain the amendment that is being debated today under Rule 42(5), when in fact Rule 42(5) refers to amendment to a motion.  What we are debating now is an amendment to an amendment under Rule 42(2)- (Applause)  Therefore, from a procedural point of view, may I request that you guide this House so that the record is clear?  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How many times am I going to guide you?  I do guide you and you do not listen- (Laughter)

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, let me conclude by saying I support the motion of deleting moved by hon. Dr Okulo Epak. This is because the current amendment as it stands contradicts Rule 62, which anticipates that reconsideration will come and the rule of anticipation is prohibited by our Rules of Procedure.  Anything that we pass now should be on the question of rescission, but not to combine rescinding and reconsideration.  So, this amendment is defective according to our Rules of Procedure.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  You see, honourable members, let me make myself clear on this.  This is what I said yesterday, to reconsider is after you have rescinded.  When you rescind, you reconsider the same matter during the same session. The motion as it is says rescind so that you are able during the same session to reconsider the matter.

3.45
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I think this is a trying moment in the history of Uganda. We are under test.  This Parliament is under test to prove that we can manage the transition. Therefore, it is very important that really we put Uganda above an individual or above the jobs that some of us hold.  We have to make a sacrifice, and therefore we have to tell the country the truth of the matter.  

Mr Speaker, I am seeking your clarification. I would like you to clarify to me and maybe even to others whether it is competent for us to debate hon. Bitangaro’s motion when it is not relevant to what hon. Dr Okulo Epak was seeking in his motion.  

I think technically I would like you to clarify and let it be on record of this Parliament that it is proper for us to debate the amendment to the motion which is not relevant to the substantive motion.  I want you technically to go on record to clarify on that.  

Secondly, I had thought that yesterday Dr Okulo Epak’s motion was to give us a way out of the entanglement, and a way out was to deal with resolution two. Now that the motion is before us, Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance.  

I would rather suggest that we dispose off Dr Okulo Epak’s motion first then we can move on either way. Right now we are debating an amendment which is not relevant to the substantive motion before us. So, I am pleading with you, Mr Speaker, that let us first dispose off Dr Okulo Epak’s motion either way and then we move on.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday the motion had two resolutions. Honourable members said if it has two resolutions and we pronounce ourselves on the motion, we shall have pronounced ourselves that Electoral Commission holds a referendum. That was the substance of resolution number one. Hon Okulo Epak said, “No, let us only remain with one so that we pronounce ourselves on the motion. What we shall only have done is to rescind.”  

Now my understanding assuming - I am not saying this is what is going to happen - assuming you accept the amendment by hon. Bitangaro, which in my view actually substitutes –(Interjections)- well, that is my understanding.  If you accept his resolution, it does not mean that we shall immediately request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum; it does not mean that.  For us to entertain a motion to request the Electoral Commission, this will only come after we have agreed that we rescind.  This is what is going to happen. Therefore, as far as I am concerned, if this succeeds resolution number two will not be there.  

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, that is why I am saying - (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, please.  My understanding is that this is wider; it is deleting resolution number two. It also mentions that we shall reconsider this matter during this Session.  Rule 53(3) is meant to enable you to deal with the matter during the same Session.  If you do not want to deal with the matter during the same session, you need not come here for a rescission.  So, the rescission is meant to enable you to reconsider the same matter during the same Session. That is all.  

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, that is why I am wondering why we are dealing with that issue within Dr Okulo Epak’s motion. Maybe now we should now plead with Dr Okulo Epak to withdraw his motion. I think that would be the best way.  Let Dr Okulo Epak withdraw his motion, then we can move because right now we cannot move –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, if this motion is carried there will be no resolution too, it will have been blotted out. 

3.55
MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Mr Speaker, thank you for allowing me to speak at this late moment when there is anxiety to vote on this motion.  But I think the intention, just not the intention, but the good intention of Members who are concerned about this motion since yesterday is to ensure that whatever we do in this Parliament is done properly and according to the rules.  

So, Mr Speaker, if we look at the two resolutions, which are the substance of the motion introduced by the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hon. Mwesigye Adolf, yesterday. The first part of the resolution was dealing with rescission.  

I would like you, Mr Speaker, to look at it critically because you may have ignored what other honourable members have said. You are looking at the good intention of what should be in the motion rather than what is rhyming with the motion.  

In other words, as somebody said yesterday, when you go to the bank they look at both the amount of money you have written in figures and the words you have put.  If you are withdrawing Ugshs 10,000, you should also put in figures 10,000 and in words ten thousand.  If the two do not rhyme, your intentions are in conflict. 

In this case, Mr Speaker, bear with me, we would rather do things properly and arrive together than do things wrongly and arrive at a situation of conflict.  Resolution number one is up here. Resolution number two, which hon. Okulo Epak wanted to amend is down. He wanted a deletion.  

Now, Mr Speaker, if you substitute –(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you, my colleague.  I am really at pains to stop a senior legislator like hon. Omara Atubo, but I have no alternative but to say this. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Omara Atubo is saying that we should do things properly.  That insinuates that the decision of the Speaker- that whatever we are doing was –(Interjections)– yes, the Speaker ruled that the notice was properly put before him, and when he made that ruling 50 members did not stand up to challenge as per our Rules of Procedure.  

So, Mr Speaker, I do not want our record to reflect that we are doing things wrongly.  We are doing things properly. So is he in order to insinuate and actually challenge you as an individual without raising the number 50?

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, in life you should not be scared of that because not everybody will be happy with what you do; and that should not stop you to do what you think is right simply because somebody says you are doing it wrongly. 

 But I want to repeat for purposes of record again; maybe I take 10 minutes to say so. In my view if his motion carries as far as I am concerned resolution two will not be in existence. Whatever extract we shall make of the resolution shall not carry because if this resolution two exists and we pronounce ourselves on the motion, if it continues to be there, it would mean that immediately we shall send the resolution to the Electoral Commission to carry out a referendum.  But this will not be the case because once we pronounce ourselves on this and it is the basis of our deciding on the motion, it will only be that the door is open for us to reconsider something, which failed on 21 April 2005; that is all.  

By carrying it, we shall have to pronounce ourselves again on whether we rescind.  If we do not rescind that will be the end and the matter can only come up in the second session of our Parliament, which will start in June.  That is exactly what is going to happen.  I think once this is done, hon. Okulo Epak’s motion will have succeeded and other improvements would have been made on the motion.  

MR ATUBO: Mr Speaker, what I am saying is this. If hon. Bitangaro’s amendment goes through, we are going to have two resolutions –(Interjection)– why not, it is a substitution.

THE SPEAKER: The intention of resolution number two was to deal with the issue of requesting the Electoral Commission in the same motion, but we shall not do it.

MR ATUBO: The amendment of hon. Okulo Epak was very clear, Mr Speaker, it was to delete.  The one of hon. Bitangaro rejects the deletion and substitutes it with another motion. The effect for it is actually to have two resolutions after we have passed.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me read this motion. I have a copy here. “That the conclusion reached by this Parliament on 21 April 2005 in regard to the motion under Article 71(a) of the Constitution seeking a resolution to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the purpose of changing the political system be rescinded.”  

That means we shall find out the details of what we did on 21 April 2005. We rescind to allow this august House to reconsider the said motion during the current Session. It does not mean we may consider it today. We may consider it tomorrow, that is only to allow us to bring back the motion so that we are not out of order in contravention with Rule 53(3). That is all.  

4.05
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, after your very articulate guidance, and having listened to very good explosive and detailed debates by members, I beg to move that you put the question.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question on the debate in respect of the proposed amendment by hon. Bitangaro.
  
(The Members voted by a show of hands).

THE SPEAKER: I want to inform you that the ministers are not my tellers. Honourable Minister, please, you are not my teller.  

Honourable members, the position is as follows: Those abstaining - three; against - 37; for – 180. (Applause)  
(Question agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, now we are going to the substance.
         
(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: Abstaining - two; against - 39; for – 194. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is that the motion, which was originally presented by hon. Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs is accordingly amended and in amending it, on the second page of the motion, you delete the reference to resolution one and resolution two, and substitute it with what I have read here or what he read and that is the motion. (Applause)

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The Floor is with him. I will come to you later, please.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I was trying to catch your eye before you went to voting. I said, “procedural concern”, that in counting, given a method we have been using, that is generic hands up. I was going to propose that you use your discretion of powers that we adopt the system we passed recently by roll call and tally for the accuracy and also it will show the level of commitment.  

Mr Speaker, I know it may not apply to this particular motion, but I am simply appealing that you use your discretional powers that we use that procedure for counting for accuracy, accountability and transparency.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the procedure which hon. Awori Aggrey has said that we should use is restricted to constitutional amendments. Therefore, I do not intend to adopt it for this matter, which is not a constitutional amendment, but enforcing a constitutional provision.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker - I beg for protection from the –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Order, please. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I would imagine now we are debating on the motion to rescind.

THE SPEAKER: We are going to start.

MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If you could again clarify to me. My understanding is that the motion that has passed was to amend Dr Okulo Epak’s motion, resolution 2.  Mr Speaker, did I hear correctly that resolution 1 and 2 now have become amended to one?

THE SPEAKER: I have said you substitute what you had seen on the second page with what is here.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, how does it happen?  It can never happen unless, Mr Speaker, you are applying a rule of discretion.  Until I am informed that you have used your discretion and your powers in the rules to state so, it does not happen that way that a rule is subsumed –(Interjection)- please, I am seeking clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, who is the owner of the motion, do you have any problem with what I have said?

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesigye): Mr Speaker, the amendment to hon. Okulo Epak’s motion has been properly passed by this House. I personally have no problem with the motion now as amended. (Applause). It is my prayer, Sir, that you allow me to justify my motion as amended.

THE SPEAKER: Do you still have resolution 1?

MR MWESIGYE: No, Sir, resolution 1 and 2 have been replaced with the amendment, which has been moved by hon. Bitangaro.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, do I still have the Floor because I had not finished?

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, you started with a clarification and I gave my clarification. You seem not to agree with my clarification.  You are free to stand with your clarification.

MRS MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, what I am seeking clarification on is for you to advise me that this is what has happened and for the record.

THE SPEAKER: This is what I have said, my dear friend.

MRS MUSUMBA: But it cannot be the Minister to say so.  Mr Speaker, the Presiding officer is you and not the Minister, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Salaamu Musumba, I direct the Hansard to produce for you the record of what I said. Honourable members although in our rules we have procedure, order and so forth, please invoke those rules when you have a point of procedure to raise. Do not just use it so that you halt the proceedings of the House.  

As you have seen, honourable members, today we started with amendment and the amendment has gone through the process.  You debated the amendment, we voted on the amendment and the original motion has been amended.  Now it is the time to get the gist of the amendment, the case for rescinding.  Would you proceed?

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Mwesigye Adolf): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I wish to represent the case for the motion for rescission of the conclusion of this House on the motion for a resolution of Parliament to change the political system as amended by this honourable House.  

Mr Speaker, honourable members will recall that on Thursday, 21 April 2005, I did move a motion for a resolution of Parliament under Article 74(1) of the Constitution to request the holding of a referendum by the Electoral Commission for the purpose of changing the political system. 

This motion, sir, was duly seconded and debated when the question was put for the resolution. 142 Members of Parliament voted for, 17 against and one member abstained. 

The effect of the above pattern of voting, Sir, was that the motion was not passed because the standard of voting required under Article 74(1)(a) is more than half of all Members of Parliament who must support that motion for it to succeed.  

Mr Speaker, this Parliament fell short of this standard by only six votes.  The conclusion reached by Parliament then therefore was that Parliament did not pass a resolution to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum to change the political system.  

Mr Speaker, the Members of Parliament who supported the motion and those that support the motion but were not available to vote on that day are of the view that the change of the political system is a constitutional process that belongs to the people and it should therefore be subject to the direct popular approval of the people. 

 It is against this firm background, Sir, that I moved this motion as amended for Parliament to rescind its conclusion of 21 April 2005, which had the effect of not resolving to request the holding of the referendum.  

Mr Speaker, I do recognise that there is an alternative method of changing the political system other than by referendum.  Under that method in Article 74(2), Parliament can change the political system upon a petition to it by District Councils.  

I would like to observe, however, Sir, that this country in the circumstances cannot afford that method.  The system which we seek to change was adopted by the people in a referendum in the year 2000.  

As I pointed out in my motion, which this motion seeks to review, 92 per cent of the people of Uganda who turned out for the referendum on 29 June 2000 voted for the Movement.  

The findings of the Constitutional Review Committee (CRC) Report, which was submitted to Government in December 2003, continued to demonstrate that over 70 per cent of Ugandans continue to support the retention of the Movement system. 

It is clear, therefore, that the Movement political system is owned by the people and should therefore be changed by the people in the referendum.  

The option under Article 74(2) of the Constitution, sir, therefore, in my view, is not the most appropriate method to choose in the circumstances.  

I would like to add that Government has indicated to the population that the people will participate in the change of the political system.  This is one of the most compelling reasons why this Parliament should rescind its earlier conclusion and reconsider the motion to enable the people of Uganda to perform their rightful duty of changing the system, which they have been looking forward to for a long time. Mr Speaker, this motion, if adopted, will lift the political veil between Parliament and the people and reunite the institution of Parliament with the people Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to commend this motion for rescission to this Parliament. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable members of the House. My colleague, hon. Adolf Mwesige, has been quite eloquent in making the case for the motion. I will therefore be very brief in support of this motion. 

Mr Speaker, the country has made tremendous progress in forging a consensus on the issue of the political system that we should go to in future.  Honourable members will recall that at the time of making the Constitution in 1995, colleagues who believed in multi-partism cried out very loudly when we adopted the Movement Political System. Even when we went to the referendum, as hon. Mwesige Adolf has said, still there were cries by those who believe in multi-partism that we should move to multipartism. Now, what is the progress that we have made? 

Today, the leadership of the Movement through the National Conference, the leadership of those who support multi-partism have come to a confluence.  We have decided that we should recommend to our people that political space be open. But we run the danger of losing this progress, and that is why I support this motion. 

On Thursday the 21st of this month, we had business here and the conclusion we reached was to imply that we did not need to ask the people to participate in the final decision. In my view, Mr Speaker, this has the risk of eroding the progress we have made. Let us look at the mental set, let us look at the evidence we have, what the people are thinking currently. It is only in that way that we can decide whether we should decide ourselves here or involve the people so that we move together.

Beginning with the Odoki Commission through to the referendum, the Ssempebwa Commission, the National Conference of 2003, the message is very clear that the population is still hesitant about moving to multi-partism. It is very clear, but we the leaders think for strategic reason that it is good for the country if we open up political space. Let us go to the people and sit with them, explain to them why we now think we should change the system. Our people are rational, Mr Speaker, they will move with us and in that way the stability of this country will be assured and we will have done a historical job for our country. So, Mr Speaker, I support the motion. (Applause)

4.30
MR NORBERT MAO (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The same chair, which is occupied by you, was once occupied by other distinguished people; God rest their souls in peace - (Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I am referring to the cherished memory of the late Francis Ayume and the late James Wapakabulo. Mr Speaker, I also refer to the memory of the late Betty Okwir. 

The reason why I am referring to the cherished memories of those who used to guide us is because in this House rules matter, and anybody who tries to behave as if they do not matter –(Interjections)- Mr Speaker, I am not trying to insinuate anything as Members may want to infer. What I am only saying is we had some court cases and we had the court made pronouncements. That means what we do here is not beyond review; we must not act as if we are a law unto ourselves. That is why I was invoking the memory, in particular, of the late Francis Ayume, who went to the court and was made a laughing stock under cross-examination for running this House as if there were no rules.  Mr Speaker, then the hon. Minister, Sam Bitangaro, came and said rules are just a handmaiden. 

Mr Speaker, if you are playing football, is it just a handmaiden that there are lines, which if you cross then you are outside the playing field? In anything, whether politics, even marriage, there are rules; you cannot say the rules are just a handmaiden. Mr Speaker, rules do matter, and I want this House to convince itself that anybody who says rules do not matter is an enemy of democracy and peace. 

Mr Speaker, all over the media it is as if this Parliament is under a Presidential directive -(Interjections)- Yes. The President has been quoted saying there must be referendum, that Parliament must pass that resolution. Mr Speaker, I want to protest before you because you are the chief custodian of our privilege; you are the chief custodian of our independence as a legislature of this country.  Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, rules will have to be followed, but it does not mean that your misunderstanding of a rule means the rule is not being followed –(Applause)- because you are not the – I am not talking to you, I am talking to anybody who thinks that he is a point of reference; nobody is a point of reference. So, your understanding does not mean we have to follow it.  

On the question of voting here and making decisions, if you think you do not have to vote, you abstain. Therefore if I need 148 people to pass a motion and 148 Members abstain, the motion will be lost. So you are free to decide as you wish, and I am here to protect you should you decide to abstain, should you decide to vote contrary to the wishes of others.

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, my basic point is that rules matter and they are not just handmaidens.  

Secondly, I was saying that I was protesting what I have been reading in the media to make us appear as if we are not independent. Those were my basic points.

THE SPEAKER: I agree with you, and I have said do not act because somebody is ordering you to do this and the other. You are free. If you think you can talk, why don’t you think I can talk the way you are talking? So, you are free to disagree with what you see in the papers and reflect your position by refusing to be taken like that, and I will protect you.

MR MAO: Thank you for promising to protect this House and me. Mr Speaker, I have listened to the justifications on the motion –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, many people talk about rules being mandatory for our procedures, but in their conduct they act differently. It is very unfortunate and I am not going to be bothered by points of order because I am not so sensitive; some of these things we ignore and we proceed.

MR MAO: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  We have listened to the justifications –(Interruption)

MRS MUNYIRA WABWIRE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether it is in order for a Member in the House to keep propelling another Member to continue to disregard what the Speaker is saying when the other Member is talking? Is it really in order for hon. Musumba –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I hope she is following the Rules of Procedure.  (Laughter)

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, let me respond to the mover and seconder of the motion. Mr Speaker, we have listened to the justifications given. They are actually not for a motion of rescission; they seem to be rather justifications for the request for a referendum.

Mr Speaker, yesterday we were told what a rescission is –(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, there is some kind of disharmony behind me, which may require your intervention; somebody is saying it is yellow fever. (Laughter).  Well, Mr Speaker, let me proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you caution him or her not to do that?

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, yesterday we were told what a rescission is. It has the effect of relieving people of any obligation. In fact, if you are rescinding a decision, you must attach the decision you are rescinding because a resolution or whatever you are rescinding must have an effect of creating an obligation. What did we do that we must now not continue doing? Actually, let me go to some other authorities concerning rescission.  

Mr Speaker, permit me to read from Erskine May, I quote, “Rescission is opposed to the spirit of the existing rule that no question shall be offered, which is substantially the same as one on which judgment has been expressed during the current session. The power of rescission has only been exercised in the case of a resolution resulting from a substantive Motion and even then, sparingly.  It cannot be exercised merely to override a vote of the House such as a negative vote. Proposing a negatived question a second time for the decision of the House would be, as stated earlier, contrary to the established practice of Parliament.”  

Mr Speaker, I quote further, page 370, Erskine May, Parliamentary Practice, 22nd Edition published in 1997. “The reason why motions for open rescission are so rare and the Rules of Procedure carefully guard against the indirect rescission of votes is that both Houses instinctively realize that Parliamentary Government requires the majority to abide by a decision regularly come to, however unexpected, and that it is unfair to resort to methods whether direct or indirect to reverse such a decision. The practice resulting from this feeling is essentially a safeguard for the rights of the minority and a contrary practice is not normally resorted to. Unless in the circumstances of a particular case, those rights are in no way threatened.”  

Mr Speaker, we are not the oldest Parliament. In fact, the rights of the minority are under threat here because it has become now a brute force of numbers. I heard the National Political Commissar speak on WBS television. He was assuring the listeners that, “You wait and see, we are now enough; the numbers are now there.” (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, let us take the case of an election.   Assuming I lose an election today, would I be justified to go to the Electoral Commission to say, “Now my people are ready to vote, call the election again.”  That would not be regular. 

Mr Speaker, as I wind up, we have dealt with many issues, but let us not resort to the brute force of numbers. It is possible for you to say, “Whatever you do, whatever you say, we shall have our way”, but we do believe sincerely that ultimately there is higher authority even beyond the courts that watches over our actions. During the trial of Jesus Christ, Pilate knew what needed to be done; you are in that position. Mr Speaker, do not wash your hands; you must take a stand on these matters when rules are being violated because the majority, which is here, is now behaving like the mob that appeared before Pilate saying, “No matter what happens, let his blood be on our heads.”  

Mr Speaker, they are behaving as if they are saying, “Whatever we do, let his blood be on our heads and on the heads of our children”. This is the advice so that we can crucify the Constitution; crucify democracy.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to end by referring to another authority on Parliamentary democracy –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you had a lot, but as you see, so many people are interested. The time has been five minutes, but you have gone beyond, I would rather you conclude please.

MR MAO: Let me conclude, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, Harold Lasky in his book, “Parliamentary Government in England” wrote: “Men who are to live together peacefully must be able to argue together peacefully –(Interjections)- okay, “Men (and women) who are to live together peacefully must be able to argue together peacefully. They must not learn to suppress criticism of things as they are, rather they must be willing, if pressed upon a significant minority, if pressed to invite its own examination. They must refrain from pressing upon a significant minority principles of legislation by which the later is outraged. Without this tolerance, there is no prospect in the society of compromise, and every subject of division then becomes a high road to disruption.” 

Mr Speaker, if we are going to deal with the bigger issues, which are to come, we must be able to listen to one another peacefully and respond to the arguments. I think the motion to rescind has not been defended successfully, and the reasons that have been given are unacceptable. The motion has only been brought to override a negative vote of the House, and therefore I oppose it with my entire soul.

4.43
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members. Apart from a few members of this House, who are Ex-officio and therefore here by appointment to Cabinet, all of us are here because we had majorities in our constituencies. It is very surprising that people who are here because we got majorities can at the same time seem to despise the majority. To me, it is contrary to reason, so I would like to point out that majorities are things that make democracies move. Democracy is the government by majority but a government, which does not ignore the minority. And in the tradition of this House in which I have been from 1987 and only interrupted in 1996, the tradition of listening to everybody has been established.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, it is not the loudness of the voice, it is not the stampeding of Members in the corridors; it is what we do to add to the foundation of our country. Are we doing something that builds democracy here? The answer is yes; and I would like to disagree with hon. Mao, in spite of the quantity of quotation that he has sent to our ears, that the motion has been justified. 

In my opinion, it has been justified because of two things: the rules have been followed; the rules that applied last week got the House to make a decision. A decision was made, 17 people celebrated when 142 were many more than they were, just because the rules applied. The same rules allow the 142 and more to come here and appeal to the House.  It is not Cabinet that has sat on its own and ignored the decision of the House. It is the Members of this Parliament who felt 142 could have been 148, and the decision would have been different, and who are saying that this same House with reasons that are being given, can make a decision again within the rules.

Lastly, I want to point out that people say that the courts have challenged decisions that have been made hear, and hon. Mao went into the graves to mention some of our departed colleagues. The pillars that make democracy are this House. This House is important; we are very few; we are only 304, now 303 because one constituency is not filled, but we make decisions that affect everybody in the country. So it is important that we are here. But the courts also have their role, and when they have challenged what we have decided here they have not done anything wrong. The fact that we have responded to what they have done, this has been within the building of a stable system. And when we have gone to the population, it is because we have gone to the population knowing it is the base of democracy. There is no democracy that does not build itself on the people.  

Therefore my conclusion, Mr Speaker, is that hon. Aggrey Awori, who depends on a vote, and who went to get a vote for presidency and got only very few, and now hopes that he can get more, and we were being watched, thanks to the television and the radio, let us support the majority. Let us support the belief that the biggest pillar that will build democracy is the people, and they are where you are going.  I thank you.

4.49
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion to rescind the conclusion made on 21st April 2005, last Thursday.  

Mr Speaker, I am going to give the following reasons why I feel we must rescind our conclusion. I would like to inform the House, the nation and the whole world that when we voted on 21st April 2005, we won by majority. That means we had more people supporting the motion except that we required more than half, which is written in the Rules of Procedure. But now the question is, what happened to the other Members? 

Mr Speaker, I was here when we were voting. I am sorry to say, Mr Speaker, but when the voting started, you did not ring the bell, so some Members were in the canteen, and some members came when the votes were about to be counted. When they were coming, even those people who wanted to vote were not counted. So, it means that at a particular time our numbers were there except that we did not come in time to vote; that is one thing. So, that is why we feel that today if we rescind the conclusion we shall get the number.

Mr Speaker, I want also to inform you that we are human beings. By virtue of our human nature we are bound to commit mistakes and to make wrong decisions. That is why we have that provision in our Rules of Procedure so that if you have made a wrong decision you have the opportunity to change. That is why we have come here, Mr Speaker, to rescind so that whatever mistake has been made can be corrected.  So, Mr Speaker, I thank you very much, I support the motion. 

4.52
MR LOUIS OPANGE (Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion as amended by hon. Bitangaro. Mr Speaker, you are aware that the system of governing this country depends on the ownership of the stakeholders.  That is why I support to rescind the earlier objective we took according to the motion.  

Mr Speaker, it is overwhelmingly indicated in Ssempebwa’s Report that 92 percent of the people of Uganda supported the change of the system through the referendum. Even when the White Paper was brought to this House most of the Members of Parliament indicated that their constituents supported the change of the system basing on the referendum. That is why, Mr Speaker, I support the rescission of the earlier decision.  

Mr Speaker, we are all aware that the lawyers give legal opinion. As a Member of Parliament, I represent the people of Pallisa; I give a social opinion. Mr Speaker, the people I represent are saying, how can the 17 Members of Parliament take advantage of winning a motion in the House out of the 304 whereas the honourable members of this House, basing on the debates of the White Paper, indicated that the people of Uganda wanted to change the system through a referendum?  

Mr Speaker, it is also on the basis of this that the stability of this country is adopted. Mr Speaker, we are aware of the crisis of 1967 when a pigeonhole Constitution was put in this House, for which we are still paying up to date. But through the referendum, we are trying to correct those mistakes, which happened in the pigeonhole Constitution. That is why I support the motion of rescinding the earlier decision of this House.  

Mr Speaker, I urge the Members of Parliament of this House that we should also adopt the policy of going by the wishes of the people; anything short of that means betraying the people of Uganda who gave us the mandate to talk for them in this august House. Mr Speaker, I urge all the honourable colleagues to support this motion to rescind the earlier decision of this House. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.56
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu county, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity. I want to oppose the motion for rescission moved by hon. Adolf Mwesige. 

Mr Speaker, I have made it abundantly clear on the Floor of this House that I am a paralegal, and I believe on Thursday last week we did not make any decision, we only failed to make a decision. We did not make any decision because the requirement of numbers at that time was not realized; we were just attempting to make a decision, which we did not succeed to do. So ordinarily I would suggest, in my paralegal sense, that the most appropriate thing to do would have not even been to rescind because we did not make any decision. It would have been to look for other attempts to make the decision other than rescinding what we just failed to make.

Having noted that, I am one of those Ugandans who will never swallow my vomit whatever the circumstance. Once I have made a decision, period. And I will always be clear even when I am wrong because the standard of measurement would be clarity and not wrongness or rightness. 

I have been listening to the Minister very carefully. You know, we are now praising Rule 53(3) about rescission; it has now become the magic rule in Parliament to overturn any decision that this House takes using numbers. But do not forget that this House rejected my motion on the Shs 5 million.  I can use the same rescinding motion to bring it back to this Parliament. (Laughter). For those who got the Shs 5 million from Mossa Courts, I can bring the motion back.

Mr Speaker, I believe in ideas and I am well read; and I am one of those who will raise an amendment during the Constitutional Amendment Bill that the academic qualification for Members of Parliament should be raised to at least one degree because I seem to see that there are some people who only specialize in raising their hands in this House. (Laughter) That is why I abstained.  

I have heard the legal arguments of hon. Mwesige Adolf on why we should rescind the decision we made on Thursday last week. These are my counter defences: We want to go and ask people to make a decision on whether to go multi party or not. What about the parties, which have been registered by the Registrar of Parties?  What will you do to them in case the people say they do not want political parties?  Can anyone give me information?

MR JOHNSON MALINGA: Mr Speaker –(Interjection)- I pray for your protection from hon. Amongi. Otherwise, the information I would like to give to my colleague is that the Constitution saved the parties that were in existence under the Movement rule. If the people of Uganda say we stay in the Movement, the parties will stay and operate according to the provisions of the Constitution.  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, I do not think hon. Malinga has even attempted to give the answer to my question. I am saying, what are we going to achieve by asking the people whether to change political systems or not? Political parties exist; I do not think if people say, “We want to remain under the Movement system” then tomorrow you send Police with tear gas to close FDC offices. That one sounds like a dream. We are not going to people just for record purposes; we are not going to the people to request them to change the political system; we are going to the people to seek their ideas whether they want to change the political system or not. They might refuse your request because the impression you are creating now –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Otto, whereas the Rules of Procedure of Parliament have to be respected, and I will draw you to Rule 53(2), but that is not the point. The point is that if we have to respect the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, we have to respect the bigger law, which is the Constitution. You can proceed.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, as I conclude I want to inform you, first of all, I did not even understand what you have said, and in what context. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Then let me read this to you and to everybody else. “It is out of order to use offensive, abusive, insulting, blasphemous or unbecoming words or to impute improper motives to any Member or to make personal allusions”.    

A lot has been said and I am saying that in future you should desist. But then if you have to respect our Rules of Procedure, the Constitution itself talks about Article 74, so you cannot wish it away. That is the point I was trying to make to you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, I still want to lobby fellow MPs to reject the motion –(Interruption)

MS DORA BYAMUKAMA: I thank you, hon. Otto, for giving way, and I would like to give some further clarification on the issue, which you raised, because it is a valid issue. Your question is, what will happen to the parties, which are currently operating if you want to change the political system and the people say, no? 

Mr Speaker, when you look at Article 72 of the Constitution, it is clear that the right to form political parties is guaranteed. When you move on to Article 72(3), it says, “Parliament shall by law regulate the financing and functioning of political organizations”. 

As you know honourable members, we did pass the law called, the Political Parties and Organization Act.  Under Article 73, we did also have the Political Parties and Organizations Act put in place.  Currently what we are discussing is this change.  How do we effect change of political system?  Should we do it by referendum? If we do it by referendum, there are three ways: should we do it with District Councils? I think that is the question at hand and therefore, I would like to advise my learned brother that political parties may continue functioning, but within the law that this Parliament has passed. It does not mean that if we do not effect change of political system, then the parties will have to wind up. I thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Lastly as I conclude, Mr Speaker, I am urging MPs to reject the motion raised by hon. Adolf Mwesige. For us to start going out in June and addressing rallies, to disturb our peasants who are digging that they should come and vote for what is already there, looks a very costly exercise.  This activity can just be done in Parliament. We can operationalise Article 74 and we have all the political parties we need and you go and inform the people. If any way you are leaders, we are to lead our people; we are not to follow them. So you go back and tell them, “Parliament has now opened political space”. That is what leadership is all about.  

If you refuse my idea to reject the motion of hon. Adolf Mwesige, this is my last fallback position: In the Omnibus Bill, hon. Janat Mukwaya gave a very brilliant decision, which I would want this House to consider as a second thought other than just referendum; that we go to request the people to allow us amend Article 74. 

So the permission we shall be seeking from the people is whether we should amend Article 74 or not. When the people give us the go-ahead, then we shall come here in Parliament and do the necessary amendments because Article 74 is entrenched. But if you want to go and ask people whether you want multi-parties or not, I think we are causing unnecessary problems and some of us are not ready to live with resolutions that have passed.

Mr Speaker, during the referendum of 2002, I was beaten close to death, because I saw what you are seeing now; that we are wasting time in that referendum. Four years down the road, you have realized that the referendum was a waste of time.  Why didn’t you listen to me at that time when I was just a student at the University? Some of those who beat me are even in this House -(Laughter)- but I have forgiven all of them. But I urge you to reject the minister’s motion. Thank you so much.

5.07
MRS WINFRED MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the motion moved by hon. Adolf Mwesige on two main points. One, this motion was not lost; it just did not pass. It is clear that when something does not pass, it does not meet the requirements or the conditions set by the rules. That is why the 17 people could overturn what the majority desired to have in place. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, it will be careless of us to know that there is an exception provision in our rules and we do not use it and we go ahead dwell on an issue that did not just pass. Not passing means that it did not meet some of the requirements. It is clear that it was the numbers, but there were reasons behind the numbers not being enough. Some could be attributed to the fact that the notification was not adequate. It could be that some Members had problems and could not come or they were busy with other parliamentary work. Anything else could have led to the inadequacy in numbers. Therefore, if there is an exit, we should, as diligent Members of Parliament, try to take advantage of it and move forward. That is the reason why I think we should reconsider this issue and move forward.

Mr Speaker, allow me to take you back to Page 158 of the Constitution, Article 257, on the interpretations. In this Article it is very clear that the year of Parliament extends for 12 months, that is, the session. Mr Speaker, and honourable members, people who have been advocating for multiparty system are the very same people, surprisingly, who would like to suffocate this process that would save time. You should realise that the year is ending on 2nd July 2005; we only have approximately two months left. 

Article 78 is clear; it says that all the resolutions and petitions should be in the fourth year of Parliament. Therefore, for anybody to create a constitutional crisis would really not be responsible. With two months left, we have not got any petitions, at least from the district councils. 

If you want to rely on the option of using district councils, honourable members, you should also be mindful that petitions cannot be solicited for. If you ever did that, that would be corruption of the highest order. People should put in their petitions as and when they think they need to. 

So, if it is only two months remaining, and my district has not sent in any petition, and here I am saying that the district’s petition; let us not use the Parliament, a Parliament, which we can control and we dwell on using Local Councils and districts where we have no control at all! The local governments are independent, how then do you expect the petitions to come in time and then we prepare for a transition or a change?  

Honourable members, for people who really want to suffocate this motion, it is clear that they are not interested that we go into multiparty system.  What is ironical is that they are the very people who are heading some parties, and who are working very hard. Honourable members, let us be true to ourselves. What do we want? What does our country want? What do our constituents want? 

Since it is already imperative that we have to go into a multiparty system, let us calm down and support this motion because we have control over ourselves as Members of Parliament, and when we have gone through this, then we can go ahead and make sure that the referendum will take place. Mr Speaker, this is the only reason that we can use to make sure that this thing takes place in the little time that we are left with so that we do not abrogate the Article, which says that in the fourth year of Parliament we should have this done. 

It is against these reasons, Mr Speaker, honourable members, that I support hon. Adolf Mwesige’s motion, and I would like to request all Members present to support it if we are interested in our country, if we are interested in the people we lead, if we are interested in the democracy that has been a song in this House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  (Applause)

5.13
MR ABDU KATUNTU (Bugweri County, Iganga): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I think I have been in this Parliament for close to four and half years now.  The most useful contribution to this House is what I am going to make today. We were voted in here as Members of Parliament to come and debate, and whoever has a better idea, that idea should prevail.  

Mr Speaker, on the 21st of April 2005 we could not gather enough numbers to make a decision. If the majority of Members of Parliament at that time had decided that “no referendum”, we would have made a negative decision. If the majority had decided that we have a referendum, we would have made a positive decision. What decision did we make, which we now seek to rescind? 

I know they are shouting, they are jeering; Mr Speaker, this idea eventually will go to a place where people will listen to the arguments, and this one, I can assure you, is not ending at merely voting. You cannot vote against a correct idea, you cannot vote against a right thing, you cannot. So, what we are doing now is to close our eyes and ears to the correct thing and we say, we vote. The issue is not voting, honourable colleagues; the issue is; is what we are doing correct in law? If it is not correct in law, is it correct morally? 

Mr Speaker, you can see for yourself, they are not listening. He is supposed to be a professor of – he is shouting –(Laughter)- you see, this is the problem. If we do not listen to each other, we shall go to a place where we will be listened to. 

Mr Speaker, the reasons envisaged under Rule 53(3) are not because we lost; losing is normal. If you lose, you cannot say, “I cannot lose.” This is the sickness of “we must win”. It reminds me of my days in Northcote Hall, “We either win or they lose”.  This House -(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. What happened on 21st April 2005 is gone. The conclusion made said the motion should not pass. Now this Parliament has erased it, it is not there; so we are discussing a new motion.  Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I am lucky to have gone to Law School at a time when the NRM Government had revived the education sector, that is why I am the lawyer I am today. I know my brother, Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi could have gone to Law School at the time of Idi Amin –(Laughter)- and that could – the lawyer he is today. 

The point I am making, Mr Speaker, is one –(Interjection)- It was a joke, Maj. Gen. Muhwezi Jim –(Interruption)

MAJ. GEN. MUHWEZI: Mr Speaker, is hon. Katuntu in order to impute that I do not have the qualifications I have from the great university, Makerere University? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, the honourable member is informing you that it is the same school you went to that he went to. 

MR KATUNTU: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. But the point I was making is that the motion being debated now is to rescind the decision. So, the situation as of 21 April 2005 is the one prevailing; this House has not made any decision at all, as of now. 

Mr Speaker, as I was saying, the issue about referendum - by the way, and as hon. Masiko says, it is us who are even so eager to have this political space opened up! The question now is, why are the people who have been saying, “parties are bad, we cannot open up” are now the ones too eager? This country cannot afford the luxury of spending over Shs 30 billion in a referendum on an issue, which has already been decided on and there is consensus on it.  

Mr Speaker, I was here and I listened throughout during the general debate on the White paper. And the people now saying we go and ask the people, all of them were the ones saying they consulted their people, and their people said we open term limits. All of them said it here and they said that the issue of opening up political space, the people have said that anyway let us open up; all of them said it here without any single voice dissenting.  The Hansard is there for everybody to see. So, at that time were they just making accountability for the other facilitation or they were lying to the House?  What has happened to the sense of shame? 

Mr Speaker, I oppose hon. Mwesige Adolf’s motion, and I wish to warn that it will not be the first time in this House that I make this caution. I have done it before and time has always proved me right; and this one, you are running in a legal ditch.  The law is not on your side, the facts are not on your side, we are just here to vote. We have become voting machines that somebody can leave even school to come here and just vote. 

Mr Speaker, this should be a respected Parliament, a place where we should be debating ideas. The Christians say that they have ears but they do not listen; they have eyes but they do not see. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.23
MR WILSON MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion as moved by hon. Mwesige Adolf. Mr Speaker, there is merit in having a referendum about the change of a political system. Those who are saying that the matter has been decided, I think are looking at the superficial side of the question. It may appear that the matter has been decided, everybody is agreed, we are all agreed and so on and so forth.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, I thought the motion on the Floor is to rescind, not to reconsider. What most Members who are debating now are doing is to give us reasons for reconsideration. Are they in order?

THE SPEAKER: I think this will be the hundredth time I have to say this. The motion we are dealing with is whether we rescind so that we can move to reconsider. But I think the reason why they are doing so is that, the justification for the motion to rescind was based on the need to hold a referendum. But the question we are dealing with here is, is there a good cause for rescinding so that we can go to the other?

MR MURULI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that guidance. Yes, we are here to debate that motion of rescinding, and I quite agree that we should actually rescind so that we can get that opportunity to justify to some doubting Thomases why we should have a referendum. 

There are very important reasons why we should go the way of a referendum because of the practical findings, which are here with us. One practical finding was by Odoki report, the other one was by Sempebwa report and then the National Executive Committee (NEC) and the Conference who said the majority of the people still want the Movement. Therefore, if we take our decision here ourselves without getting the opportunity of going down to explain that we go with everybody, then it will be a big mistake and in fact, we may find ourselves going into the ditch, which hon. Katuntu has been warning us about. That is a very strong reason. 

But also we are not forgetting really the past history we have gone through under party rule. All that needs proper and careful explanation, and I think this period, which will be given to us, will be essential to make sure that we go along with everybody in line with Article 1 of the Constitution. 

So, because of that, Mr Speaker, I would urge honourable members not to ignore this, not to wish to move so abruptly, but let us be practical, let us be cool-headed and accept the rescinding of our earlier decision so that we can really go down to the country under a referendum and change the political system, and make sure that at least the majority or 90 per cent of the country is with us and we avoid the snakes, we follow the ladders, we avoid falling in the ditch. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.28
DR JONNY RICHARD BULAMU (Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, there is a saying in Chinese that, “Who ties the knot must untie it.” It was inestimably here agreed by both Movementists and non-movementists that the whole population of our society was crucial in deciding which way we move, which system with power. Hence, it would be very cheating to avoid them now because we are seeing it does not fall our way for some of us.

Two, the third syllogism of understanding of a mental stable person is in identification, and identification equally comes in when you talk about numbers. If a person in school beat you by two marks, you would be clever and you would be stupid.  In the Constitution, there are numbers well stipulated as a weapon of judging specific yards of democracy. When you say that Movement is irrelevant because they are using numbers, it defeats the argument. We are here because of numbers!  (Applause)

Worse still, very many of us want to be identified by name, if John was called Richard instead of Alex, he would protest, just as some of us are protesting because you are not called UPC when you are UPC, or when you are not called Movement when you are Movement. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I want to remind the old ones like me and the young ones that this most prestigious stage, which is Parliament, must have specific norms of understanding the society that we want to be called. You are called honourables because there are others. You cannot be in a room and call yourself honourables, and those who call you honourables are the same important people who gave you the vote. And if you still have respect for them, better give them that respect by allowing their vote. I thank you, Mr Speaker.  (Applause)

5.32
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for this opportunity. I am also one of those who went to law school, but I went to law school after completing a degree in another matter altogether. When I took on the law and when I signed the roll of advocates, I took a pledge to make the law my master, and the law is truly my master. When I was voted by the people of Omoro to come to this Parliament, I made a solemn declaration under the principles embodied in this Constitution; I took an oath.  

Mr Speaker, each time I look at this oath, I close my eyes. I want to remind Members of the oath we took before we entered this House. We took two oaths: The first oath was the oath of allegiance and the words go as follows: “I swear in the Name of the Almighty God, that I will be faithful and bear true allegiance to the Republic of Uganda and that I will preserve, protect and defend the Constitution. So help me God.” The second oath that I took was the oath of a Member of Parliament and it reads: “I swear in the Name of the Almighty God, that I will give faithful service to this Parliament and support and uphold the Constitution of the Republic of God as by law established. So help me God.”  

Mr Speaker, I stand here with a double obligation of both being a lawyer whose master is the law, and by oath, a solemnly declaration I made before God. The Constitution is what we must defend. From the Constitution emanate bodies of law that govern every aspect of our lives in this society, and any law that is inconsistent with it cannot stand even for a second, whether it is an Act of Parliament, a provision passed by the local government or even our Rules of Procedure as Parliament; if they are inconsistent with the Constitution, they are invalid to the extent of inconsistency.

Mr Speaker, it brings me to the question of the matter we are examining now. The motion that has been proposed, does it threaten, violate any provisions of the laws that govern this country? I say no! (Applause) The motion that has been brought does not violate any law.  Why do I say so? The motion that has been brought is based on rules that have been found to be consistent with the Constitution. I have a double obligation to defend this Constitution, Mr Speaker, and that is why I am speaking now. 

The rules say, if you have made a conclusion of a matter, you can rescind it. The rules say you cannot reconsider that matter in the same session of Parliament unless you bring a substantive motion to rescind that decision. That is what this motion is about. It is up to us, as Parliament, to examine its validity, and I think that is what we should be doing. Is there any merit in rescinding the decision that we made? Is there any merit in reversing the conclusion that we made?

I love the statement of some judge who was talking about effects of revocations and rescission of decision.  He said that when you rescind, the effect is as if the space that decision occupied was empty. Now that is the effect of the rescission we are seeking. So, I find it perfectly in order, Mr Speaker, that Parliament must examine the merits of the motion that has been made and take a decision.  

There was at one time a judge, who after months of hearing a case, on the day of judgment he said the following: “The plaintiff, who is the main complainant in the court, is right.” Then he turned and looked at the defendant and said, “But the defendant is also right.” Then the man who was in court shouted and said, “But judge, how can they both be right?” Then the judge said, “You are also right.” (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, a decision to review a decision is not a decision that you just take, it is a matter you take judiciously; even in courts of law they are allowed to review their decisions. Everybody who makes a decision has an opportunity to look at it again. As Parliament, we have an opportunity to look at it again.  (Applause) I am suggesting that let us go - for purposes of being on the record, I was personally perturbed when only nine or ten people out of 160 people contributed on that motion. I was a bit perturbed but there was nothing I could do, but those are the prices we pay for being in a hurry.

We have a saying in Luo that the way you see the hyena looking is because it was in hurry when God was trying to give it colour –[Hon. Members: “Say it in Luo”] - I say it in Luo? It says, “Rucu Rucu oweko kom lalur otabo tabo” meaning, when the hyena came on the line of painting, it was in hurry so they just threw paint on it and it went so that is why it looks that way. I am just asking that we rushed that day, about nine or ten people - I was sitting in front there. I was not even given an opportunity to explain as a chairman of a committee because of the rush. So, are we all going to be bound because something was done in a rush and we never explained our case, we are not in the Hansard about what we really think about this thing? We have not stated our position on it. 

I, Jacob Oulanyah, Member of Parliament for Omoro County, want to be on record on why I support Article 74 (1)(a) or why I oppose it. It is using it as a process for implementing change of political system. I want to be on record and I am just seeking this opportunity. I support this motion, Mr Speaker.

5.42
MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker –(Mr Mbabazi rose_)- the Speaker had given me the Floor.

5.42
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, honourable members, having heard the presentation of the motion, the justification, the pros and cons of both sides of the divide on this matter and considering, Mr Speaker, that the reason for rescission is to consider the substantive motion of 21 April 2005, I move that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question. 

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to ask for your guidance on procedure, having heard what some Members have said of what happened last Thursday, that maybe we consider ringing a bell so that there will be no justification for those people –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is in our Rules of Procedure, we ring the bell when there is an issue of quorum, and I want to say that it is not incumbent on the Speaker so long as the quorum is there to see who is going to defend or who is not going to defend. If I start ringing the bell then every time even when the House is full I will be ringing the bell. 

I decline to ring the bell and we follow - my appeal to you, honourable members, is that if you have come for business do not go to the canteen, do not go anywhere, stay here. So, the question of the bell was not rung, I think is not supported by the Rules of Procedure, which I intend to follow without a minus and without a plus. Now, I am going to put the question –(Interruption)

MR BAMWANGA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much for the explanation you have given, that having come to Parliament we should be able to be counted and even those who are in the restaurant are not supposed to be there. Procedurally, we have been asking for voting for those who are in favour of the motion, those against the motion and those who abstain.  

Procedurally, if somebody is in this House, and the reasons why we are here again is because last time we did not get the requisite numbers to take the motion, for those people who neither vote for the motion, nor against the motion, nor abstain and they are in this House and they are voters, procedurally how do we treat those Members of Parliament? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: It is their freedom, I cannot compel them to put here or there.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, since we are voting to rescind our decision on a matter that the Constitution required us to have passed by a half of this House, I propose that the votes required for rescission should also be one-half of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members –[Mr Mao: “Procedure”]- let me dispose of one then I can dispose of yours. Honourable members, I think his case is that the decision you are trying to rescind was made by 142 plus 17 or 18, something like that.  I think he is asking me, do you want that decision to be rescinded by 100 Members of Parliament? So, if we have to rescind a decision, which was made by that number, I think the number to support it should be higher or above that.

MR MAO: Mr Speaker, I rise to seek your guidance on two matters: One is that you need to state clearly what is the percentage that is required to rescind, and I propose two-thirds –(Interjections)– now those who love majorities are saying they do not want it to be an overwhelming majority. 

Secondly, I refer to Rule 61, and after the speech by the Chairman of the Legal Committee, who spoke about the right of Members who want to contribute and their right being denied, I would like to draw your attention to Rule 61, which says: “After a question has been proposed in the House… and debated, a Member may move “That the question be now put”, and, unless it appears to the Speaker that the motion is an abuse of the Rules of the House or an infringement of the rights of any Member, the question “That the question be now put” shall be put forthwith….” Mr Speaker, this is something, which depends on your personal discretion as the Speaker. I have seen many people who are really eager to debate, so does it appear to you that the question be put?

THE SPEAKER: Let me exercise my discretion, I put the question. 

(The Members voted by a show of hands).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: Abstaining – 1; against - 15, for 196. The motion is carried. (Applause).

(Question agreed to)

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I am now putting the question to rescind what was done on 21 April 2005, in respect of the motion under Article 74(1)(a). We have agreed that it must be above the number I had then. 
(The Members voted by a show of hands).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: Abstaining - 0, against - 24, in support  - 189. The motion is carried. (Applause).

(Question agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the manner in which you have conducted yourselves during this debate, but it can be improved. We need not to be abusive, we need not to be annoying, we need not to be demeaning; just market your views and listen to other views expressed and use what you have got to make a decision. Emotions will not produce quality work; we need quality work. 

This is the beginning, the serious work is coming very soon, maybe next week, and the country will not be proud of producing shoddy work because you are emotional. This will be my daily prayer throughout the exercise.  

Now, there is another limb. Now that you have rescinded, it means then we can reconsider, but I think this is the appropriate time to adjourn. We shall deal with that issue next week, Tuesday.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.00 p.m. and adjourned to Tuesday, 3 May 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


