Wednesday, 27 April 2011 

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON INTERNATIONAL LABOUR DAY, 1 MAY 2011

2.54
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR, AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The 1st of May is celebrated by many countries the world over as the International Labour Day. This day was declared as an international holiday by the Second International Conference of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) in 1889. Since then, many countries celebrate this day in commemoration of the historical struggle of working people who have had their working conditions improved. 

In Uganda, the International Labour Day is a gazetted public holiday and ceremonies are organised both at the national and local government level. The importance given to the observance of this day in Uganda lies in the commitment by the government to recognise the dignity of labour and the important contribution it makes to the socio-economic and political development of our country. 

The theme of this year’s celebration is, “Consolidating and recognising the workers’ role in production and development.” This theme was selected because it forms part of the overall Government strategy to address the problems related to descent work, low productivity and poverty. 

Employment creation and a productive work force are core to the socio-economic transformation of Uganda from peasantry to a modern and prosperous society. Government believes that a purposeful focus on employment creation, descent work and productivity enhancement are key to social-economic transformation of our country. 

This year’s celebrations will be held at Entebbe’s Kakeeka Cricket Grounds. In this regard, all actors in the various sectors including political leaders, civil society, government departments and the private sector are expected to participate in the commemoration of this day. I, therefore, call upon you, hon. Members, to show solidarity with the workers of Uganda and join us to observe the International Labour Day at Kakeeka Cricket Grounds, Entebbe, Wakiso District. For God and My Country! 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON POLICE RETURNEES FROM DARFUR

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, this is a statement regarding the police returnees from Darfur. I would like to remind this House that Uganda started deploying police officers to UN peace keeping missions in 2004. Before deployment to UN missions such as UNMIL in Liberia, UNMIT in East Timor, UNAMID in Darfur, UNMIS in Southern Sudan and UNMIK in Kosovo, the officers are first assessed by the United Nations Selection Assistance Team (UNSAT). 

In July 2008, 653 Ugandan police officers were interviewed in Kampala by UNSAT for deployment to UN peace keeping missions. A hundred and twenty two officers passed the interviews and were recommended for deployment to UNAMID in Darfur. In July 2009, 115 out of the successful 122 officers were deployed to Darfur leaving behind seven officers who had other important commitments to perform here in Uganda. 

According to the specifications issued by UN in their deployment tracking requests, these officers were supposed to be on this tour-of-duty for a period of 12 months only. The officers were accordingly briefed on 22 July 2009 prior to their departure. 

The 12 months of tour-of-duty of these officers ended in July 2010. Because the Uganda Police Force did not have at that particular moment other UN assessed officers to replace those whose tour-of-duty had come to an end, those already on the mission got an extension of six months, that is, up to January this year, 2011.  

On the invitation of the Uganda Police Force, UNSAT came to Uganda and conducted a UNSAT interview in November 2010. A hundred and fifty seven officers passed these interviews which gave us a good number of officers for the UN to pick from for future missions. These were to be deployed to UN missions as replacement of all the Uganda police officers whose tour-of-duty was ending between January and May 2011. 

In December last year, in line with UN procedures, the Uganda Police Force sent all the documents(UN Entry Medical Forms, Personal History Profile Forms (PHP), Passport Extracts, photocopies of National Driving Permits) of all the successful officers to the UN Department of Peacekeeping  Operations(DPKO) through our Permanent Mission in New York. Replacements of officers ending duty in UN missions were proposed from these 157 officers. 

In the same month, December 2010, the Director of Interpol and Peace Support Operations went to New York and discussed, among other things, the replacement issue with Permanent Mission and desk officers of the Missions where Uganda Police Force officers are deployed. It was agreed that officers in Darfur and Southern Sudan be given extensions of 60 days and 45 days respectively to enable the desk officers process the replacements. This means that the officers in Darfur were expected to come back to Uganda on the 26 of March this year and those in Southern Sudan on 28 February also this year. The officers in Southern Sudan came back as programmed. Despite the fact that officers in Darfur had received the Inspector General of Police’s circular about non-extension of duty and also a copy of policy on international deployment and appointments dated 28 October 2010, they still sought extension of their tour-of-duty. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs has seen an unsigned copy of a memorandum to hon. Odonga Otto suggesting that there is a problem with obtaining visas in Sudan. The general procedure of communication between the UN and member states is through the permanent missions of their respective countries. The Uganda Police Force has never received any communication from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, our permanent mission in New York or the UNDP to the effect that the Sudanese Government will not give visas to Ugandan uniformed officers. 

Furthermore, officers in missions always get visas for six months. These are renewed up to the end of the tour-of-duty. Since these officers completed their tour-of-duty, this means that the Government of Sudan will have to renew their visas if they are to continue on that mission. If it indeed is true that Sudan will grant visas only to officers from Arab-speaking countries as it is alleged in that note, these will have to come back since they too are not Arab-speaking.

Press reports also suggested a requirement to pay US $4,000 by each officer to the Police Department of Peace Keeping. This is not true. What is true however is that the UN always advises peacekeepers to move with a minimum of US $700 to cater for accommodation and meals in the first weeks before accessing their mission allowances. In response to this, there is a proposal for peacekeepers to contribute to a welfare fund which will benefit an outgoing officer to access quick money. Modalities are being worked out by police management and police authorities. 

Finally, I wish to inform this House that the UN communicated, through our permanent representative on 14 April this year, appointing 112 officers to serve as replacements of those supposed to be in Darfur. Modalities are being worked out to enable their movement, ready to be in mission by 18 June 2011. 

That marks the end of this statement. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the statement. 

3.05
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification from the minister. Was it agreed with the UN that these people should go for one short term and be replaced or can they serve continuously until the end of the second term? 

The minister said that they have to go with US $700; where does a policeman get the US $700? Does it mean that somebody has to save something before he travels? Why shouldn’t we, as government, take care of this money off their salary? I have seen these peace keepers go for a short time and come back and you have said that in response to this, there is a proposal for peace keepers to contribute to the welfare fund; how will you tell them to contribute? How do I contribute when I know that I am going away for six or twelve months? Who are these peace keepers to contribute to the welfare fund?

Finally, was this another plan to remunerate another set of obedient cadres in the Police? Going to missions like these ensures they get better pay. Do you pull out these names and remunerate a new team that you feel are good cadres?

3.07
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek clarification on two issues from the minister and the first is that when these officers go out there, they leave their families and dependants behind. I would like the minister to inform the House how the families and dependants are catered for when their bread winners are out there – in fact, there have been complaints that they send money but the money is not quickly passed on to the families.

Secondly, I would like to know the salaries of these officers when serving out there and are these salaries taxed by the Government of Uganda? I thank you. 

3.08
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank the two colleagues who have asked these pertinent questions, which will help me to explain one or two things that were not clear in the statement. Are these officers meant to stay there infinitely or are they supposed to serve for a limited period? The answer is that they are supposed to serve for a year only and come back. It is a short-term contract.

“Where does an officer obtain the US $700 that he must go with?” We are saying that there is need to create a fund; all these officers should subscribe into a SACCO and then colleagues going away can go and borrow from that SACCO but the money still remains in the names or the shares of the contributing officer. Hitherto, I have been raising the same question. These people’s appointment may not so much be dependent on Uganda; it is dependent on the UN. They interview them but they don’t exactly tell us when they will take them. You may find that there is a problem in accessing money from the treasury in case there is urgency in deployment. That is why we feel that there should be a special fund within the Police which can help officers who want to go. 

“Is this a reward to good officers?” In one sense, it is a reward to the good officers but I want to tell this House that it is actually not the Uganda Police that does the selection. We have an open system; we advertise the opportunity throughout the barracks and throughout the police stations and ask them to apply and they do so and they are interviewed by this UN body (UNISAT) and those who pass the interview are selected to go and participate in these UN missions. 

“How are the families taken care of when these officers are on tour-of-duty?” I will answer this by answering the second question about salaries. First of all, they do not get a salary but an allowance and it is a very good allowance. It has created a little uneasiness among the police officers. If you want me to mention it, they earn something like US $4,000 per month in allowances. Therefore, allowances, as you know are not taxable. But we continue to give them their salaries - these people get this money because they work under difficult and dangerous conditions. But as I said, this is not for the Uganda Government to determine, but the UN and we have very little to say about it. I hope I have adequately answered the questions, thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE - SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011 BUDGET

3.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Mr Speaker, on Thursday, I presented a report of the Budget Committee on Supplementary Schedule No.2 and subsequently, this report was debated and you ruled that we consider figures for appropriation when we reconvene this week. I beg that we proceed as you had ruled.

3.14 
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Albert Oduman): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the report was presented, I was not here but now I am here to make my views known on the report of the committee.

To start with, on page 10 of the committee report, the figures indicated for the recurrent supplementary expenditure and development supplementary expenditure, in my view, should be the ones that constitute the total for us to supply and appropriate and exclude the aspect for pension. Therefore, the total should consist of recurrent plus development and that total should be Shs 1.48897 billion. 

Secondly, I will make suggestions to allow some expenditure and then disallow some and I will give my reasons. We will be able to allow expenditure on thermo power generation and then some money for swearing-in and I will give a detailed breakdown of what we propose. 

On the request for supplementary expenditure on page 9 for the Ministry of Defence - we cannot be doing this in the House. We are an oversight institution to which everybody looks up for checks and balances.

The committee says that the expenditure was classified and some amount of money out of the total provided was spent in 2009/2010 and then the other portion was dispatched in 2010/2011. It says that these amounts could not have been included in the normal budgeting process. That suggests that once expenditure is classified in nature, it is not possible to provide for it in the normal budgeting process and that we have never done it. This is not true. Classified expenditure becomes classified just because of the nature of scrutiny by the Auditor-General and that is why there is a provision for an audit by the Auditor-General to be brought to Parliament and a sub-committee of PAC scrutinises classified expenditure. We have been budgeting for classified expenditure. 

Is the committee suggesting that this is the first time we are meeting classified expenditure and that a unique situation is arising where that expenditure can only come under a supplementary? My answer to that is no, this is not the first time; we have been budgeting for classified expenditure in the normal budgeting process. 

Even if that were the case, why take this long to bring this here – almost two years since 2009? Why did we wait; over that time, we have passed several supplementary expenditures; where was this particular aspect of expenditure lying? Who was sitting on it and why? 

The truth is that this money has already been spent so where is the urgency to bring it at this time as a supplementary? Why don’t we provide for it as an arrear to be incorporated in the normal budget? Since it is already spent, why don’t we allow the Auditor-General to pick it up and present it to us and tell us exactly what that expenditure was about – because we do not know up to now. Asking me to pass this on behalf of the people I represent is to ask for too much – something I do not know in detail and has taken two years without being presented here! I think we rather allow the Auditor-General to pick it up in the audit process and present it to Parliament in a committee of PAC. They will scrutinise it in the sub-committee on classified expenditure and they will present it to us to allow or reject the expenditure.

On the expenditure of swearing-in on pages 6 and 7, the committee recommends that there was a request for Shs 3.0 billion. And I quote, “The committee in its wisdom decided to reduce the budget by Shs 200,000 million to Shs 2.8 billion taking into account the current economic situation prevailing in the country.” I thank the committee for this line of argument. Swearing-in can be made as small or as big as we deem it. You can have a tea party and it becomes as good as any other. You can take it to Serena if you so wish. 

What do we want? What is the situation that we are dealing with? The committee is right to say the economic situation is harsh – I agree. But what is the basis of saying remove Shs 200 million? We do not have the basis and the committee says, “In its wisdom”. I would like to invoke the wisdom of this House to also trim this figure to a manageable amount by the public. I am going to present a detailed breakdown of how I wish to propose to us on how to cut that figure down. 

In conclusion, the question raised by the committee about whether the law was complied with has not been answered. In the discussion in the report, you find the argument straying into dealing with what the law should have provided and not what the law says. 

The Budget Act is very clear; it says that if you spend, you cannot spend beyond three percent without pre-approval. We need guidance; if you do, what happens? What are the penalties? My view is that if Government does, then it is up to this House to decide whether to allow or disallow that expenditure. We can only allow such expenditure, in our wisdom, where there are clear reasons as to whether that expenditure was an emergency. That has not been demonstrated to us.

In the alternative, the minister responsible delivers to this House an apology. There is a precedent in this House; when the former minister, Dr Suruma, suggested that he wanted to roll through requests for supplementary exceeding three percent, he almost burnt his fingers. What saved him on the Floor of this House was an apology delivered by hon. Omach on his behalf and that is when the House downed its arms. He said, and it is on the Hansard, that he will not do it again. So, short of a clear reason why this expenditure was incurred and under what circumstances and short of an apology, I do not see how this House can pass this money.

In the alternative, I am going to suggest and to move that we cut down the expenditures as suggested in accordance with our proposal in this document. 

As I already said, if the minister does not demonstrate that there was real need to incur this expenditure before prior parliamentary approval and if the minister cannot deliver an apology, I move that we disallow that expenditure as follows: The amount requested for recurrent expenditure and allowed by the committee is Shs 2.8 billion and development expenditure Shs 1.48617 trillion, totalling to Shs 1.48897 trillion. I wish to propose that we disallow Shs 1.8 billion for swearing-in out of the proposed Shs 2.8 to leave a balance of Shs 1.0 billion for swearing-in.

We need to rise up to the circumstances and the situation the people are facing. The committee used its wisdom to reduce from Shs 3.0 billion to Shs 2.8. This House should also use its wisdom to decide whether that is appropriate or not. I would like to invite the House to invoke that wisdom and say that Shs 1 billion can deal with and handle the swearing-in ceremony. That is enough money. The President can walk in here and swear in like we did in the past –(Interruption)  

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: I want to thank the honourable member for giving way. I just want to get clarification from the shadow minister: how did he work out these figures to arrive at what he is proposing? What are the justifications for these deductions?

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want the honourable shadow minister to assist us. He initially said that when the Budget Committee reduced the Shs 200 million, they did not give a justification. If he can give the justification and the break down, then that would be a very good persuasive area.

MR ODUMAN: You see, when you are dealing with figures and especially a lump sum figure and you are not given a breakdown, the only way you can reduce it if you have a breakdown is to deal with the details. If you do not have a breakdown and the committee itself suggests that it arbitrarily just used its wisdom –(Interjections)- I am saying the committee; it is in writing. The committee applied its wisdom to reduce the Shs 3 billion by Shs 200 million to Shs 2.8 billion. We have not been given the basis, and that is what we should have asked for first. What is the basis of slashing off Shs 200 million? Are you not curtailing the swearing-in ceremony? Now, that gives you room to think and believe that this figure and the way it was arrived at is a lump sum and we do not have a basis as this House.

Bearing in mind –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you very much, honourable shadow minister and the Speaker. 

We were given data that Heroes Day cost Shs 256 million for three days where the President –(Interjections)– yes, there were figures there and we are telling you. Even if it is one, it took Shs256 million. What happens is that even if we do not appropriate any money for this, the President will swear in. It will be very important to think of things like the Cancer Institute in Mulago, where Shs 3.0 billion will treat 3,000 people, other than a one or five-minute activity to take all the money and yet people are dying in Mulago. 

I think we should place our priorities very well. Even the Shs 1 billion which hon. Oduman is suggesting is too much. We would take all this money to Mulago –(Interjections)– Anyway, for you when you fall sick you go away on planes. Go to Mulago’s Cancer and Heart institutes and see how people are suffering and then you come and say that the Shs 3 billion should be for only five days! So, we already have the experience of Shs 260 million for three functions.

MR ODUMAN: Good. He was giving me information.

MS NANKABIRWA: I thank you very much. I know I have an opportunity to respond but I thought that I should give this information to guide you, my shadow minister. It is unfortunate that you were not there when we were handling this schedule in the committee but you were fully represented by honourable members from the Opposition. I thought you briefed them and agreed. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi talked about Shs295 million for only Heroes Day and I thought that I should correct that. The Shs295 million was for three national functions - Heroes Day, Independence Day and 26th January. He raised that same point when we were discussing this and I gave him the information. 

The swearing-in we are talking about comes after every five years and involves dignitaries and visitors who are normally not invited for these other national celebrations. I gave the information that in 2006, we actually used Shs 2 billion and so it is really unfair to say that the President should walk to the swearing-in ceremony. Walking to swear in might not really work. We appreciate the problems we are going through, and the Shs 2.8 billion that the committee proposed was after they scrutinised the activities in the presentation by the Minister in charge of the Presidency. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you for that information. These are really hard times and everybody knows that. We have not suggested that the President should walk –(Laughter)– we have been very kind in our proposal. As you have heard from my colleague, Shs 1 billion is still generous. 

Let us go back to where we started from and see how we did it. To refresh your memory, I have here a picture of how it was done in 1986. That model was very good. The picture is here. I beg to lay this on the Table. This magazine extracted what happened at the time. The title of the magazine is “Contemporary Africa Review”. It is about revolutionary ways of doing things during hard times. This is issue No. 13 of March 2011. On page 24, there is a picture of how the swearing-in was done in 1986. It was very affordable, efficient and effective. So there is no reason why we cannot do it now; what has changed?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I witnessed the events of 1986. We had just emerged from the bush [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “You never went there.”] How do you know? There was no government in place, there was no treasury at that time and we did not invite heads of state because we had just formed a government. Now we are inviting 32 heads of state. Is the honourable member in order to continue misleading this House that what took place in 1986 should be replicated today in 2011?

THE SPEAKER: I did not understand that point of order. When the issue is a question of opposing opinion, the Speaker cannot rule another out of order because they are opposing you. 

Hon. Member, I want to prepare you for the motion you want to move. You may have to look at our Rules of Procedure, rule 129(11). This is the kind of motion that you are going to move. It says “...any Member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimates, and such motion shall take the form that ‘I beg to move that the sum of Shs 10,000 be reduced in respect to vote...’”. That is the procedure. 

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. First of all, in the document I was laying on the Table - I want to complete the information for the minister. The author of “Revolutionary Practices”, who takes us back to 1986 to remind us of the revolutionary ways, is none other than a one Kintu Nyago. He is a senior official in the Office of the President. So this is not something from elsewhere –(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Thank you very much. I think it is always said that democracy is very expensive. This very Parliament, including you, the Opposition Members, the amount of money you draw every month cannot be drawn by any peasant. Secondly, we have had a general election in the country – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, don’t you think that by stating that, these Members will say you are blackmailing them?

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. The point I am driving at is that the President was elected by the whole country. Everyone who voted for him, from the north, east, west and south, would like to come and attend the ceremony. 

In 1986 such a ceremony did not exist; it was not a ceremony for an elected President so we could not get all these people to come and attend. This is a different time and we cannot compare it with 1986 when there was no Government. This is an elected President and all those who voted for him would like to come and attend. Therefore they have to be accorded opportunity to come and attend.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, Members of Parliament were also elected by the people; do they have a budget to cater for the electorate who voted for them at their swearing-in? If they do not have, then what are you talking about? That is why I say that some of you are engineers who cannot reason. If you know that a Member of Parliament is not being provided for – we are saying that we are providing for a national function and that there should be a minimum amount - how can you come and say that he was elected by all the people? What about you; were you elected by animals?

MR ODUMAN: Thank you, colleagues, for the information. The President elect can win international accolade if he woke up one day and said, “Well, I am sorry my friends, these are difficult times for my people in Uganda. I have to manage my costs. My people are going through hard economic times. I have cut the size of my expenditure for the swearing-in and I am sorry I am going to go in a lean way to Parliament for swearing-in. You all know, anyway, that I have been sworn in; I am now the President elect of the Republic of Uganda.” Those will be international accolades for him; not because of how many people are included in the entourage or how many limousines will be driven. Who does not know now that he is going to be President? This is the basis of our proposal. 

I want to quickly move to development expenditure and wind up. As I already said, Shs 1.3 trillion over two years – we do not know what it is; we cannot pass this. We disallow this from development expenditure, notwithstanding your guidance which I respect very much. In my view, and I might be correct or wrong, Shs 10,000 was an example that was provided in the rules, that this is how you move to reduce an amount from a proposed amount. Therefore, for the Shs 1.3 trillion, it is for us as a Parliament to ratify this and say we agree. However, to agree on something we do not know how many legs it has, we cannot. For us to say in spite of the fact that the law says three per cent with prior Parliamentary approval, we go ahead and pass it; and we say the law says at least within four months you present, it is beyond four months to two years and we pass it, we will have let down the intention of the people who made that law. We will have also let down the people we represent. Let us disallow that amount and exclude it as a charge on public funds.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification. How much time does hon. Oduman need to convince us or not convince us? You ruled last time that the debate was over and when we come back, we shall go to the committee of the whole House and sort out our figures. How much time does hon. Oduman need to convince us? 

MR ODUMAN: Okay, you are seeking my clarification. If you are now convinced, we can now move on to appropriation. In total, I suggest that we allow up to 1.18 per cent. That will include only two expenditures: one on the thermal generation power plant and then Shs 1 billion for the swearing-in. Based on those reasons, at committee stage, not withstanding your advice, I will seek to reduce those figures. I thank you very much. (Mr Okello-Okello rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I thought you made a contribution; didn’t you? Make your contribution but if you made it, you do not have to do it again.

3.45
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am one of those who will not be part of the function that will take place on the 12th of May. I want to make my position very clear. 

THE SPEAKER: You mean they have not invited you?  

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: I am not going to debate the swearing-in. I want to look at this matter from the abuse of public funds at a time when our people are dying of hunger. The people in Northern Uganda, the people in eastern Uganda are looking for food from the anthills. They look for termites to survive and here we are, trying to spend so much money on one day for a matter that is not productive. 

I wonder what is really special about this year’s swearing-in. Why all these heads of state who are coming? What are they coming to do; to witness what? This swearing-in is not going to be different from any other that has taken place. Why should we spend so much on this? 

It is wrong for us as Parliament to approve this money at a time when our people have no food to eat. I thank you. [MR KIVEJINJA: “Information.”] I have finished. (Laughter) 

MR KIVEIJINJA: I would like to inform the hon. Member – (Interjections) - he has asked what is special about this –

THE SPEAKER: Leave it.  

MR KIVEJINJA: I was going to tell you why. 

3.48
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): I want to make clarifications on some issues that have been raised by my honourable colleague, hon. Oduman. I wish you had read the Hansard of Thursday, perhaps you would have got some answers to most of the queries you are raising.

Regarding classified expenditure, it is not the first time and it will not be the last time that we are handling it. The legal framework is there but for your benefit, I would like to read the relevant sections of the law that the committee relied on when we were looking at this classified expenditure for 2009/10 and 2010/11.

We have regulations that have the force of law and I want to refer you to the statutory instrument of 2003, No. 72, the Public Finance and Accountability Classified Expenditure Regulations 2003. I want to start from there. I want to refer you to Section 7(1) and (2). Section 7 (1) of the regulations says: “Classified expenditure shall be budgeted for and appropriated by Parliament in accordance with the Public Finance and Accountability Act, 2003.” Section 7(2) goes on to say: “Notwithstanding statutory regulation (1), in order to preserve confidentiality the budget for classified expenditure shall be presented as a single-line item for each authorised agency.” So, as to whether we are supposed to know more, that is the law. It just allows it as a one line item. We cannot go beyond that.

Regulation 7 regarding classified expenditure refers to the Public Finance and Accountability Act. In the Public Finance and Accountability Act, we specifically refer to Section 16 regarding supplementary estimates. Section 16(1) reads: “Where in respect of any financial year, it is found that the amount appropriated by an Appropriation Act is insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimate, showing the amount required shall be laid before Parliament, and the expenditure votes shall be included in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill to be introduced in Parliament to provide for their appropriation.” 

The Constitution also provides the legal framework that the committee used, specifically for classified expenditure. Otherwise, the Budget Act as well was referred to by the committee when we were looking at other classified expenditure.

The question, “Why wait for so long?” is a matter of the nature of the expenditure that the Minister of Defence explained here on Thursday. But if he wishes to he may explain to you so that you get to know why 2009/10 is being brought out now. (Mr Oduman rose_) Let me conclude then I give you that opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: But I must say that the way the hon. Chairperson has read the provisions of the law indicates that she is a topflight lawyer. (Laughter)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that compliment. Now with regard to the swearing-in ceremony, the legal provisions are there. You said that we decided arbitrarily to reduce the figure. That is not true. We listened to the chairperson and we also called the Minister responsible for the Presidency to come and testify before us and justify the Shs 3.0 billion expenditure. 

The committee of course took its decision taking into account the fact that in 2006 we spent about Shs 2.0 billion for the same kind of activity and now it is five years down the road.

Also, the minister explained that we are getting more international guests- over 32- and there will be invitations to other dignitaries within the country. So, the budget inevitably had to go beyond what they utilised in 2006.

Those are some of the considerations the committee made to say, “Well we can reduce it to Shs2.8 billion,” and the chairperson of the committee, who was privy to some of this information, said that it was okay. So, that is the figure we took after lengthy discussions with the committee chairperson and the minister in charge. 

So, I want to give you an assurance that it was not an arbitrary figure. We also looked at precedents regarding this function especially the one five years before - (Mr Oduman rose_)- let me conclude then you can clarify- especially the one of 2005/2006 and also the circumstances under which the minister said it should go to Shs 2.8 billion this time and we were satisfied. So, this was not an arbitrary figure. We agreed with the minister and the chairperson.

So, honourable member, I beg you to once more let me conclude. Whatever I have not perhaps explained here, I beg you to listen. I believe the Minister of Defence will give you further clarification on the issues you have raised. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable shadow minister, what I must say is that this was a repetition of what was said last time when you were absent. It is true, you had assigned some people to ask your questions which were on the Order Paper but this explanation that she has given was given last time. The explanation on Defence was also given by the minister but I have appreciated that we missed you and that is why I allowed you to make your statement. (Laughter)

MR ODUMAN: Mr Speaker, I need to seek one more clarification from the chairperson. Why is it coming now and not earlier? Why is it more than what is allowed in the law? You said on page 9 of the report that this particular provision could not be included in the budget because of the nature of the budget process and the security concerns. You have just said that where an expenditure is of a security nature, where it is classified, that item can be included as a line item so that it is concealed somewhere for security reasons. 

Now, a supplementary budget is a budget. A supplementary budget is as good as the main budget except that it comes after and it is supplementary by nature. But it is a budget and the process is the same. Now, what stopped this figure from being included in the main budget as a line item as you propose? And now you say the law provides that a supplementary expenditure which is of a security conscience nature can be included in the supplementary as a line item. 

We have been doing that in budget in the past and we have been including these amounts as line items and there has been no controversy over this. Why did this delay? Why was this excluded from the budget process? Why has it been sneaked into a supplementary?

Secondly, where you have matters of the law and regulations, which one is supreme? The Budget Act is very clear and those who made the Budget Act at that time, I thank them. They wrote it in very simple English that no expenditure shall be incurred that exceeds three percent. Now, you can have regulations under the Public Finance Act and you can have regulations under other laws but the supreme law on budgeting, in my view, is the Budget Act and the Budget Act says that you will not incur expenditure before parliamentary approval that exceeds three percent. My question to you is that if you do exceed, what do we do to you?

In my view, to take us to regulations is to divert us. Let us deal with the principal law and the Constitution. What do we do to you in case you exceed three percent? What is the punishment? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have been dealing with this subject for quite sometime. But as I informed you, the shadow minister for finance was not there for a good reason and so I allowed him time to say what he has said. I hope   you have appreciated what he has said. 

The other item we had that was postponed was to deal with the report of the committee. The details of the amount we pass will come at the committee stage. So, I find now the appropriate time to put a question on the report of the committee on supplementary, subject to the observations made by Members. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

3.59
Supplementary Expenditure Vote-001.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 2,800,000,000 under Vote 001 be provided for as -(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)- let me finish then you come in.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are not 103. We have a quorum issue. 

THE CHAIRMAN: You are raising the issue of quorum, let us clear ourselves. The quorum for deciding is a third of the membership. How many Members of Parliament currently do we have in Parliament so that you get a third of them? (Laughter) I want to inform you that the present quorum as per our law would be 83 because we lost some Members as a result of the Constitutional Court decision. And, therefore, the quorum is those now constituting the House. 

I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 2,800,000,000 under Vote 001 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2010/11.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, as I gave you notice earlier, and with reasons, I would like to move that we reduce the amount suggested to be provided to supply for recurrent expenditure from Shs 2.8 billion to Shs 1 billion. And the reason –

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but I told you that we have Rules of Procedure of dealing with Committee of Supply, either for the budget or supplementary. And the Rules of Procedure provide you with the format of the motion you have to move. The format of that motion is to show dissatisfaction. Actually, in some jurisdiction they say “by Shs 1” – that indicates that you are not satisfied with the supply. 

In our case, the question should be “by Shs 1,000” or “by Shs 10,000” as the case may be. You cannot alter it until we change our Rules of Procedure. So you can show your dissatisfaction by moving the motion.

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, I had earlier sought clarification but I do not remember whether I received a response. The provision for “by Shs 1,000”, in my view, was an example – like a good teacher would do. A good teacher would say, “If you want to reduce this amount, you say it like this...”

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let me read for you the provision. It is rule 129(11): “When the House is in the Committee of Supply to consider annual or supplementary estimates – (a) any Member may move to reduce the amount of the vote of the estimates, and such motion shall take the form that ‘I beg to move that the sum of Shs 10,000 be reduced in respect to vote...’”

MR ODUMAN: Mr Chairman, does that now mean that when the Executive brings a budget here, we cannot reduce it; it is only the committee that can do it? Because in this case the committee reduced by Shs 200 million and it was doing work on our behalf. How come that we, who are the owners of the work, cannot touch that money? It puzzles me and that is why I say that it would be unfair for the Rules of Procedure – if that is what they meant – to allow the committee to touch the figure and not allow me, who delegated my work to the committee. That is why I said that that “by Shs 1,000” was an example –

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I was not conducting business in the committee so I do not know. Maybe they had detailed mathematical calculations. I am concerned with the Committee of Supply which I am presiding over. But I agree with you that we may use this opportunity to commission the Rules Committee to look and maybe make changes in future. But as far as I am concerned now, those are the rules.

MR ODUMAN: That means, Mr Chairman, that there is nothing we can do whether adding or subtracting to this budget?

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you can subtract. If you are dissatisfied, show your dissatisfaction by moving that motion if you want. But if you do not want, then I am going to put the question. You can go on record that, “I was dissatisfied with this.” 

(Members of the Opposition withdrew from the Chamber.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Vote 004 – Ministry of Defence and Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that a total sum of Shs 1,486,170,000 under Vote 004 and Vote 017 be provided for as supplementary development expenditure for financial year 2010/11.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding._)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the budget proposal for Supplementary Schedule No.2 together with addendum and supplied it. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (MICRO-FINANCE) (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US $10 MILLION FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) AND US $10.0 MILLION FROM SAUDI FUND FOR DEVELOPMENT (SFD) FOR FINANCING OF RURAL ELECTRIFICATION PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you will recall, yesterday the Chairman of the Parliament Committee on National Economy presented a report in regard to these two loan requests in details. One is for rural electrification and the other for water in Kampala. But before we left, I asked you to study this report over last night so that you would be able to effectively participate in today’s proceedings. 

One of the tasks I gave to the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development was to show us what they are doing in West Nile. This was after some Member raised a concern over it. Since the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is present, I expect him to say something about West Nile in terms of rural electrification now.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Mr Speaker, yesterday I was requested to show and explain the power interconnectivity in the West Nile Region of Uganda. In that regard, I wish to report as follows:

Grid Extension projects:
Complete projects:
The project is –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we still have business to handle. So, I appeal to you to be patriotic by staying in the House.

MR LOKERIS: In Zombo District in the West Nile Region, we have Arch Bishop Orombi’s residence and Jupudongo Village.

Planned activities with committed funds.

We have signed an agreement with the KFW of Germany to fund grid extension projects in the West Nile Region of Shs $10.4million. The areas to connected are:-
In Nebbi District these are the areas: Agwok, Nyaravur, Pakwach Town, Angal TC and hospital, Parombo TC and Ginnery, Angaba, Boro, Akella, Panyimur and Dei.

In Zombo District, we are to work on the following: Logiri, Lwala, Anyavu, Ejupala, Angermach, Katekere, Warr, Zeu, Zombo, Kango, Kamdini Corner, Kurru, Ayivu and Nyapea. 

The others in Arua District are: Manibe, Lokiri, Akokoro, Maracha, Nyadri, Oleba, and Dranya. In Koboko District, we have: Nyagili, Koboko Town, Ombach, Kijomoro, Alivu and Arua extensions.

In Adjuman District, we have the following areas: Ofoji Border, Orokomba, Amwa, Laropi HC, TC and landing site, Difule and Arra.

In Amuru District, we have: Olij, Ofua sub-county, Olia, Dzaipi, Arinyapi, Bibia, Atiak – I am not pronouncing these names of places because I am not well versed with them – Pawel, Pabbo, Awer, Parabongo, Olwal, Keyo, Pagak, Olwal, Labongogali, Amuru TC sub-county and Amuru District Headquarters.

We also have extensions that move all through, but let me also talk about Nyagak I would like to say that we renewed a contract that became effective on 12 October 2010. The old scheme is supposed to be completed in July 2011.

But there is another line that the people of Soroti were asking me about. Actually they complained that we are building an extension line from Katakwi to Moroto, but that there is no line connecting power from Soroti to Katakwi for it to continue to Moroto.

On this issue, I wish to report that we have got a funding from the World Bank, which will start off –(Interjections)– this is just a brief that I was instructed to give – so, it is to move from Komolo – that is Soroti – Katakwi extension in Katakwi District. The areas to be covered are: Komolo, Getom, Katakwi Technical Institute, Katakwi Town, Katakwi Health Centre and Katakwi Pump.

There is also an extension to Amuria – the money for that project has been found. So, there will be connectivity of power in that area.

In Arua District, as I have said, there is a lot of connectivity going on and once that is complete, everybody will be happy. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. However, I would like to suggest that you avail copies of that document to the honourable members of Parliament and district leaders from those areas for them to verify. This will help you avoid lamentations that we have been receiving recently. Yes, hon. Minister Onek.

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to make some clarification to my colleagues who come from the areas covered by this project. 

As my minister of state stated – there maybe some misplacement of the names of the places, but to us that is not important because the actual ground work will be done by the consultant who will be surveying the area to see where the power lines will be passing. So whatever mistakes that maybe appearing on this list should not worry anybody because corrections will be made from the ground. Otherwise, the funds are there and we are going to implement this project. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS ERIYO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give is that on what the consultant has provided – you know there are names of places that people may not be familiar with.

But those names of places indicated as being in Adjumani, are actually in Moyo District. That is misplacement. I also hope that when the actual work begins they will not go searching for these places in Adjumani when they are actually not in that place. 

Also some of the places that are in Adjumani have been listed under Amuru District. Yes, I agree with the minister that there are some errors here, but I would like to put the record correct for the Parliament and the Hansard because this information is very misleading, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that is why I said that a copy of this statement be availed to you people from that region so that you can react. 

4.22
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have heard the response by the minister about the concerns of Members from West Nile. I do not know whether all of us should in turn have the opportunity to present our concerns. Whereas I appreciate the report, to say that the criteria was balanced regional development, you realise that while some regions accessed power, there are some areas which are marginalised. 

I feel extremely perturbed that we are approving for areas, I do not know whether the chairperson of the committee had some interest but when I look at this Hoima-Nalweyo, which is being proposed in the project, yet there was a longstanding project from Nkonge-Lwemiyaga and the surveys were carried out – measurements were taken and we got a communication from the minister, hon. Migereko, to that effect - 

But also recently, the President re-emphasised that point that he needed power from Nkonge to pass through Makole, for historical reasons, to Lwemiyaga. However, they made a switch in their offices and said now power to Lwemiyaga has to come through Lyantonde, which is a far distance from where it is and even for other considerations. 

For that matter, I am constrained to stand here and approve, when power that was granted in 2005, and there is no mention of that project, in the pipeline or anywhere - Mr Speaker, you will permit me to abstain from voting on this because I am touched; you become patient, and they seem not to bother about the surveys that were done but were instead thrown out. Indeed, it took a whole team from the ministry – they went down there and that is three years ago but nothing is being mentioned! 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have the points with you but that should not prevent you from participating in the deliberations here. But since you have detected that, what you should do is to write to the minister concerned or the officials concerned, alerting them on what is happening in your area, and at the same time raise those issues here. Use the two fronts: approaching the ministry, as a leader, and then also coming here because you have the opportunity to say something, as you have done so today.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the ministers are here and they are colleagues. Must we have a tug of war over these matters that really ought to be handled at a peaceful pace?

4.26
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know that mistakes happen but there are other areas where we did not make similar mistakes. My proposal to my colleagues, Members of Parliament, hon. Eriyo, hon. Ssekikubo and those MPs whose areas have been misspelt is to get to my office. I will get our people, the engineers, from rural electrification to travel with them to their constituency so that they trace all these lines one by one so that there is no mistake in the future submission. 

I am proposing that if that is acceptable, let us overlook the miswriting here. I would want us to act practically and not just to debate over names, which may be misplaced. But our intention is clear; we must get electricity to your districts. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: This is an offer on record and I advise that Members take note. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I would like to inform the minister that indeed we travelled even at night. We set off early from Kampala and had the whole day there. So, the travelling aspect is over but I am glad that you are now coming out to say that oversights can be overcome and we move forward. I thank you.  

4.27 
MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE (NRM, Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee and the committee Members for their report.

Essentially, I have no problem with the selection of the beneficiary districts. I am really happy to see electricity going to Chegere sub-county in Apac. I have ever been there to mobilise farmers. But the concern coming out, which the Minister of Energy should take note of is - and I am happy that even the chairperson of the committee talked about it- these piecemeal kind of projects, borrowing $10 million and yet the demand of power in the country is enormous. 

In the report of the committee, they allude to generation, and to me that is very important, and hon. Migereko, our Chief Whip, had also briefed me about the needs of generation. Now, we are investing money in Karuma; we are investing money in so many other small dams. Maybe what the Minister of Energy should come and tell us is, when all these dams are complete and they are up and running, what capacity shall we have to serve our country? Let us not look at the poles and the wires; you may have the poles and the wires for just political satisfaction when actually the power is not there.
 
Therefore, I think this House needs to be informed because the President keeps on emphasising these dams as a core infrastructural priority for the country. That is agreed. So, let us know, when these dams are up and complete, shall we have enough power to light up a certain substantial percentage of rural Uganda.

Secondly, from the committee report, which I read yesterday, they are trying to put an inquiry on the clamoring for power, for which they say is political pressure. I do not agree with that statement. The clamoring for social services is informed by the need to improve welfare. When we talk about rural electrification, what are we trying to solve? Light up our schools such that our people in rural areas can also have uninterrupted power supply and read their books. We are talking about agro-processing machines. 

I come from a district that has for sometime been dominating in maize production. Our acreage used to be high before the soils became bad. Now, if I must mill my maize on a diesel powered maize mill, I am at a disadvantage because the cost is high. So, the ordinary farmer at the farm may not install power but an agro-processing machine can be set up and an investor can be attracted. When we talk of modernising agriculture, you can never modernise agriculture unless you have power going to the villages. 

Granted, the committee talked of exploring other sources. Mr Speaker, I have been promoting solar panels in my constituency, I have given out over 100 panels there. But they have a limitation, for example, laboratories cannot be run on solar. The cost would be very high. So, it is not that we have to assess the economic sense; it is about the need for enabling every rural village of Uganda to be equally served.

This leads me to call for an actual master plan. The Rural Electrification Agency has a problem of money. When you go there they say, “we need this, add us more money”, but I think before we talk of more money let us talk of a plan. 

I used to see letters from the President, copied to us, to hon. Onek who was the then Minister of Agriculture, challenging that anything produced fresh and is not eaten should be processed at every sub-county. The President is talking of a mega industrial plan for the country. That must go with power. Therefore, we need a plan that will actualise that. Let us know the needs. If we sort out generation and we know how much we produce, then let us know the money and then you come here like the Minister of Education one time came to us and asked for a loan that was going to comprehensively rehabilitate a number of our schools. I should actually congratulate and thank her for that.  It was a very universal and all inclusive loan that catered for the needs of our constituencies.  

We were putting pressure on Ministry of Works because as some districts would have more roads gravelled, others would not have.  They tried to come up with a policy of taking up more roads much as UNRA has not done them but somehow it had a bigger outreach. So, while I support that Chegere and Swan Bukwo should get power, Nalweyo is equally badly off. Hon. Ssekikubo, do not feel bad about them, they are badly off. I know Nalweyo but there are more Nalweyos and Chegeres in rural Uganda.

As I wind up, I ask the Minister of Energy to tell us the generation capacity we shall have after our dams are complete; two, to give us a rural master plan covering all sub counties of Uganda whether I come to your ministry or not. I thank you.

4.34
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report submitted to Parliament yesterday. I would also like to thank Government for the efforts put in first of all generating more power, which would afford the extension of power to the countryside. More so, I thank Government for the initiative by the Ministry of Energy through the Rural Electrification Agency for the extension of power to those areas where they have tried to reach.

I would like to comment that Kakuuto has power. This power line was extended from 2008-2009 to Kakuuto, from Kyotera to Mutukula and also to Kasensero and it has done commendable transformation of livelihoods as my brother has said. There are many maize mills which are coming up as well as many coffee hullers. There are also many small businesses like fabricating machinery, which are employing many Ugandans who would not have been employed without power extension to the countryside.

I would like to support my brother who has said that we need to fast track countrywide rural electrification because many opportunities are generated as soon as power is extended to the countryside: charging batteries and phones, hair dressing and salons and maize mills; many opportunities which have employed the many unemployed youths.

What we could do is to request Government to bring a bigger loan rather than bringing piece meal loans of US $21 million. We should get a comprehensive loan facility tied on tariff collections so that we know that when we extend power, it is pegged on the tariffs which will be generated to recover the loan so that we fast track the process of countrywide electrification to all the areas which currently need power yesterday rather than today. We should not wait for tomorrow.

I would also like to emphasise the aspect that we have done well in the hardware facility of extending power to the countryside but there is the software; the technicians who are required. I am facing a problem in installing power in all the areas where power was extended but we do not have technicians. We are busy training people to speak English and history without having technicians who will install these power lines within the households and factories you are putting up. There must be a strategy in electricity to have technicians deliberately trained and put in the rural settings because getting electricians to go and install electricity in the countryside is very expensive and it is one of the deterrent costs, which is failing part of the countryside to get adequate power supply.

This also goes for water. A lot of sanitation projects have been done but we lack plumbers in the small water growth centres, so you find that as we go for industrialisation in this country, we must deliberately put a policy either integrating O’ Level with technical education in the basic education like plumbing and electrical installation so that we know that as a student qualifies for O’ Level, he or she equally has a first grade certificate of craft for technical education. This will make them able to stay out there and install the necessary hardware facilities we would have put in place as we do the rolling out in the development agenda of this country.

So, I support a massive countrywide equity driven electrification of the countryside so that we are able to ensure that our people get out of darkness, which they suffer every day. I thank you.

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. During the course of debate yesterday and today, reference was made about how the rural electrification plan is aligned to the National Development Plan. I just want, for purposes of comprehensiveness, to inform the House that in the National Development Plan, it is noted as one of the binding constraints. In fact, if you go through the numbers, rural electrification is an urgent matter both for production and transformation.

You need energy for growth. The numbers we have is that Uganda’s per capita consumption of electricity is one of the lowest in the world at 69.5 kilo watts per hour. The world average is 2,752 and for Uganda’s case, we need massive - I have listened to Members and you have a population where 90 percent of the population goes to bed with the sunset when the rest of the world is working and you are not working in shifts. Even these crises we are going through of price hikes are partly lack of processing capacity. 

The population is also tied with going to bed early because you do not have electricity. It is a compounded situation and no doubt in the National Development Plan, massive focus is put on construction and generation of electricity. I could relate all the programmes: Bujagali, Karuma, Ayago, Isimba - there are also many hydros including Musiizi, Kikagati, Mushungyezi, Waki, Mpanga, Masheruka, Nyagak. All these are massive undertakings to ensure that electricity generation and distribution reaches the majority of the population.

Consequently -(Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, hon. Kamuntu. I would like to inform you that you have referred to Mushungyezi, Kitagati and many others of that nature. These are projects that we have been talking about for the last five years even before I came to Parliament. To date, nothing is on the ground. In fact, I should be asking the minister to tell me how far these projects are, as far as implementation is concerned. It is not enough to fill that book with a lot of literature when there is nothing on the ground. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: I thank you very much for your information. The point I am making is to agree with Members that the country needs massive generation and distribution of electricity and that Government has put it in plan. It is already in the five year development plan and that is confirmed. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.   

4.42
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I just have a few concerns. I have gone through the entire document but I have not seen any project for Buvuma Islands.  I would love that the ministry comes up with a comprehensive plan which not only caters for the mainland but also the islands. Because as we talk right now, we have over four districts which are made up of islands, Buvuma being one of them. The others are Kalangala and Namayingo. So, there is need for the ministry to come up with that programme.

The second issue is that when we talk about rural electrification, we forget that it ends in trading centres. We would love that the ministry comes up with a programme such that these lines are extended deep into the villages. 

I would like to give a very good example of Kiyindi which was given electricity in 2006 but you realise that by the time power was extended there, the transformer they had was serving 20 people but now that many more people have been connected, that transformer has been overloaded which has made people lose their household appliances. So, I would also love that the ministry thinks of systems of improvement because much as many people are connected, they do not use the power due to its being very dim. They should replace the small transformers with big ones since people pay for the power. We would like to pay for a service which we benefit from.  

I would like to conclude by saying that the original Mukono has not fully benefitted. I have noticed that Buikwe which is a very big district has only two projects. When we talk of rural electrification, it is amazing to note that the bigger part of the project is in Wakiso, which is an urban area.  So, when you talk about rural electrification, when the power is going to Kampala, you will have missed the point. We would love that most of the villages are included. 

THE SPEAKER: So, is it the consensus of everybody that this loan is too small to meet our needs? 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I really agree with that. 

THE SPEAKER: So, we need more and the ministry should show us the plan for covering the entire country and maybe know the cost that is involved so that we progressively get loans to cover it. Otherwise, there is no opposition to the loan. Can I put the question on the resolution authorising Government to borrow for rural electrification? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW 75.0 MILLION EUROS FROM AGENCY FRANCAISE DE DEVELOPMENT (AFD) OF FRANCE, AND EUROS 75.0 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK (EID) TO SUPPORT THE KAMPALA WATER – LAKE VICTORIA WATSAN PROJECT

4.47
THE CHAIRMAN, THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Mr Speaker, we had also presented a report. I only want to request that the blue copies are given to all Members so that we move at the same length. I thought that they had been given yesterday but I am still seeing most of them up there. We have enough copies of the questions and answers because in the interventions, we had to look at so many areas which Members might raise in the debate when they are already part of the text. 

4.47
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the loan but when I read the report yesterday, there was no indication of the infrastructure to bring back the water from Katosi. So, can the minister give me some light on that issue?

THE SPEAKER: This is for water in Kampala and beyond. Hon. Minister -

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Jessica Eriyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As it was presented yesterday, by the chairman of the committee, I would like to clarify to the minister that this project is not for the traditional Kampala alone but for the Greater Kampala. It is going to cover four or five districts and, therefore, the pipeline will be laid through all those districts and connect with what we have in Gaba. So, there should not be any fear on how the water will leave Katosi and come to Kampala.  We have a well laid plan for it. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWERS

QUESTION 122/1/08 TO THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS

4.49
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): “The Mabira demonstration of 2007 and the Buganda riots of September 2009 showed that the country lacked a specialised force to handle demonstrations, riots and revolts.

(i) 	Would the minister inform the House what steps are being taken, if any, to have a well-trained, specialised public order Police Force to handle demonstrations, riots and revolts?

(ii) 	Would the minister accept that involving non-specialized forces in handling demonstrations, riots and revolts has resulted in many lives being lost needlessly?” 

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Mr Speaker, this is my answer to hon. Okello-Okello’s question.

It is true that there have been demonstrations, riots and revolts in the past few years. This has been possible due to the environment created by the NRM Government; an environment that allows free expression of opinion as prescribed in the Constitution. 

It is also true that during some of these events, a few lives have been lost and property destroyed. And this is highly regrettable. The loss of lives and destruction of property has mainly been caused by the refusal by the organizers of the demonstrations and processions to cooperate with the Police in planning and management of the events more often than not, such events turning into riots. 

Hon. Members, will recall that on the 5 February 2010, a Memorandum of Understanding for the Inter-Party Organization for Dialogue was signed. Those party to the Memorandum of Understanding were: the Conservative Party, the Democratic Party, the Forum for Democratic Change, Justice Forum, the National Resistance Movement and the Uganda People’s Congress. The Uganda Human Rights Commission facilitated the discussion that resulted in the signing by the parties of this memorandum. 

The memorandum spells out the guidelines to be followed by those intending to hold demonstrations and or processions. The guidelines require: 

(i) 	Identification of the organisers of the demonstration or procession.
(ii) 	Notifying the Police of his or their intentions.
(iii)	Planning and managing the demonstration procession together with the Police. The time, the route and the place of the demonstration or the procession has to be agreed upon. We will have to skip that, Mr Speaker. The copies have not been produced by my office. My apologies, please. 

Mr Speaker, it is sad to note that despite agreements on these guidelines, some individuals have never found it necessary to comply with the Police. They have gone ahead to stage demonstrations or processions without involving the Police and as a result, the Police have always had to come in to maintain law and order as required by our Constitution. It is in this process, as some demonstrations and processions turned violent that a few lives have been lost and some property destroyed. It is certainly true that all this could be avoided if the organisers cooperate with the Police as spelt out in the 5 February 2010 Memorandum of Understanding. 

In order to deal with such situations, a Public Order Management Unit was set up in the Police Force. This unit is made up of officers trained in public order management. So far, we have trained a suitable number of personnel at the Police Training School in Kabali in Masindi. These have been deployed in stations around the country to manage public order operations. For command and control of these forces, the British and the Irish have helped us train senior, middle and lower level officers. So far, three lots totalling to 196 persons have been trained. The training is continuous. 

Through these measures, a well-trained and specialised Public Order Management Unit in the Police Force has been created and we will continue perfecting it. The allegation that we involve non-specialised forces in handling these demonstrations and riots is not true. What is true is that in line with the constitutional mandate given to the Police under Article 212, the Police, depending on the circumstances, have sometimes called upon the Military Police to assist them in handling particular situations. When this has been the case, the Military Police have always played a supportive role with the Police in the lead. 

In conclusion, I want to inform the House that we have set up a Public Order Management Unit in the Police Force. Those in the unit are well trained but training of more officers is ongoing. 

It is true that there have been a few regrettable deaths and destruction of property during some of these demonstrations and processions. These would have been avoided had the organisers acted in line with the agreed guidelines. The Mabira protest, for example, resulted in the death of one Indian national. During the Kasubi riots, three people died. Where death and destruction of property has occurred, the incidents have been and or are being investigated and appropriate action has been or will be taken. Where an officer has committed operational mistakes and has been identified, appropriate punishment has been meted out in accordance with the Police Code of Conduct and the law, the latest case being the police officer who shot a child in Masaka a few days ago. He is under arrest and we may court martial him. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.58
MR LIVINGSTONE OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable minister for his answers but I would like to know from him whether it is the official government policy that people handling unarmed demonstrators should use live bullets on them. 

Secondly, this question was filed in 2008 and I am surprised that the minister is mentioning a very small number. If the minister started training a specialised force in 2008, I think some of the people that died should not have died. Can the minister therefore speed up the training of people who should handle the demonstrations?

Lastly, last Thursday, this innocent young baby – Juliana Nalwanga – was shot dead from inside her mother’s house purportedly by a stray bullet. I would like to know from the minister what Government is doing about it, apart from the arrests because so many people have been arrested in the past and they are back on duty, in situations like this. What is the government going to do because money cannot be a substitute for life? This is a very sad picture; I do not know what went on in the minister’s mind after seeing this picture here. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, answer the question. 

4.59
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Okello-Okello for raising this public concern. It is exactly because of such incidents that Government deeply regrets what has happened and the mere fact that we are trying to build up a Police Force which has not been around in its right form can account for such stray incidents. This case actually was not done by a police officer but an LDU who was just incorporated in because of certain circumstances but otherwise, I can say that the 186 people are mainly the officers we are training. Of course we are constrained by the budget because you know that the proportion of the – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, what I see in the mind of hon. Okello-Okello is whether you are planning compensation.

MR KIVEJINJA: First of all, we take police action for anybody who has committed any crime. Secondly, if at all there is anything that Government can do including compensation, it is always part of our normal duty. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This ends today’s business and I thank you for attending and again I thank you for being patriotic. Continue by attending parliamentary work until the end. We have cleared today’s work. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. to deal with the work which has been indicated on the Order Paper. 

(The House rose at 5.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 April 2011 at 2.00 p.m.)

