Wednesday, 23 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.27 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala
                    
PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence that I raise a matter of national importance and urgency –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: From now on, we are going to be very strict in how we do things. If a member stands up, he should first catch the Speaker’s eye, be named, and that is when he or she could start addressing us. Yesterday I saw a member who tried to grab the microphone and start talking even when the Speaker was still addressing the House. That is contrary to the rules. When you stand up, the Speaker should first say, “Yes, hon. so and so” then you address the House. Proceed.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate your guidance. I am sorry if I went beyond the normal parameters of the Rules of Procedure. However, my concern is about national security. 

Basically I am reminding the House that about three weeks ago, you made a ruling that the Government, especially the Leader of Government Business, or the Minister of State for Security, would give us a regular brief on matters of national security. This has not happened for nearly a month. However, right now, the region of eastern Uganda is very disturbed. 

There is a lot of illegal recruitment of people. We do not know whether these people are being recruited to join a subversive organisation, or whether it is an authorised UPDF recruitment. Statements have been issued from the Government. I can quote the spokesman of the Ministry of Defence. He said, “Guns have been given to the wrong people in Kapchorwa.” A person in the Ministry of Defence, a security organ of the state, making a public statement that guns have been issued by the state to the wrong hands, is a matter of serious concern.  

Over the Easter weekend, Mr Speaker, there were people in the Tororo area who were allegedly terrorising the community. They even exchanged fire with members of the security organs. To date, there has been no statement from the Government confirming this concern of the people of Tororo and Busia Districts. People are coming through – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you reporting or trying to pose a question to the Government about this issue?

MR AWORI: I was in the process until my honourable colleague interrupted me.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you hon. Aggrey Awori. On the 17t,h three people were arrested in my constituency on the border with hon. Dombo’s constituency, and they were allegedly transferred to Kampala. I was informed by the District Security Chief that two are from Bunyoro and one was from Zaire, that they travelled through Lake Victoria via Busitema up to a swamp bordering my constituency and that of hon. Dombo. The three people are alleged to have abducted a girl and raped her before the local community called the police. There was exchange of fire from ten O’clock until eight O’clock. That is when they surrendered.

Mr Speaker, the population, and I as an area Member of Parliament, are worried that these people might have been staged in order to establish an army detach there and to destabilise us politically. Because, if anybody would like to establish a camp or a rebel group, they cannot move all the way from Bunyoro and then come to an area without even getting the local population to be part of them! If you are to fight to establish a rebel camp, you do not start by raping people’s daughters! Therefore, I think Government needs to come up and give an account of exactly what is happening in the country.  

Second to that, the following people were picked up from my parish, allegedly by a UPDF officer, and they are being recruited into the UPDF. I called the Chief of Military Intelligence, Col. Mayombo, and he told me there is no recruitment. I met the Minister for Security yesterday, and he told me that he had also heard rumours some time back that there was recruitment going on quietly in Masaka and Rakai. 

The people have asked me, “Who is recruiting”? Is it the UPDF deserters who are recruiting to form rebel groups, or Government? If Government is recruiting, why do it quietly? The RDC and the DPC could not give me information. The parents of these people are asking for where they are. One is called Mukama, one is Opawo Besweri and another is Jawange. They were allegedly picked up by a UPDF officer called Omala Moses. This is the information I would like to give you, to show how bad the situation is. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, you asked whether I am informing the House or asking for information from the Government. I am expressing concern. This is a matter of national security. We expect a statement from the Government –(Interruption) (_Mrs Aporu rose_).

THE SPEAKER: There is information from the honourable minister.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mrs Christine Aporu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I share the concern of hon. Aggrey Awori about security in the Eastern region, however, I would like to take the opportunity to inform the House that the Minister of Internal Affairs is chairing a security meeting and the Minister of Defence is there too. The Minister for Security and the security bosses in the eastern region are all in the Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters for the meeting. But we shall take the concerns and inform the ministers, as they are discussing issues similar to what you are raising about the eastern region. Thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, as I said, I was winding up and with your indulgence, I should do so accordingly. The last point I was going to raise pertains to the northern part of Uganda, which has taken up 23 percent of our budget. 

I thought the Government had set up a peace team but we hear nothing about it. At one time, we were told the Government is better equipped in terms of military hardware, to contain the situation. Instead the number of causalities by Kony is going up. 

Among other things, we understand the UPDF is supposed to withdraw from the Eastern part of Congo –(Interruption)
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Awori, have you moved from eastern Uganda to the DRC? You stood on a point of security in eastern Uganda, stick to the point. The issue has been taken and the minister has promised to take the message to those concerned.

MR CHARLES ANGIRO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to report about the situation in Erute County North, as far back as the 20th of this month. In fact I have received the latest information this afternoon to the effect that over 250 people have been abducted by the LRA rebels of Joseph Kony. 

In fact, since Easter Sunday to date, the situation has been out of control because we have no UPDF in the area.  The few LDUs who should have manned the situation have been overwhelmed, and the situation is now pathetic. People are running up and down, they are sleeping in the bushes, and others have run to Lira Town. Those who have remained behind have no medical facilities, no foodstuff, and they have just raised me to inform me that I should report there immediately. But I am going to report empty-handed. I wonder what is happening.

So far, we have requested for the UPDF to be stationed there and there is no reply to this effect. I was told that some 50 or 60 mobile UPDF reported there, but then they disappeared. So, the situation at the moment is really bad. We are requesting Government to intervene because without that, people are losing confidence in this Government.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I want to inform this House that the issue of security and early response by the UPDF is causing a lot of concern, especially in the eastern part of the country. The issue of insecurity had not been very rampant in Bunyole County until very recently, when three armed people claiming to have come from Congo via Kenya, settled in Bunyole for about two days. 

The people in Bunyole called the security organs in Tororo District and it took two whole days in order to mobilise enough policemen to come and counter the situation which was getting out of hand. Because of this delay, an innocent citizen, the daughter of a Mr Higenyi, was abducted and defiled. 

When you go to Lubongi Barracks in Tororo District, you will be surprised to find only women. And not women soldiers, but women married to the soldiers. You wonder where the soldiers are! And this creates a very big problem. When you go to Kapchorwa, you do not find the soldiers. When you go to other places, you do not find the soldiers there either. Now that the soldiers are coming back from Congo, may I request the Leader of Government Business that these nooks, which are potentially dangerous and require specific protection, could be given enough cognisance so that the people of Uganda are protected the way they ought to be? I want to thank you.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you honourable colleague. Mr Speaker, I have been told that the abduction of the 250 people in my sub-county was of people within the ages of eight to 18 years. You can imagine! And I was told by a parish councillor that people are now desperate. We have been informing them that the Government was going to intervene since last week, but up to now there is no intervention by the Government soldiers. What is this House going to do about this? 

Even last week we lost 11 LDUs and no Government official went there to console the people of Arama sub-county! These were gallant sons of this country who were defending it from this problem! But now, their numbers are very low, not to mention the pay they get. And now that they are losing their lives, their families are concerned. I wonder what we are going to do about this. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, as hon. Aggrey Awori said, a few weeks ago I said the Ministry of Defence should periodically give us a report on the situation of security in the country. I now want to repeat it to the Leader of Government Business and the House, that this should be followed. We should get periodical reports about the situation.

You should also take into consideration the reports that you have received today on the matter, so that the House is informed of what is happening and the solutions that are being given to address the problem.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Mr Speaker, the issue of security of course takes priority for all of us. I want to note that the practice of the Government has been to buy time and to use all sorts of delaying tactics, hoping that our memory will fade away and that the issues will die a natural death. 

I have also noted that since we passed the motion for protective forces to be put on the border of the districts affected by cattle rustling, the ministers responsible have practically disappeared from this House. Every time we ask about the matter, they are not here. 

Mr Speaker, in view of the fact that in the next two or three weeks the House has to adjourn, I suspect that all Government is doing is simply buying time. May I, as a matter of procedure, request you, Mr Speaker, that you fix one day for us to discuss this issue of security? Because you are going to adjourn at the end of this Session for us to go home, but some of us have no homes to go to! 

I do not know whether you are going to give us a special allowance to stay around Kampala, because definitely I am displaced and I cannot go to Otuke. I cannot do anything, and I am asking that as a matter of procedure, you should give us a specific day - because this is what should be done - preferably a Friday morning for us to flush out all these issues of security. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, we shall make the necessary announcement, perhaps tomorrow, on this issue. (Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of procedure. 

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Lukyamuzi, let me tell you -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: A few minutes ago, I said you do not just stand up and start addressing the House unless I have said so, hon. Lukyamuzi -(Applause). You tried it yesterday when I was addressing the House and interrupted me. I did not mention it and I did not intend to, but you are provoking me. Please, you should adhere to the rules of this House. (Applause).

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am sorry, Mr Speaker, I apologise.

DR ALEX OKOT (Moroto County, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of national interest and a very delicate point which I would like to inform this august House about. 

Over the Easter weekend, I decided to go to my hometown, that is Lira town. However, it was not a good Easter because on Easter Sunday, starting from around 4 O’clock, people began storming into the town and at the same time it started raining heavily, until 9.00 p.m. However, that is not the issue. 

The issue is that I went to see somebody who was shot on Sunday morning. While talking to the lady called Ejang Aidha, from Aloe sub-county, she asked me a question: “Is the army uniform also sold on the open market?” I said, “no.” Then she told me, “The person who stabbed me on my breast was wearing an army uniform.” 

In the same clinic, I went to another room and found another lady from Omoro sub-county by the name of Acham Josephine. She was shot in the buttocks and she told me her story too. That they were at the trading centre when they saw the soldiers - it could have been either the UPDF or LDUs – coming. They were sure it was security. But a short while later, they began firing bullets and as she was running away, she was shot from behind, in her buttocks. The bullet remained in her body.

Mr Speaker, I am raising this point because it is very serious. Who were these people in army uniform, and where did they get it? Where did they get the guns from? The people of the sub-region are very sure that Government does not at all care about their security and they are used to the idea. But this is a new situation. 

And this is even the taxpayers’ money. Even if they contributed only Shs 3,000 each for tax, that uniform, those guns and the soldiers, are paid for from that tax. And now they are turning against them and Government is just keeping quiet? People are used to the idea that the Government does not care, but that Government is turning against the local people and using the taxpayers’ money to fight the local people; that is horrible! 

Is Government saying that the people of the sub-region are not Ugandans? Even foreigners are being protected in this country! Why are citizens of a particular area not being protected? 

As if that were not enough, sometimes the UPDF chases the Karimojong rustlers who have stolen animals and retrieves some animals. But when the local people identify the animals that have been retrieved as being theirs, they are asked for a fee in order to receive their cows back. 

One has to pay Shs 10,000 per cow; otherwise one does not get it. And there are no discounts. If it is a goat it is retrieved at Shs 5,000. Testimonies to this abound. Whoever received a cow or a goat back could testify to that. 

Mr Speaker, what can Government say about this? What can the Minister of Defence say about this? The people have accepted that they are suffering but they cannot accept that Government is turning against them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Omara Atubo made a prayer that we set aside a date when we should go into the details of this security matter. I promised that very soon I will set aside a date and ask the Ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs to be here too. So, these other details can wait for that date, which I will announce shortly. Let us proceed. Unless there is another urgent matter, I suggest we proceed.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion under section 40(k). It concerns -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you met me about the motion you intend to move, and I advised that we should clear the committee stage of the next bill, and the matter on the terms of reference, before we can entertain other business in the form you want it.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE UGANDA LAW REFORM COMMISSION ANNUAL REPORT, 2001

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS COMMITTEE (Mrs Dora Byamukama): Mr Speaker, I am not detailed but I am sure that the chairperson will be here shortly. I apologise.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

(Clause 1, agreed to.)

Clause 2:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, before clause 2, the Committee is proposing new clauses to be inserted and to read as follows: -

“The principal enactment is amended by deleting the definition of ‘conference’ starting in the fifth line of the section. 

Secondly, the principal enactment is amended in sub-section (2) by- 

    (a) inserting between the words ‘shall’ and ‘have’ appearing in the second line the following clause – ‘be the policy-making body and’ 
    (b) inserting a new paragraph (ff) to read as follows- 
 		“to make or amend the Constitution of the National Youth Council.” 

The justification, Mr Chairman, is that Section 8 is deleted. The council is taking on the functions of the delegates’ conference. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: The question is, why is it “before Clause 2”, because when you look at Clause 2 in the bill, it states that: “The principal enactment is amended by repealing Section 5”. If this is what Section 2 provides, why don’t you use clause 2 and then add whatever amendment you want, rather than introducing a new one? Because it will mean that we have to pass it and then come to clause 2, which is exactly doing the same thing!  I do not know, maybe you have a point!

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, these amendments are on the principal statute and there are certain sections we are amending on the principal statute, which were not provided for in the amendment bill. And they come before clause 2, although we have amendments on clause 2.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but can’t you use clause 2 to do exactly what you are doing without introducing two clauses which you want to use to amend the statute? Because, by repealing, we amend the Principal Act, and it states “The Principal Act is amended by deleting the definition”. Don’t you think that can be done?  But we can do it the way you want if you think that is the way to proceed.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I prefer we do it the way I have read it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the committee has proposed clause 2 to be amended and to read as follows: -

“The principal enactment is amended by substituting for Section 5, the following-  

5(1) The council shall consist of- 

    (a) the National Youth Committee.
    (b) the Chairperson of every District Youth Council.
    (c) the Secretary for female Youths at the district level.
    (d) the Secretary for Finance at district level. 
    (e) eight representatives of youth organisations nominated on regional basis by the National Executive Committee in consultation with the non-governmental organisations board.
    (f) the youth member on the National Council for Disability.
    (g) four student representatives elected by National Students’ Association, two of whom shall be female and one from a secondary school.
    (h) the Executive Secretary of National Council.
    (i) Youth Members of Parliament.

(2) The members of the council in paragraphs (e), (h) and (i) of the subsection (1) shall be ex-officio members who shall just participate in the deliberations of the council without a deciding vote”.

Justification, honourable members, Mr Chairman:

(i) The bill is seeking to recompose the council, and not the delegate’s conference. Therefore, the appropriate section to be replaced is Section 5 and not 8.
(ii) To establish direct linkage with, and more participation by lower youth council structures for effective implementation and monitoring and to streamline the size of the council merger with the delegates conference to a reasonable number which can be properly facilitated for its meetings.
(iii) The members from non-governmental organisations, the Executive Secretary and the Members of Parliament are ex-officio members so that they do not dominate the council decisions but bring their expertise to the council.  I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Dr Kamugisha): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  On Clause 2(f), the youth member of the National Council for Disability, I need to inform you that we don’t have that person yet, but it is in anticipation that this Parliament will pass the disability bill and approve that position.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you saying, we are anticipating the- 

DR KAMUGISHA: At the moment we don’t have such a member on the National Disability Council because the council is not there.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you are saying that if we fail to pass the law, there will be a problem?

DR KAMUGISHA: Yes, we shall have to forego it.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, are you aware that in this country we cherish affirmative action? When people with disabilities made this request, the committee wrote the report and it is only waiting for space on the Order Paper - (Interruption)- yes, we are hopeful.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, this is a technical point which the minister has raised. Now, if they ask you, what is the National Council of Disability, are you in position to define it, or you anticipate that it is going to come in the law we are about to pass?

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I think to use the words you have used, we are anticipating, since the bill is before Parliament and the committee has already written the report.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I am one of the members from the Equal Opportunities Committee, which joined the Social Services Committee to work on this particular bill, and indeed we cannot anticipate as we legislate.  Therefore, in light of this, it would suffice if an amendment, which provides for a representative for people with disability, could be adopted subject to what members have proposed, because if this particular person is not there, we shall not pass this law. So I propose that we put a representative for people with disabilities.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you have heard that we put "a representative of persons with disabilities", and maybe later, when we deal with the other one, we can find a way to overcome the problem. Definitely, you cannot put a structure which has not been created in a law to operate.  I think that is the argument of the minister.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, we have found ourselves in the catch because if the Disability Bill had come earlier than the Youth Bill, we would have found ourselves in a similar situation because there would be no disabled person in the youth council.   I quite appreciate that indeed, because according to our rules we cannot anticipate the creation of a disability youth.  But in order to avoid the problem of anticipating the law, can’t we make a provision without necessarily having a reference?  In which case I will support her.

THE CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, do you accept the contribution by hon. Dora Byamukama that we amend it by bringing in a representative of persons with disabilities? Otherwise, we cannot anticipate because our rules don’t allow us.

MRS HYUHA: Okay, Mr Chairman, that is accepted.  We have to bear in mind that we are dealing with the Youth Council, which has a defined age limit of between 18 and 30.  So I can- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Of course, that will be taken into account.

MRS HYUHA: Okay, I accept that proposal.

DR KAMUGISHA: Mr Chairman, still on composition, I wish to suggest that it becomes “all youth Members of Parliament” rather than “youth Members of Parliament”.   It is a small amendment.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, honourable members, you had the proposals by the committee and you have heard the contributions.  Now I put the question.  Is there any other?

MR MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I want to move an amendment on the Chairperson’s report to delete (d). "The Secretary for Finance at district levels.” Because - I am making a justification - there is no reason why we should have Secretary for Finance when we have the chairperson and the woman representative from the district. 

Secondly, on (g), knowing that most of these youth are from secondary institutions, why do we limit it to the females?  I move an amendment that the four students selected should not be based on sex. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Let’s first deal with his amendment of (d) because we have to dispose of it. You may support it; I am not saying it will succeed.  But why don’t we dispose of that, and then we move to the other one? 

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Yesterday, I listened to the concern of my colleague hon. Nandala about the size. You remember one of the objectives for the merger is to come out with a sizeable council so that we minimise expenses, which failed the two big national bodies to transact business.  

But when you look at the proposal which we have indicated, the council at the end of the day, (b) to (d), if you calculated, we have 56 districts each bringing three members and that would give us 193; (e) would give us 8, (f) 1, (g) 4, (h) 1 and (i) 5.  That is an estimated number of 212.  But when you look at the original size, the National Youth Council had 67 members and the National Delegates Conference had 310, a total of 377!  Certainly, this composition of 212 is manageable but reasonable enough for transaction of national business.  

The reason why we looked at the secretary for finance is because this person should come from the district level so that we are in position to know his strategies for the centre. That is why we looked at secretary for finance. And looking at the kind of population we are dealing with, if you bring this person who is dealing with finance, in addition to the chairperson and secretary for the females, we should be in position to come out with clear strategies on how they should mobilise the youth, and that is how we looked at it.  I beg that this House support this position.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.  Are you convinced?

MR MAFABI: Mr Chairman, I am not yet convinced because if a leader comes as a chairman, he will be briefed by all sections of his council from the district.  So he will come with a position on finances, on environment, on education etcetera.  If the chairperson says, it is only the secretary for finance that is well versed what about the other secretaries?  I think it is not necessary for me to agree with her on that.  If she had said, any other secretary, maybe, but for me as per now, I am not convinced.  I think this person is redundant because the chairperson will come with all the information about all the sectors.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, honourable members, you have heard the arguments; you have heard the amendment suggested by hon. Mafabi and you have heard the response from the Chairperson of the Committee.  Now, I put the question on the proposal by hon. Mafabi.  

(Question put and negatived.)

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Chairman, I stand on the amendment of the chairperson on subsection (2), at the end of that proposed amendment on page 9(2):  “The members of the council in paragraph (e), (h), and (i) of subsection (1) shall be ex officio members, who shall –” I would suggest “who may” rather than “who shall”.  The justification is that -

THE CHAIRMAN: They may decide not to?

MR WAMBUZI: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I am seeking clarification on (i), "Youth Members of Parliament". We have many MPs who are within the age bracket of the youth, and if all these Members of Parliament are included on the council, then according to the statute, those ones within the age limit of the youth are many.  They are more than five, and if all of them were included on the council, then the council would be big.  So I was trying to seek clarification from the Chairperson.  What did she really mean?

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, let us first of all dispose of hon. Wambuzi’s amendment. He says instead of saying, “shall just participate”, we should say, “may participate” so that it is permissive. His worry is that when you say, “shall” it means they will have to participate but with “may”, they decide to or not to.  There is a purpose why they have been included, so if you water it down to say, “may” then what is the purpose of putting them there?  But then, let us put the question. I put the question to his amendment that we use “may” instead of “shall”.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: In respect of the honourable member for Masindi, I think she did not mean people who fall in the bracket of 18 and 30, but youth representatives.  You cannot take hon. Otto to fall in this category because he is not representing a youth constituency.  

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, my colleague should have possibly read the background of the report on page four.  We were very clear, and this amendment is tallying with the observation of the Committee, which says, “The Committee has proposed that all the five Members of Parliament representing the youth become ex-officio members of the new recomposed National Youth Council”.  So it is in that line.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is clear.  

MR BASALIZA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I am questioning the rationale of the Committee on Clause 2 section 5(1)(g). They should have considered all secondary schools as well as tertiary institution!  So, I am suggesting that (g) should read: “Four student representatives elected by the National Student’s Association, two of whom shall be female and one from a secondary school or from a tertiary institution”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we dispose of this first and then we come to you, unless it is connected?

MR MWANDHA: I wanted to respond to the earlier one; I don’t know whether it has been sorted out. We should change the formulation of Youth Members of Parliament to Members of Parliament representing the youth.  There you will be more exact.  We should avoid a situation where any young Member of Parliament may claim to be a member of this council.

THE CHAIRMAN: We shall come to that, but have you heard hon. Basaliza’s comment?

MRS HYUHA: I am first disposing of hon. Mwandha’s concern. We have no objection because that is exactly what we said in the main body.  So it can read that “Members of Parliament representing the youth”.  

Then hon. Basaliza asked why we specified that one student should come from a secondary school and excluded tertiary institutions.  It has been noted that many of these tertiary institutions and universities dominate these activities and leave out secondary schools.  That is why we were specific to secondary schools and they are the majority on the board.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question on the proposal by the Committee.

(Question put and agreed.)

MR MAFABI: Mr Chairman still on (g), I want to move an amendment that of the four student representatives elected by the National Students Association, two should come from secondary school, but there should not be segregation; it is a must. One should be a female.  My justification for this is that the share for females, we have already provided it in (c), that every district will send a female youth at the district level.  

Two, why I am insisting on secondary school, the chairperson has just mentioned that it is higher institutions which are fond of taking the lion’s share.  In this matter we are providing two at least for the secondary school so that they participate – (Interruption)

MS KABONESA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and thank you hon. Mafabi for giving way. Honourable members, as you may be aware, we have catered for affirmative action everywhere; it has been our way of working out things.  In our experience, we have noticed that all the four students have always been boys.  So, if we at least take up one female from a secondary school, we will be catering for affirmative action.  So, I beg that you support this amendment.  I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put a question to the amendment by hon. Mafabi

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Do you again want an amendment?

MR MADADA: Yes, Mr Chairman, I am on point (e) on the composition, where it reads “eight representatives of youth organisations nominated on regional basis by National Executive Committee in consultation with Non-Governmental Organisations Board”.  I want to replace “Non-Governmental Organisations” with the “ministry responsible”.  Why? Because I am aware of many youth organisations that are registered under gender offices, and they are not within the NGO board. So, it will be limiting those youth organisations that are not limited to the NGO board.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, hon. Madada is aware that we have the NGO bill.  It is mandated to register and streamline the NGOs within this country.  Therefore, if a certain NGO has not been recognised and registered, why should we plan for it?  We have proposed that the recognised non-governmental organisation should play this role! 

MR MADADA: They are community-based organisations which are legally recognised, but they are registered under the Ministry of Gender in their districts, without necessarily going to the NGO board – (Interruption) 

MR KIDEGA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform hon. Madada that there is a background to this NGO board.  In the parent law which we are amending, there is an organ called the National Youth Fora, which was brought on the NGO board.  So, the reason for consulting with the NGO board is to take care of these people who formally existed in the parent law, and also to provide opportunity for the Constitution of the Youth Council to be composed of really strong organisations which are legally existing and not small ones.  I thank you so much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal by hon. Madada, I want to put a question to his amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2 as amended stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the Committee is proposing an amendment on Clause 3 as follows: - 
“ Section 7 of the principal enactment is amended-

    (i) by adding at the end of subsection (3) the following-
“and two students elected by Sub-County Council Executive Committee in consultation with the National Students Association in the district, one of whom shall be a female, as well as the Sub County community officer as an ex-officio member”

    (ii) By substituting sub-section (5) with the following-
“A District Youth Council shall consist of;
        (a) the District Youth Committee;
        (b) the Chairperson of every Sub-County Youth Council;
        (c) the Secretary for Women Affairs at Sub-County level;
        (d) the Secretary responsible for Finance at sub-county level;
        (e) one Non-Governmental Organisation involved in social and economic development in the district to be nominated by the District Youth Council Committee;
        (f) one youth with disability, representing the organisation of persons with disabilities in the district to be nominated by the District Youth Committee;
        (g) the District Officer in charge of Youth Affairs;
        (h) two student representatives nominated by Uganda National Students Association in the district, one of whom shall be a female;
        (i) the executive secretary of the district secretariat.

The members of the Council in paragraphs (e), (g) and (i) shall be ex-officio members who shall just participate in the deliberations of the Council without a deciding vote –” (Interruption).

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me before you proceed. Under (e), did you mean a representative of non-governmental organisations?

MRS HYUHA: Yes, please.

THE CHAIRMAN: You meant one representative?

MRS HYUHA: Yes, please. Noted? One representative of non-government organisations involved in social and economic development.

Mr Chairman, (7): “District Youth Council shall be a body corporate, and may sue or be sued in its corporate name, and shall carry out any other activities carried out by a body corporate.”

Justification: The District Youth Council is nearer to the grassroots, and should have more activities. Being a body corporate will enable it operate more independently and be able to raise funds and hold property on behalf of the youth. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, you have heard the proposed amendments.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to add after sub-section (3) – let me read it as she put it - that “two students elected by the sub-county Council Executive Committee in consultation with the National Students Association in the district, one of whom shall be a female, the sub-county community office…"    

Mr Chairman, there I want to add “and the two youth councillors to the sub-county local council who shall also be ex-officio members” and then at district level –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us dispose of that. Chairperson, what do you say?

MRS HYUHA: Yes, Mr Chairman, given the members’ contribution yesterday to the motion, we took note of it. It had come up in our committee, although, I think, at the time of finalising the report, something could have happened.  We accept that because we want that linkage of the youth councils with local governments. But since we are not amending the Local Governments law, we can bring the other two members on local government to come and interface, since that is where the resources are decided. We have already moved that we want the youth councils, both at district and sub county level, to be body corporate and allow them to generate more income; it is appropriate. I support it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put the question on the proposed amendment by hon. Namayanja, which has been accepted by the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS NAMAYANJA: Another amendment, Mr Chairman, is after (i) to add (j), to include the district youth councillors to the local council and that “the members of the Council in paragraphs (e), (g), (i) and (j) shall be ex-officio members”.

MRS HYUHA: Yes, it is the same analogy as I have stated.  These are the two ex officio members who should come at district level, but should be ex-officio both at sub-county and district level. I beg to support.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR KAMUGISHA: Mr Chairman, on clause (3)(i), on the first line, which says, “and two students elected by the sub county”, we should add, “or division or town”, because these also may have committees.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. You see the policy; it says “division or town”. 

DR KAMUGISHA: Additional.

THE CHAIRMAN: But let us dispose of this.

MR YERI OFWONO: Mr Chairman, you find that a sub-county is equivalent to the division but municipal council is also a county and there is an accounting officer who also can support the youth. So if we could include, “division and municipal council”, and everywhere where there is a sub-county, we would add  “division and municipal council”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I would rather accept the division because that is equivalent to a sub county.  But we have already removed councils at county level, which is equivalent to a municipality. So let us take on division so that we have some consistency.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 (Clause 3 as amended agreed to.)

Clause 4:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the Committee is proposing an amendment in Clause 4 to read as follows: “The principal enactment is amended by deleting Section 8.”
Justification: The Delegates' Conference is being removed.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 as amended agreed to.

Clause 5:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the Committee is proposing an amendment in Clause 5 to read as follows:

(i) By inserting a new paragraph (a) to read as follows-
    (a) Deleting the words “or to continue to hold office” appearing in the second line from the bottom of sub-section (3)
    (ii) Renumbering the provisions starting with the words “adding after”, appearing at the beginning of the second line to read as paragraph (a)
    (iii) Deleting the words “over age” appearing at the end of the second line of sub-clause (6)
    (iv) Inserting a new sub-clause 9 to read as follows-
“For the avoidance of doubt, any person holding an office in a youth council shall not vacate office on the sole reason that he or she has attained 30 years of age at any time during his or her term of office”.  

Justification: It would be very expensive to re-elect every time a member of the Committee becomes 30 years, and yet even a person who is twenty-nine and a half is eligible to be elected. I beg to move.

DR KAMUGISHA: Mr Chairman, yesterday I spent some time arguing with the House the importance of age, and I still want to request this House to retain the age of the youth so that one holds office between the ages of 18 and 30.  The moment we start going beyond that age group, we shall have defeated the affirmative action for which this clause stands.  

Secondly, Mr Chairman, elections to replace the officers who fall out are not expensive at all because they are held at regular council sessions. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, why don’t we deal with this issue of age? You have heard the position of the minister; you heard the chairperson of the Committee. The minister is opposing the extension of age on the grounds of expenses for holding a by-election, but the Committee said it is because it would be expensive, that is why they extend age even when a person is no longer in that bracket of youth. So, I put the question –(Interruption)

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Chairman, I just want to clear my mind before I vote. The Committee is proposing that youth should overstay in office for the fear that it will be expensive to re-elect others. But the minister has just told the House that there is nothing to fear; it is not expensive, and people should vacate office as soon as they attain the age of 30. If that is the position as I understand it, then the question be put.

THE CHAIRMAN: The position is not that the youth should stay in office after the age. They are saying a person who has been a youth should stay in office when he has ceased to be a youth because it would be expensive to replace him or her. That is the meaning. Now, I want to put the question on the Committee’s proposed amendment on extension.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAFABI: Mr Chairman, some of us have voted without knowing. We thought we were going to first deal with the minister’s amendment then we come to the Committee’s amendment. The reason why some of us are coming up to support the minister is that even in Public Service, the moment you hit the retirement age, however good you are, you are supposed to be retired and paid gratuity. So, the Youth should not also overstay in office for purposes of saying –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: The minister was not making an amendment. He was saying yesterday he made a contribution on the issue and he has been explaining that people should not fear this question of election being expensive because it is not. But I think people were clear when they decided. Were you not clear?  Do you want us to repeat? 

The position is this, that a person may be elected when he is still a youth but then after two or five months, he ceases to be in that bracket of youth as defined in the Act, and yet he has been elected to serve for four years. He may serve for four months and he ceases to be a youth. And they are saying, “you continue with the remaining three and a half years because it is expensive to replace you.” That was the policy. Is that clear?  

The Minister is saying, “no, it is not expensive at all to replace that person.” That was what he said.  

Now, in view of that explanation, I want to put the question on the proposed amendment by the Committee. I do not think now you do not understand - (Interruption).

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Chairman, I want to seek further clarification before I vote on this matter. Is it in the interest of the youth that they should continue in office, that people who served them when they were youth should continue in office beyond the age of 30 even when it would not cost us anything much to replace them? That is the clarification I want to seek.  

Secondly, would this Parliament be legislating in the best interests of the youth if it violates the age bracket of the youth, imposing over-aged people on them?

MR MIKE SEBALU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to get clarification from the minister. He said that it is not expensive at all. What does he mean by that? I think we need more explanation about what he means when he says, “it is not expensive”. People would be voting from an informed position if he said that the process is simply doing a, b, c, d. He simply said it is not expensive. I do not think that is a good explanation for one to take a logical, informed position.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the question is; what is the overruling interest? Is it the expense or to serve the interest of the youth? I think this is what you have to –(Interruption)

MR SEBALU: The primary motive is to serve the interest of the youth, and to encourage affirmative action whereby those in the age bracket serve legitimately.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I said if you want to make any submissions, you just stand; it is for me to say, “honourable so and so”.

MR ODONGA: Thank you very much. Mine is a plain submission. Mr Chairman, I think the architects of this constitution imagined the ground would be unlevelled for a youth to compete with an elderly person. But we are now reaching a situation where even the elders are complaining that the ground is not levelled to compete with the youth, for example, in my constituency.  

So, I have a very contrary view in that, first of all, it is bad to make a law while knowing who to apply it on. We have four Youth Members of Parliament in this House and probably they are already over 30. Now we are making a law whether to determine their continuity or not - (Laughter).

MR KIDEGA: I am just seeking a small clarification from my honourable colleague. I am his Member of Parliament as well - hon. Otto.  He has just alluded to the fact that all of us are above 30, that most of the Youth Members of Parliament are above 30. The law that keeps us here is very clear and the debate we are having right now is on the Youth Councils, not representation of youth in Parliament.  

So, I think it is very important for the member to clarify to me whether he is trying to insinuate that the law that keeps a person in Parliament when he clocks 30 should be undone. I will be happy to know that.

MR ODONGA: Mr Chairman, in fact I might even choose to request your office that they leave the House since it seems we are discussing matters that conflict with their interests. (Laughter) 

But that aside, I had wanted to say it is bad to make a law while knowing who to apply it on, this argument is similar to the "third term" argument. You see a personality and then you debate the law depending on how that particular person is. I suggest that if we are debating over this issue, then we should better agree that in case we pass it, perhaps it would not apply to these colleagues in the House. It would help them to be a little more objective. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think you must now know what you are voting for. We have extensively debated this issue, and I think we want to vote from an informed point. We are voting on interest and cost.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, the guidance I wanted to seek was that this law we are passing now must be in tandem with, say, the Parliamentary Elections Act. If we provide something different from what obtains in that Act, we shall cause ourselves a lot of problems In some cases, some people will not be qualifying, in other cases other people will be qualifying. I would have preferred a situation where a person standing for the youth position is such a person that will continue to be a youth during his term of service. That would have been the best thing. But that notwithstanding, I think we need to reconcile this law with the Parliamentary Elections Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Mwandha is saying you are given a load to take to Jinja from Kampala, but you know that your fuel will only take you to Lugazi and you undertake to take that load which is supposed to reach Jinja when you know –(Laughter)

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Mr Chairman. As a former Youth Member of Parliament, I would not buy the idea of allowing somebody who is above 30 years to continue in these political offices, because the age bracket given is very limited and yet we have many youth in this country. So, anybody clocking 30 years should leave office and allow other youth to come in.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me see how we handle this one.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. When the Committee came up with the recommendation that is before this House, it analysed and debated at length on all the pros and cons of the situation in which we are.  I get a little bit upset when the honourable minister comes up to say that it is not the financial implications that the Committee is worried about. 

I think the minister owes us information because as I talk now, why is it that the various vacancies that have existed in these youth councils have never been filled if it is not because of the lack of facilitation? (Applause) At the same time, we should also make a law which can be implemented. There is no point in making a law which we know will not be implemented for many years. 

I think that in all fairness, based on the experiences we have gone through, if a person has been elected into the office while duly falling within the age bracket of a youth, and to use the Chairman’s example, if the fuel gets finished in Lugazi, there are local OPEC boys these days, they can look around and be able to get that difference to make it reach there -(Laughter).  

Having said that, I am looking at the practicability of a law. Let us make a law that we will be able to implement, that will be able to work because, as I said, right now, if you went to the countryside, there are many of our youth, who are in those offices but they have long superseded that age bracket. There are even other vacancies; even elections have become too costly to this government. As I talk now, there is no LC II executive. Now if from that it can happen, what about with the youth who are already marginalized? Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, honourable members, the opening of this clarification was not for debate on the issue. It was meant just for you to understand when you are voting, why you are voting for this or against it. I am satisfied that I think you are now clear. When you vote, you will be voting well aware of the consequences so that we vote on this, we vote on the proposal by the Committee because you know –(Interruption)

DR KAMUGISHA: Mr Chairman let me clarify one point before the members vote on this - (Interruptions).

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

DR KAMUGISHA: I want to clarify on this issue of cost because we must distinguish between elections which are to be carried out by the Electoral Commission and those which should not fall under that category. 

I want to refer you to Section 5 of the Schedule under this very National Youth Council Statute which says, “Except in the case of the village youth council where the office of a member of a Youth Council or Youth Committee becomes vacant, the Committee of the relevant Youth Council shall organise an election for the vacancy to be filled.”  

In other words, once a position falls vacant, the committee declares it to the relevant council and they hold the elections. Then they can transmit the results to the Electoral Commission and that is the way it has been working. In other words, there are no costs apart from those of convening that regular council -(Interjection). Yes, that is what I am telling you, and this is the absolute truth.  

Secondly, Mr Chairman, I interact also with youth quite a lot. The issue of age is a big stormy amongst them when they see one of them who has by-passed the age bracket still presiding over them. And this is one of the biggest issues. Those are the two clarifications I wanted to give.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I think now you really know. When you vote this way, you know what you are voting for and I want to put the question really.

MR ODONGA: Mr Chairman, I had wanted to understand that as of now, who are the youth Members of Parliament who are over 30, before we vote?

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member, I think that by now you should know your colleagues and their constituencies. So, I do not need really –(Laughter) 

MS KABONESA: Thank you so much, Mr Chairman. I want to make it very clear that the honourable minister has said that for the places that fall vacant, people go in for voting. Honourable members, I want to assure you that these places stay vacant for years and years, till another election. And we never vote because there is no money in the Electoral Commission. That is number one.

Like hon. Wadri said, we want to make a law that is applicable. Now, do members want to tell me that for the purposes of elections, for one to contest, you should be between 18 and 25?  Because this means that for any person who is 24 and a half or 25, they will not contest. And yet we are looking at youth who are between 18 and 30. So, I would rather we take up any person who is between 18 and 30.

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to supplement what hon. Kabonesa has said. When you close out the youth between 24 and 30 years, that is a big injustice to this country.  The youth who are between 24 years and 30 years are so many. For you to deny them the right to represent their fellow youth is not proper. (Applause). So, we should really make a law that is suitable to all the youth, from 18 to 30. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us explain this. I think there is a misinterpretation. A person who is 29 is free to stand. But those opposing the amendment are saying, he can only serve for one year, after he has reached the age of 30, he ceases to hold the office - (Interjections)- Honourable members, let me put the question. I think it is clear. Now you know.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5 as amended agreed to

Clause 6:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, before clause 6, there is a new clause to be inserted after clause 5 - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order! Please let us dispose of this matter. We have more business to transact.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, there is a new clause to be inserted after clause 5, to read as follows: “Section 12 of the principal enactment is amended by replacing subsection (1) as follows-The secretary shall be appointed by the Minister following the procedure applicable to appointments in the Public Service.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Then why don’t you say, “on the advice of the Public Service Commission”? What are we hiding?  

MRS HYUHA: Okay, on the advice of the Public Service Commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS HYUHA: Before clause 7, clause 6 is amended by deleting paragraph (b), and sub-section (4) that goes with it.  

Justification: Appointment of a secretary is dealt with under section 12 and not in section 13. Therefore, the provision is transferred to a new clause to amend this section. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 6 as amended agreed to.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, before clause 7, the committee is proposing a new clause to be inserted after clause 6 as follows: 

“The principal enactment is amended by inserting a new section 15(A) as follows - 
15A(1)	The District Youth Council shall have a secretariat to assist in carrying out of its functions under the Statute. 

(2)	The Secretariat shall have an Executive Secretary, who shall be appointed by the District Chief Administrative Officer on the recommendation of the District Service Commission.

(3)	The District Youth Council shall employ such other staff as may be necessary for the proper and efficient discharge of the functions of the Secretariat under this Statute.

(4)	The employees of the Council shall be appointed by the District Service Commission on terms applicable to the Public Service.

15B(1)	The Sub-county Youth Council shall have a Secretariat to assist in carrying out its functions under this Statute.

(2)	The Secretariat shall have an Executive Secretary who shall be appointed by the District Chief Administrative Officer on the recommendation of the District Service Commission.

(3)	The sub-county youth council shall employ such other staff who shall be appointed by the District Service Commission on terms applicable to the Public Service.

(4)	The provisions of this section shall come into force on a date to be determined by the Minister by Statutory Instrument.” 

Justification: To allow the functioning of lower councils to be independent of the national council, and to be effective. I beg to move.

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would wish to amend the committee's position on 15B(2) as follows: “The Secretariat shall have an executive secretary who shall be appointed by the district Chief Administrative Officer in consultation with the district youth council executive committee, following guidelines issued by the district service commission.”  

Mr Chairman, this would also work for the sub-county persons. But the justification in this case is: first of all, the justification given by the Committee is that it will allow the functioning of lower councils to be independent of the national council and to be effective. 

Mr Chairman, what we have realised is that when these people are put in place without the participation of the youth councils, without the participation of the executive committees, the allegiance to these people is lacking. You find that they owe allegiance to the Chief Administrative Officer, and they have nothing to do with the youth executive committees. This has been in place, and we think that participation of the youth committees at this level is very important.

THE CHAIRMAN: Supposing your advice is wrong and you produce a wrong person?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, we cannot have wrong advice for our activities.

THE CHAIRMAN: Because this is a public person who is serving. Why don’t you leave independent people to deal with this, instead of getting involved with cliques here and there?  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I cannot understand why we should create another appointing authority. I thought that the appointing authority in a district is the district service Committee. What is special about this executive secretary? 

As you rightly recommended, there should be an independent body to appoint this person, rather than the Chief Administrative Officer or some other person. So, I want to move an amendment that this person be appointed by the District Service Commission.  I wish to move, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we want consistency. Since at the top you have put the minister, at the end I think the consistency has to follow, and the Chief Administrative Officer is the top civil servant in the district. He is the one to sign the letter of appointment, although he acts on recommendation after interviews by the District Service Commission. Because now, why did you allow the minister to appoint, when actually he is also advised by the Public Service Commission?   

I want to put the question to the proposal by hon. Namayanja. Hon. Namayanja wanted to introduce the council, the CAO and so forth. I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on the proposal by the Committee.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 7:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the Committee is proposing an amendment to Clause 7 by substituting the words “section 16” with the expression “Part V”. 

Justification: The election of parliamentarians is dealt with elsewhere, and non-governmental organisations are included in the council. The consultative forum is therefore not necessary anymore, and this is dealt with under section 17 and 18. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 7 as amended agreed to

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, before Clause 8, there is a new clause to be inserted after Clause 7 as follows: 

“The principal enactment is amended by inserting a new section 19A as follows-
19A(1)	The funds and resources of the District and lower Youth Councils shall consist of-

(a)	Such sums as may be appropriated by Parliament for the purpose of the district and lower youth councils.

(b)	Such sums as may be appropriated by the relevant local government council for the purposes of the Youth Council.

(c)	Any monies accruing to the relevant Youth Council in the discharge of its functions under this Statute.

(d)	Grants, gifts or donations to the relevant council.  

(2) The monies appropriated under subsection (1) shall be decentralised as conditional grants to the relevant local government councils and directly transferred to the district through the normal accounting system for the benefit of the relevant youth councils by the Treasury.

(3) All income and monies of a council shall be deposited to the credit of the council in a bank approved by the district youth council, and shall not be withdrawn except with the approval of the Youth Council.  

(4) The account shall be operated by the signature of the Chief Administrative Officer, or any person authorised by him or her, and such other signatures as the council may determine.  

(5)	The provision of section 20 to 25 shall apply to the district and other lower youth councils.”  

Justification: Mr Chairman, the councils at the district level are being made body corporate. They should therefore be able to raise funds from several sources, with supervision from the centre for accountability. Also, conditional grants to districts should be given for the funding of the councils while the Chief Administrative Officer remains the accounting officer. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the amendment is to introduce a new clause to deal with finances of the council.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Chairman, my concern is with sub-clause (1)(d)- the gifts, grants and donations to the relevant councils. There is need to know where these grants, gifts and donations are coming from. There is need to regulate these donations, gifts and grants. We do not want bad money, for example, to come from anywhere in the world and find itself in the council. 

For that matter, Mr Chairman, I want to propose to the chairperson of the Committee that there may be no harm if these donations, gifts and grants could be scrutinised at that level, maybe by the CAO, and then at the national level by the minister.

MR WADRI: Could the honourable member clarify what he means by bad money? Is there any money in this world that is bad, once it is given for a good purpose? (Laughter)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I am also equally disturbed by the member’s concern, because a gift could be from a Member of Parliament. I may have gone to officiate at a function of the youth councils, and I give them a donation of 500,000/=.  Who should scrutinise that? Is that bad money?  

It could be that a minister has gone to officiate at the Youth Day and he has given them one million shillings. It could be that they are going to have a tournament and Coca Cola has come out to give them donations or gifts of T-shirts.  Is that really bad? So, I pray that the House supports the position of the Committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is that as of now, the honourable member has just expressed reservations. There is no formal amendment for us to consider.  But maybe I can give him an opportunity to frame a formal amendment.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Chairman, I propose to move an amendment on that sub-clause referring to grants, gifts and donations. And I ask for an opportunity to justify why I am moving this amendment. 

I do not mean, in any way, to deny the youths from getting money, but I want to be conscious, so that these young people are not influenced in any way by money, which may be coming from bad sources. And I will justify that later on. 

But the amendment I want to move is as follows: The funds and resources of the district and lower youth councils shall consist of all those monies as outlined in (a), (b), (c). But specifically for (d), I want to add “with the approval of the CAO”.

THE CHAIRMAN: You had something to say about this, Mr Minister?

DR KAMUGISHA: Mr Chairman, on Page 15, Paragraph 2, a small –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no. Let us dispose of this first.  Now you have heard the amendment moved by –(Lt Col Katirima rose_)- No, the justification was given when you addressed us. I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

DR KAMUGISHA: Mr Chairman, on page 15, paragraph 2, I think the monies to be decentralised should be those which shall be appropriated by Parliament.  Therefore, it should read, “The monies appropriated under sub-section 1(a)”, not just (1). 

THE CHAIRMAN: You read it with the amendment you want to make.

DR KAMUGISHA: “The monies appropriated under sub-section 1(a) shall be decentralised as conditional grants.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, I have an amendment on this very clause. When you look at what has been written, it states, “The monies appropriated under sub-section 1(a) shall be decentralised as conditional grants to the relevant Local Government Councils and directly transferred to the district through the normal accounting system for the benefit of the relevant youth councils, by the Treasury.”  

I have a concern about the issue of the normal accounting system. It may be neater to say, “through the prescribed accounting system.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, accepted.

MR ODONGA: Mr Chairman, I was concerned about the issue raised by my colleague, hon. Katirima.  Are we now saying – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no. We have disposed of that.

MR ODONGA: Yes, but are we allowing youth to collect money from Al Quaeda, from enemies of the state, because we have not come out with anything to that effect?

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment on a new clause.

(Question put and agreed to)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, before Clause 8, we would like to insert two new clauses to read as follows:

“The principal enactment is amended by inserting a new section 28 A after section 28 as follows -

28A(1)	"Subject to this Statute, every youth council and youth committee shall remain in office for a period of four years from the date of its inception, after which it shall automatically lapse and dissolve.

(2)	A member of a youth committee or youth council vacating office at the end of his term, subject to this Statute, be eligible for re-election.”

Justification: It was found necessary to put the tenure of office of the councils and committees in the main body of the law, to avoid it being adjusted by the minister from time to time. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

MS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, 28B is about a transitional period: “As a transition for the districts where delegates were elected, the delegates will fill the office of the secretary in charge of finance in the district in the National Youth Council, until the expiry of the office of a delegate.”

Section 29 of the principal enactment is amended in sub-section (1) by deleting the expression, “tenure of office of the Council, youth councils and youth committees”, beginning from the end of the second line to the end of the third line. 

Justification: The tenure of office is being provided for in the main body. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Chairman, there is a small amendment which needs to be taken care of, and I am really requesting for re-committal on the Clause 8 we have just passed. When you look at the clause, it says, “A member of a Youth Committee or Youth Council vacating office at the end of his term…” We respect gender neutrality. Therefore, Mr Chairman, I thought this should be corrected.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, they will take note of that.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would wish to propose an amendment on 28B. I would wish to propose a new clause to read as follows: “As a transition, the members of the District Youth Council at the commencement of this Act shall remain in office until the expiry of their term, and thereafter, the composition under this Act shall apply.” 

The justification is that this new law, the one we are debating now, has provided for the change in the composition of the district youth councils. But the district youth councils are already in place, and they were duly elected under the principal law, the National Youth Council Statute. That is the law that constitutes the district youth councils and they are already in place. 

But this new law is proposing another composition. So, that is why I am moving that those who are already elected, the district youth councils in place, should stay in office until the expiry of their term of office, and then this amendment applies to the other term of office.

DR KAMUGISHA: Mr Chairman, on 28 B –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we want you to reply to her amendment before we move on to another. Perhaps the chairperson could answer that.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, I have no problem with hon. Namayanja’s amendment. We should cater for the transitional period of those positions we have suggested to be scraped. We have proposed that county councils should be scrapped, but since they were already elected, let us allow them to complete their term of office at district level. I beg to support.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Chairman, I want to know exactly which term is being referred to.

THE CHAIRMAN: The current term.

MR KIWALABYE: Is that the amended one? You know, in the principal law, they were not elected for this term. They were elected for another term. Which term are they now completing?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think they are saying that there is an arrangement existing now. That arrangement should continue up to the expiry period of the tenure. Is it clear? Currently there is a government and they say it should be preserved and that these provisions should be effective at the expiry of the term of the current administration. 

MRS BINTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I seek clarification on how the district council will be formed. Right now, we have the county councils and yet the new law says that the county councils are not supposed to exist. How will that be synchronized?

THE CHAIRMAN: They are saying that as a matter of transition, the current arrangement should operate until the time that was given to it expires. It is transitional. After that, normal things will flow. So, I put the question to the amendment by hon. Namayanja.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question on the proposed amendment, including hon. Namayanja’s, on the new clause.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, clause 8 should be amended by inserting before the word “substituting” appearing at the beginning of the second line, the following clause: “deleting paragraph 2 and…”.

The justification is that paragraph 2 is dealing with the tenure of office of members and the provision is being incorporated in the main body of the Statute. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.)

MR YERI: Mr Chairman, I want to seek your guidance because we are trying to equate the youth structures to the local government. There is a sub- county to the district in rural areas, but in urban structures we have divisions, town councils and then municipal councils. All these are existing bodies corporate. 

However, according to the existing amendment, we are excluding municipal councils. A county is an administrative unit but municipal councils cannot go away with it because they are not administrative units. It is a government. So, we should at least make sure that there is a committee at the levels of municipal, town council and division. Those are the urban structures. We should not exclude the whole government, which would support the youth at town council level. These are headed by mayors, and we have 13 municipal councils so we should not underrate that. I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Is the municipality not equivalent to a division in the city of Kampala?

MR YERI: A sub-county is equivalent to a division, but the municipality is above that.

THE CHAIRMAN: A municipality is equivalent to a division in Kampala.

MR YERI: No, a municipality is above because –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the Sixth Parliament passed a law elevating the status of divisions in Kampala to municipality level.  

The Title:

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the Title stands the Title to the Bill.

(The Title, agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002” and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE, YOUTH AND CHILD AFFAIRS (Dr Alex Kamugisha): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read a Third Time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill entitled, “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2002.

THE SPEAKER: Congratulations, the Bill is passed. (Applause).

LAND ACT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002
SELECT COMMITTEE TERMS OF REFERENCE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this item is on the Order Paper because we have not settled terms of reference for the committee that we set up to look into the controversial issue in the Land (Amendment) Bill. I do not know what to do, but the chairperson has a draft of what he thinks. However, the decision as to what terms to take up is ours and I understand you have been given copies of this draft. Hon. Ruhindi, could you assist us?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, my Committee sat this morning and looked at the various opinions that have been given by Members of Parliament. We think that it would be wise and prudent to sit and harmonize them in these recommendations that we will make to the House.

These terms of reference are succinct; they are focussed and we believe they measure up to the challenge that the Committee was given. They are focussed and specifically interested in the new proposed clause (39)(a), the one on family land rights brought forward by the Committee on Natural Resources.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we believe that when the Committee studies the proposed amendment by the Committee on Natural Resources in clause (39)(a), together with other relevant laws, particularly the Land Act, 1998 and the Land (Amendment) bill, 2002; they should harmonize it with existing laws. Based on the method of work the Committee deems most expedient, that first component of the terms of reference will have been properly discharged.

Part two is more related to the methodology. We are proposing that in making its recommendations, the Committee should have regard to:

    1. The different land tenure systems in the country;
    2. The different social systems in the country; and
    3. The importance of land and human resources in the country’s development process. 

Item three is based on the proposed recommendations the Committee is expected to draft, and relevant provisions of the law.

We have also received proposals from the Minister of State, Natural Resources and we believe that the points raised by him are very crucial. They will certainly be considered when we are carrying out our deliberations.

With those few words, we hope that these terms of reference will be adopted and we proceed with the work, because the time we have got is very short indeed.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you very well know, my ministry, which is responsible for Lands, has been handling the subject matter for some time. Last week, or the week before, you requested that we contribute to the terms of reference. I opened the files and came out with 20 issues that were brought to the attention of my ministry for consideration while proposing an amendment to provide for family land rights. At the time that was co-ownership of land by spouses.

For the record, I wish the House to know what those terms of reference were. I now wish to transfer them to the Select Committee because the matter now belongs to the House.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Mr Speaker, thank you for letting me move this. I also want to thank the Minister for giving way. I am a member of this Committee which was given the task to look at the proposed amendment. The chairman has already outlined the terms of reference and we all have a copy of this. So, when the Minister starts talking about his terms of reference which are not available to all Members of the House, and which he wants to put on record, it becomes a little bit confusing for me. 

Since this House has appointed a committee, I propose that the appropriate venue for his terms should be before the Committee. If the House is to hear these particular recommendations or issues of concern, as I would like to refer them to, then this should be circulated to Members of Parliament as per our Rules of Procedure. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true we had this bill which was brought by the Minister. In the course of dealing with it, we found we had a problem. We agreed to refer the issues to the select committee that I set up, and it was agreed to by the House.  

Unfortunately, we did not have the terms of reference for the Committee. It is not the work of the Committee to set these terms of reference because we commission it. The House should have a mechanism of setting the terms of reference for the Committee. The Committee should just work as directed by the House. So we agreed to go and think about these terms and anyone of you who had an idea could put it down so that we could consider it and eventually decide on the terms of reference. I think it is only one member, hon. Katirima, who drafted something.

The exercise we are dealing with now is framing terms of reference. You have heard hon. Ruhindi and his committee; they have made some suggestions. They have not said that these are terms of reference; they only think they can also work on this. It is up to us here to agree on the terms of reference for the Committee to be able to immediately embark on their work.

What the Minister is doing now is also making his contribution on the terms of reference. If we agree with him, then some of his ideas could be included. Perhaps what I see is that it may not be easy for us to frame these terms of reference. Why do we not commission some people to do? Do you not think this may be our way out?

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, these are to me a good starting point - his terms of reference. If somebody has another idea, they could suggest it now and we get on with the job. The Minister has good ideas and we should try to bargain and reach a middle position. We are trying to accommodate each other. The Minister should move in that spirit, so that we all move together.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, in the spirit of partnership, I think the Minister would have shared his 20 terms of reference with the Committee that has been formulating these terms If the minister has not had time to meet the committee and give his input, it may be necessary, particularly when they are 20, for us to allow the minister to reconcile with the committee and then come up with the terms of reference which will meet the needs of the minister and ourselves.  I am saying this because –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, here you implying that it is the committee to set its terms of reference.  What we have here shows that the committee is only helping us by making proposals.  I wish we had mandated it to set its terms of reference, but that is a different matter, and if we do that then we can say, “anybody or any other person who is interested in formulating the terms of reference, let him go and meet the committee”. But so far, we have not done that, so let us decide.  Do we mandate the committee to bring their terms of reference and then report to us?  Is that what you want or you want us to do it ourselves?  

DR NKUUHE:  Mr Speaker, I have sat on many select committees and most of these committees have actually drafted the terms of reference and the House approved them.  So, I was wondering whether we could start with terms of reference and improve on them and then we proceed!

THE SPEAKER: No, it is true you might have sat on a number of them, but it is sometimes strange for a person you have given an assignment to determine the kind of assignment he has to embark on.  But it is our competence to mandate the committee; if you decide so, then the committee will have been mandated to set their terms of reference.  If you think it is better that way, we can proceed.

MRS WINFRED MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like to move that we mandate a committee to formulate the terms of reference and then bring them back to the House for approval.  I beg to move.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Mr Speaker, I believe the honourable minister for Lands, hon. Baguma Isoke, has a wealth of knowledge on land matters, and since he has come up with terms of reference, what is the harm in reading them out and then we get them on board; because we might be missing important terms of reference from the minister.  

I come from an area where the question of land is so important that I should not miss any bit of what is being proposed. So, I recommend that the honourable minister gives us his proposed terms of reference.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you do this, honourable members?  We have a select committee, but if you think it should not set these terms of reference, why don’t we mandate people to go and work out the terms of reference, bring them here, we approve them and then we start working?  We can do that.

LT COL KATIRIMA: Mr Speaker, the select committee sat and came up with proposed terms of reference.  I am one of those people who had proposed some terms of reference, and I must state here most sincerely that the select committee has addressed more than 90 per cent of the assignment given them.  I will not have much problem with them as regards these terms of reference.  But in order to be open, is it not procedurally correct, since the select committee has handed in its proposed terms, we let the honourable minister, a man at the centre of this matter to also present his terms and anybody else who has these terms and we give them a deadline?  Tomorrow, we appoint another small committee to go and look at these terms, harmonize them and then hand them over to the select committee to do the homework.

THE SPEAKER: I think it is synchronized.  Let us get five people; they get these proposals; work on them, and then report back to the house.  

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I was just suggesting that the committee should have five members composed of three woman Members of Parliament and two male Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, it is not the majority of that committee or the select committee that will matter.  What will matter is what they will produce.  So, when we set up the select committee, we had a fair share.  This should not be seen as a women matter, it is a spouse issue.  Do you agree on five members?  

MR WAMBI: Mr Speaker, I agree with the suggestion of five.  But my problem, honourable members, is how we shall call this type of committee.  Are we calling it ad-hoc committee on terms of reference or a committee without a name?

THE SPEAKER: No, it is just an ad-hoc committee to work out the terms of reference.  I do not think we should really be concerned with the name.  I think it is the substance really that matters. The committee should look at what the select committee has suggested and any other person who has an idea and then they report to us and these people start working.

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, allow me to propose the names.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay, do.

MR SEBAGGALA: One, hon. Issa Kikungwe, hon. Seninde –(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: Are you going to select all the names?  You just give one name.

MR SEBAGGALA: Hon. Kikungwe Issa.

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, this sub-committee, I believe we should have one strong social scientist and one good lawyer.  For that matter, Mr Speaker, I would recommend Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere to be one of the members in that committee.

THE SPEAKER: Those are two.

MR WAMBUZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I suggest that hon. James Mwandha should be on that committee.

MR MADADA: I am proposing hon. Kabakumba to be on that committee.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabakumba is a member of the select committee.

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, we were privileged to nominate names to form the committee, maybe what we did not think of at that time is another committee to analyse these terms of reference.  I suggest that you nominate five members and we approve them.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, tomorrow I will give you the names so that by Monday the committee can start to work. I think we have finished this business and at this juncture, I want to suspend the proceedings so that we can proceed with the other business on the Order Paper.  

(The Proceedings were suspended, for 10 minutes, at 4.50pm)

(On resumption at 5,10 pm, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
SECOND READING
THE UGANDA TEA DECREE (REPEAL) BILL, (2002)

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Uganda Tea Authority Decree (Repeal) Bill, 2002 be read a Second Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Madam Speaker, the tea industry like any other sub-sector under agriculture is influenced by the economic policies we are putting in place.  There was a time when everything in this country was being nationalized and there came a time when everything being sold we thought should have boards.  We had Uganda Coffee Marketing Board, Uganda Produce Marketing Board and for tea there was what they called Uganda Tea Authority, and its purpose was exclusively to market the tea. 

As we have gone on with the tea industry through liberalization and privatisation, this board is becoming redundant in the sense that each tea factory markets its tea directly and they can no longer sustain this body.  

One would wonder why I come to Parliament to repeal it if it is redundant, but it so happens that when some one wants to invest in the tea industry and solicits a consultant to take inventory of statutes regulating tea, obviously the Uganda Tea Authority Decree is part of the statues in the books, it, therefore, affects these potential investors.  But also those who are already in the country feel insecure that we can use it to their disadvantage.  It is, therefore, necessary that we ask Parliament to repeal it.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Madam Speaker, before I present the report of the committee, I should make one thing clear.  Yesterday, we deferred the debate on one of the bills which appear to be similar to this one, and we have taken it back and we are doing some justice on it.  Why did I say this, it is because some of the honourable members here were wondering whether it is the same bill which has come back, but that one is different. We are critical on that and we are asking Government to do a bit more homework. This one is a simple one and I hope it will not take a long time. 

This bill seeks to repeal the Uganda Tea Authority Decree 1974 and to provide for appointment of a liquidator to dissolve Uganda Tea Authority.  The specific duties of a liquidator shall be: - 

    (a) receive all assets of the authority; 
    (b) receive and settle any claims relating to any obligation of the Authority; 
    (c) determine and settle the terminal benefits payable to the former employees of the Authority; 
    (d) dispose of the assets of the Authority;
    (e) recover any debts owed to the Authority;
    (f) Carry out any other duties, which are incidental or related to the foregoing duty.

The justification of the repeal:
Since the return of the former tea estates- and by the way, this bill actually affects only the estates which were owned originally by the Asians and they have reposed them- the factories to their owners from the 1980s, coupled with the liberalization, privatisation and divestiture policies since 1993, Uganda Tea Authority lost its marketing functions and commission funds in form of cess and grants from Government. 

Furthermore, by the end of the year 2000, all the 250 Uganda Tea Authority staff had left the organization due to lack of funding.  Uganda Tea Authority, therefore, is no longer relevant and its maintenance would impose unnecessary economic burdens on the tea producers and Uganda taxpayers in general.  

The committee adopted the method of work under section 2; we received and examined the Uganda Tea Authority Decree (Repeal) Bill, 2002.  Discussions were held with several major stakeholders who included:

    (a) The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries and his technical team.  I must also add here that the ministers of State in that ministry participated effectively.
    (b) The Tea unit Secretariat in the ministry; and
    (c) Uganda Tea Association Officials, and these Tea Association Officials constituted by commercial farmers, the factory owners, who are basically Europeans and Asians in this country.

The Committee also reviewed several documents relevant to the UTA, including the justification for the repeal from MAAIF- that is the ministry itself- a memorandum from the Uganda Tea Association and some documents on the ongoing challenges to the tea industry as a whole.

The background to the establishment of Uganda Tea Authority:  Decree No.8 of 1974 was promulgated in Uganda by the then President Iddi Amin Dada after he had expelled Asians from Uganda. This contributed to economic decline as a whole and a collapse of the tea industry.  The Decree was specifically established to: -

a) exclusively export and market tea outside Uganda;
b) make recommendations to the minister as it is thought fit in regard of the amount of cess to be charged on tea growers;
(c) apply such portion of its funds as the minister may determine for the benefit of the tea industry;
(d) invest any surplus funds in any manner permitted by law, or in any project approved by the minister after consultation with the minister responsible for finance;
(e) perform such functions relating to the growing and harvesting of tea as may be prescribed by the minister;
(f) participate solely or jointly in the establishment of manufacturing factories for green leaf or derivative tea and in the control and management of such factories;
(g) do all such things as conducive or incidental to the attainment of the foregoing objects.

The performance and achievement of Uganda Tea Authority since the Decree was put in place was as follows: -

Achievements. During 1974 to 1982, the UTA was solely responsible for co-ordinating, monitoring, collecting statistical data, circulating information and in charge of tea export. However, tea production dropped significantly from 23,367 metric tones in the year 1972 to only 1,533 metric tones by the year 1980.

Problem encountered by UTA:

a) By 1983, the Uganda Tea Association had been reactivated and it started re-organising the tea producers. The association was originally established in 1948 as a voluntary association for tea producers.  They used to meet regularly to discuss common problems affecting the tea industry.  This association could not operate between 1974 and 1979 because of the existence of Decree No.8.

According to the documents from the Uganda Tea Association, the association itself controls 95 per cent of the tea producers in Uganda.  This indicates that Uganda Tea Authority has almost no one else to organise.

b) As already stated, the Authority’s powers collapsed with the introduction of liberalisation, privatisation and divestiture policies in 1993.  Farmers now produce and at the same time market their own produce both within and outside Uganda.  

c) Worse still, UTA does not have any funds and manpower to sustain its operations.  By April 2001, Uganda Tea Authority was indebted to the tune of Shs143,088,772, which resulted from unpaid rents for the Mombasa offices and go-downs of the defunct Lint Marketing Board.

d) By February 2001, the Authority had only Shs 401,964 on its bank account in Barclay Bank Limited in Kampala.  This economic demise of the Authority led to the departure of all staff.

The Committee's observations:
a) UTA was established to promote the development of the tea industry in Uganda and market manufactured tea.  As already pointed out, the organisation became redundant for almost 20 years after the return of the tea estates and factories to the original owners, followed by introduction of the liberalisation, privatisation and divestiture policies.

Currently, the investors in the tea industry do not need to be licensed to engage in the business of tea growing and green leaf processing. The continuing existence of the decree and regulations therein should therefore be repealed to avoid further suspicion on the part of the investors.

b) The decree provided for transfer of property, funds et cetera to Uganda Tea Authority. It further provided for the imposition of cess on all tea manufactured in Uganda, which cess was supposed to be collected by UTA.  Since there is no cess now, Uganda Tea Authority has nothing to collect.  

c) The decree contains several stringent restrictions such as a requirement to apply for tea planting licences, request for a permit to erect a tea factory, the need to acquire tea manufacturing licences and prohibition of tea export by private producers.  All these requirements are no longer sustainable under Uganda's present economic policies.

d) The assets of the Uganda Tea Authority are still in MAAIF- that is the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries- and will be first audited before they are disposed of by the liquidator in consultation with the established procedures contained in the treasury accounting instructions part ii on stores.  

e) Taking into account that tea production has been rising every year since 1986 without any significant input from Uganda Tea authority, it would be unfair to resurrect that same body.

Recommendation and conclusion: - The need for a comprehensive National Tea Policy by Government.  The Committee strongly recommends that MAAIF formulates a National Tea Policy as soon as possible.  They should consult with key stakeholders in the tea industry.  When formulated, the tea policy will not only produce a more flexible monitoring system for the industry, but also provide guidelines for transforming tea into a major foreign exchange earner in accordance with the existing national export promotion strategies.  

The Committee further recommends that MAAIF should utilise the experiences of other tea growing countries in sub-Saharan Africa, such as Kenya and Zimbabwe, to promote a vibrant tea industry in Uganda.  

Based on the experience of the liquidation of the Lint Marketing board, whereby cotton stores were disposed off to private individuals, who largely dismantled them leaving no storage facilities for those to come thereafter; the Committee strongly recommends that a comprehensive audit of the assets and liabilities of the Uganda Tea Authority be done and a report be submitted to the Committee to their satisfaction before the disposal of the assets.

That in the disposal of the assets, appropriate disposal mechanisms be put in place to ensure that local tea producers are not unduly deprived of those assets that enhance the productivity and development.  

Approval of the Repeal bill: 

The Committee recommends that the Uganda Tea Authority Decree, 1974 be repealed forthwith. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

MS BEATRICE KIRASO (Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the elaborate report, and the Minister for finally bringing this bill to the House. I come from Toro which I think is the biggest tea growing and exporting area in Uganda. So when the tea industry was suffering as the chairman has said, I was looking because all this beautiful tea had become very big forest.

Madam Speaker, I would like this Parliament to appreciate and note how we in Uganda do our things, and really I am very disappointed. This Uganda Tea Authority stopped being effective, it actually stopped work in 1980 when the estates and factories were returned to the owners, in 1993. That is ten years ago, because this is 2003! It completely lost its marketing function and it was not accessing any funding from Government but on paper there was a Tea Authority. In our laws there was also a Tea Authority, and if there was anybody who wanted to come and invest in that sector, this was one of the organisations to consult with, because it was there on paper. 

How much money has this country lost by having an existing and at the same time non-existent body in place? Why has it taken us this long to bring a bill here to the House to repeal that Decree? I would like to be clarified, because this shows us how we – there is a way we operate, which I think very few people could explain. I hope the hon. Kisamba Mugerwa will explain this thing. 

When you look at the indebtedness of the Uganda Tea Authority, or which accrued to the UTA, it was not different from what went on in the other parastatals that were later privatised. It is Shs 143 million, yet the Committee says there was only about Shs 401,000 on its account. And this is a body supported by a law! Parliament is here, and it is hard just to bring a bill and repeal it? What does it take? Why did it take this long? 

I would like to agree with the committee, Madam Speaker, that we need a National Tea Policy. There is a way we tend to read the liberalisation and private sector driven economy upside down. To us in Uganda it looks like liberalisation and privatisation, but a private sector driven economy means the Government should completely pull out and leave the private sector to do everything. There are some things private investors cannot do. A private investor will come and plant tea and want to process it and export it, but will it also make the road? 

A private investor will want to come and invest in flowers and fruits, but will that private investor go to Entebbe Airport and put up cold storage facilities? We are talking about promoting export. Why do we forget, Madam Speaker, that 80 percent of our population lives on agriculture? What specific and deliberate interventions have we put in place in as far as development of infrastructure is concerned? It will be a very happy day for me - not because I come from that area but also for the whole of this country – to see boosted export earnings. They are still very low. A Tea Policy should be put in place so that the areas that grow tea know what they are entitled to, what they will benefit from, and how they should continue to operate. Madam Speaker, I welcome the repealing of this decree and I thank you very much.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for their report. I remember our Tanzanian friends would say during the liberation war, “Waganda Hawaende bila fimbo” – that we have to tell the Minister to give us the National Tea Authority, the National Agricultural Policy, and also tell the Ministry of Defence to bring us the Defence law. What is this? What are we doing in these offices that it has to take this Parliament to recommend that you bring here the National Tea Authority? “Muna faanya nini” in the Ministry? Why do you not resign and go home? 

Honourable members of the Front Bench, assist us to assist you. I recommend that we tag these recommendations to the Budget of the Ministry of Agriculture - within three months a comprehensive audit of the assets should be made and brought here. How far will the Minister have gone with the National Tea Authority within the coming three months, before you start telling us about PMA? Bring us this National Tea Authority. What are you doing in the offices with all your technocrats? You assist us and we assist you.

Before you come here to sing that agriculture is the backbone of the economy, without any policy, what are you doing? Madam Speaker, let us put it in the recommendations that within two to three months this should be here. If we do not push these honourable members of the Front Bench, they cannot move. “Waganda Hawaende bila fimbo.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for its observations and the recommendations. I would like to support it. I also thank the Minister for the explanation he has given. 

It is true that the Tea Authority Decree of 1974 was meant to control the marketing of tea outside Uganda. It is also true that the liberalisation and privatisation policy on the other hand, have really helped in the marketing of this product by the Private Sector. But, Madam Speaker, the existence of this decree, to me, appears that the law is still functioning and I believe it deters the investors in this industry. 

So, Madam Speaker, when the Minister or the Committee brings a recommendation that this should be repealed, I strongly support it. However, I think this repeal bill should have come earlier than today. Probably it would have saved the country this big indebtedness caused by the UTA.  

Madam Speaker, I would also like to strongly emphasise that the tea being a strategic crop for export for this country, it is important, just as my colleague has pointed out, that the Ministry of Agriculture should come up with the tea policy for proper management of this industry. Otherwise, I do strongly support the Committee and the Minister’s view that this decree should be repealed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS IDAH MEHANGYE (Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this motion or this repeal of the Uganda Tea Authority. I thank the Committee for coming up with an elaborate report and I also thank the Minister that at long last this one has reached this House.

Madam Speaker, there are many issues, and Parliament will always say, “Why don’t they come to Parliament?” Really how long would it take Parliament to repeal this? Why should it have taken this long? 

But what I am talking about, Madam Speaker, is that I think this bill should also have come with the financial implications. I do not think our saying that we have repealed this law is all in all, because we can see that there are liabilities of Shs 143,088,000 and so on, and yet on the account there is Shs 401,000. Where is the balance that we are going to use to pay off this debt? There are some people who are going to be laid off and they need their packages as they retire. That is why I would have wanted to see financial implications. 

This is not going to be a cheap thing. We are going to employ a liquidator, who is going to liquidate all these assets and harmonise all the things that have not been properly put in place. Now where are the financial implications?  How are we going to pay this liquidator? We need to know, where is the money, where is it coming from, and it should have been laid on the Table.

Madam Speaker, I know what people suffer when they lose their jobs and there is nothing put in place. In my district Kamwenge, we have a number of people who were working with Uganda Railways and they were just pushed off without any explanation, without any promise as to when they would be paid off and they are suffering; no pension, no gratuity, nothing! I hope the people from the Uganda Tea Authority are not going to suffer the same.

MR AWUZU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way. It is not true that the workers from Railways have been pushed aside and forgotten. In fact, all the workers who have been laid off from the Railways are being paid. The Ministry has made sure that the Railways pays these workers because the Railways are now making profits. So we are paying the workers who have been laid off, and by the time we privatise the Railways, we will make sure that everybody who was laid off is paid off. So, the workers there are not suffering at all. Thank you.

MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you, hon. Speaker, and thank you hon. Minister for that good information. I am glad to know that information so that I can go and tell the people in Kamwenge that people are being paid. It is unfortunate that those of Kamwenge have not been reached. 

On the other hand, I do not know what Ministers wait for!  Why don’t you publicise such information, that you are paying, until someone talks about it in Parliament?  Yes, people need to know. So, I am glad I have got that information. I will tell my people to come to your offices to demand for their pay because they need it.

Madam Speaker, lastly, while we appreciate that we are repealing this, we should also appreciate that we have other small tea growers in our areas like Toro, like hon. Beatrice said. What has been put in place for them? Maybe they were also fearing that there is this big Authority, but they need a little more support. I know there has been some support with coffee planting, but hon. Minister, those who would like to grow tea to earn their living, what kind of support have you put on ground for them so that they can manage their tea very well and benefit from it? 

Otherwise, thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee and I support that this law should be repealed. But we should just appreciate that it was rather long overdue.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed with this debate, I think there is a procedural problem here. I would like to know from the Minister, this question of the financial implications of appointing a liquidator and carrying out all these things, how are you going to do this?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I did not like to disturb the debate because I thought I would make up when I am winding up. But I want to assure you that I have circulated a paper, which is a justification for the repeal of Uganda Tea Authority Decree, which gives details. On Page 3, I have assets and liabilities of UTA. UTA had the following assets: I have asked the Clerk to bring me another copy.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information the Minister is referring to is not an audit report. How can we assume that what he has actually put here is the truth?  What I would have imagined is to produce an audit report to the Committee of this Parliament and should be the Committee of this Parliament to say, “Yes, the Minister presented an audit report and the information he has presented is correct”.  It is a word against his.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I am very glad hon. Mehangye raised this issue of financial implications. It is a requirement under the Budget Act that every bill introduced in this Parliament should be accompanied by a certificate, not that document which the Minister says he wrote and detailed the assets and liabilities. We went a step further to sit with the Ministry of Finance and agreed on a standardised format of a certificate of financial implications. 

I would like to challenge my colleague, the Chairman, how you could have accepted this bill to go through your committee to prepare a report and bring it to us without a certificate attached. That document which the Minister is talking about does not conform to the provisions of the Budget Act section 10. So Madam Speaker, should we consider that to be the Certificate of Financial Implications? Is what the Minister brought to us a certificate?

MR MUTULUUZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Minister’s justification for the repeal of Uganda Tea Authority Decree, 1974, on the part of assets and liabilities, he did not mention how the former employees of Uganda Tea Authority will be compensated in their retirement package. I wanted clarification on that. I thank you.

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Madam Speaker, I will handle all those because when we passed the Budget Bill to become an Act, it was specifically stated that it would not affect those bills which had already been read for the first time.  This bill had gone through the Cabinet and had already been committed to the committee. Then - (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, I would like the hon. Minister to know that the Budget Act came into force on 1 July 2001.  This is 2003, so you will have to convince us that this committee got this bill before 1 July 2001.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA CHARLES: Madam Speaker the bill was read for the first time in this House on 25 July 2002, a year after the Budget Act was passed. I hope the Minister can recall easily.

MR ODIT: Madam Speaker, hon. Kiraso has raised a fundamental question, but I want to draw her attention to page 6 of our recommendation. We do agree that there is still no report on the audit and that is why we are saying the audit exercise before liquidation must be done, and we emphasize that it must be comprehensive. It is also going to be part of what we are going to include in our proposed amendment. So I think let us not dwell so much on this because we have taken care of that. In the course of scrutinising the bill, we knew which area was lacking and needed some attention, which we drew the attention of the Minister to, and this was the financial component of the assets and the liabilities of the authority.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Chairman of the Committee in order to start talking about audit reports when in the actual fact we are talking about a certificate of financial implications, a clearance from the Ministry of Finance. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, the difficulty we have is that the proposed Section 3 gives power to the Minister to appoint a liquidator on such terms and conditions as the Minister may determine in instrument of appointment. Probably this one includes the salary and other things. 

The liquidator will receive all the assets of the authority, receive and settle claims relating to the obligation of the authority, determine and settle terminal benefits payable to the former employees, dispose of the assets, recover debts owed to the Authority, carry out  any other duty related to the foregoing duties. How will this be carried out?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, one of the issues which have been raised by all the members who have contributed is, why did it take all this long? You see, one writer said that there is no best way other than bureaucracy in dealing with public affairs. If there was an alternative, you would handle a hundred affairs, but when it comes to assets, even if it is a project within my ministry, it will finally come back to finance who do the auditing and check if there is any liability and assets. Once the project is wound up, it becomes a property of Government through the Ministry of Finance. They take up all the liabilities and all the assets. 

It is true, Madam Speaker, as you have guided, that the bill authorises me to appoint, but actually it is essentially the Minister of Finance who appoints by directing us to appoint. They are also the ones who will take up all the liabilities. But of now, UTA does not even have people who are still working for it. If there is anyone who will have any claim upon, it will be published. But as of now, I do not know. So what we have put down are those which we know; they are the assets in terms of land, vehicles and furniture and bank account and also the liabilities as reported in- (Interruption)

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, an hon. Member has raised a procedural question, was the financial implications of this bill raised? And it is under this law that before this report is presented here or even before the Committee starts to work on it, the financial implications must be clearly stated. Now the Minister is just meandering, talking about this and that. He is talking about financial regulations and the Finance Act which we know well; that the Minister of Finance has powers to do certain things.  But the issue is where is the certificate which clearly tells Parliament that there is no cost going to go to the activities, which you have stated in your bill? 

So procedurally, Madam Speaker, surely should we continue debating this bill before the Minister goes back to his office and tries to come up with what is expected of him?  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those before me, because this particular Certificate of Financial Implications is very important and the Budget Act is very clear. But also I want to give an example of a law which has failed to take off, and this is what we refer to as Dead Later Law, because the financial implications were not taken into account, and this is the Land Act. We have tribunals under the Land Act. The financial implications of these tribunals was not taken into account. So since 1987, we have had this Land Act and it has never been operationalised.  

What we are saying to the Minister is that we need this certificate to be able to know that the amendment we are passing will be put into effect. That is the whole point.

MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion that we defer the debate on this bill because of the reasons and concerns which have been expressed by members.  

I am sympathetic to the ministry, because it realised this bill should have come yesterday. They are trying to run before they can walk. In essence, we are trying to help the Minister of Agriculture to fasten the process. There is no way we can help you unless we have the Certificate of Financial Implications. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to move that we suspend the debate on this Bill until we get that certificate. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister, are you making any undertaking? Can you make an undertaking on this question of certificate?

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: I can make an undertaking because, first of all, I can produce the certificate to fulfil that requirement so that we resume tomorrow. (Interjection). Tomorrow, if it was before 5.00 p.m. I would, because this is a bill which is saving, and any administration of a liquidator is normally taken into account. Because in the Minister of Finance, there is what they call Board of Survey. It is normally budgeted for; it is not another cost. It is in the normal budget to take the Board of Survey whenever any project is being laid off. So the only cost involved is for the liquidator. Is it not? So it is going to save money plus these liabilities which the Ministry of Finance normally takes over. I promise that I will bring the report by 10.00 O’clock tomorrow.

MS KIRASO: Madam Speaker, after I have read this, I will give this Act to the Minister. I have a copy of the Budget Act - because he actually thought that we started implementing the Act this year - and listen carefully to Section 10. And my colleagues, Chairpersons of sessional committees, we have got a standardised format of certificates of financial implications. It is not any document that somebody prepares. It has got to be certified by the Ministry of Finance.

Section 10 of the Budget Act reads:  “Every bill introduced in Parliament shall be accompanied by its indicative financial implications, if any, on revenue and expenditure over the period of not less than two years after coming into effect.”

So we will definitely benefit a lot from looking at what we are going to save and what we are going to spend. But then also, the Minister should remember that the macro economic plan showing indicative allocations of monies that are going to be spent in this coming financial year are already before this House.  

It is not a matter of bringing a document and putting it on the Table. The Committee should go back and look at these implications and the indicative allocations to see if the expenditures involved have been taken care of in the medium term expenditure framework. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I will hand over the Budget Act to the hon. Minister. (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, my hands are tied by the provisions of the Budget Act, which this House passed. Accordingly, debate on this matter is hereby deferred until the Certificate of Financial Implications is produced from the Ministry of Finance. When you get it, you lay it on the Table. I think you will have seen the chairman first.

MR NSHIMYE: Madam Speaker, following your ruling, I would need further clarification, because from what hon. Kiraso has read, with strict construction, if the bill is not accompanied by the Certificate at the time of presentation, it is defective ab nitio right from the beginning. So, I do not know how we can now slot in the certificate at this stage. So I need your guidance on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me remind the Members of Cabinet that the Budget Act is a strict law.  We gave a grace period for a certain period whereby people could come in, maybe who had forgotten to bring their certificates. But that was in 2001. A lot of water has passed under the bridge and we expect everybody to comply. So when the certificate is brought, we shall handle it.

Honourable members, I think this is the end of today’s proceedings. The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 24 April 2003 at 2 p.m.)







