Thursday, 24th April 2003
 
Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I regret that we could not start on time. It was for reasons beyond our control. 

Following yesterday’s decision to have a small committee to draft the terms of reference for the select committee, I have appointed the following Members of Parliament to constitute the committee:

    1. Dr Okulo Epak – Chairperson.
    2. Hon. Anim Angupale – Member
    3. Hon. Oliver Wonekha – Member
    4. Hon. Adolf Mwesige – Member
    5. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere – Member.

They are supposed to report, latest Monday.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I would like to make a short statement.  

THE SPEAKER: Is it a personal statement?

MR AMURIAT: No, it is not a personal statement.

THE SPEAKER: Normally, when you are going to make a statement, by 11.00 a.m. you should have consulted the Speaker so that the Speaker allows it. But carry on.

MR AMURIAT: I actually consulted your deputy yesterday, and she indicated that it would be okay for me to present this statement.

The statement is presented under Rule 37(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It is on the matter of the appointment of Lt Gen. Jeje. Odongo to the post of a minister. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that on the 4th day of November 2001, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda nominated honourable –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I must say that I did not look at the statement. But when I read it, this is a statement that you cannot make under that rule. You are talking about an honourable member, Lt Gen. Jeje Odongo, in relation to his work with the President. I think it is not the proper time for you to make this statement - (Mr Amuriat rose_) 

I have ruled that it is not proper for you to make the statement, because the statement that you make should not provoke other controversial issues. I think I shall discuss this with you, and then we shall see how best to deal with it.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to seek your guidance on a matter of public importance. This matter is in relation to the government assets, particularly the government land on Bugolobi Hill, Plot 4 and 5, Faraday Road, which houses Radio Uganda transmitters.

Mr Speaker, as you are aware from recent press reports, this land originally was 25 acres. But as I stand here, 5 acres have been taken over by individuals - big government officials. This time they are not members of the civil service or the Judiciary. Another 5 acres are now being processed to be taken over. I do not know in future whether Government may want to use this land, but it is now being given out to people, and strong people for that matter.

Mr Speaker, as I speak now, KCC does not have any land to give out to investors. I can imagine in future, say in 10 to 15 years, Government may have projects that it may want to put in place. But if this situation is allowed, whereby the top ranking politicians are given land without any proper procedure, without transparency in the transactions, it is a matter of concern to this country.  

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I wish to seek your guidance on how we, as Parliament, can come in to stave off the situation, to redress the matter. I have tried to check with the Uganda Land Commission, but the secretary has been unwilling to give information or throw light on the position of Government on public assets such as the vital land owned by departments, ministries and the whole government. So, Mr Speaker, I am humbly seeking your guidance on how we, as Parliament, can proceed on such a matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, matters affecting land are constitutional matters. Land was divided into three types. We have what we call private land, and this would include mailo, freehold, leases and so forth.

We have what we call public land, which has two categories. One type is under the district land boards, and the other one is under the Land Commission. The Constitution gave these bodies independence to deal with land vested in them. But should you think that they are not carrying out their work transparently, the best would be for you to start with the minister concerned. 

You can also cause the officials concerned to appear before you and explain what they are doing. After that, you can bring the matter here for us also to debate. I think that is the best way you can handle this matter.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of public concern, related to the Constitution. 

The main role of Members of Parliament is to make laws and to check what Government does, because we are the eyes of the people we represent. For a week now, the Front Bench has been almost vacant. We do not see the Attorney General; we do not see the Leader of Government Business, and yet there are some fundamental issues for which we need clarification. 

When we look around, for a whole week the Front Bench has been empty. We have a duty to do on behalf of our people. They should let us know whether they are tired, so that we advise the President to appoint new ones, or else some of us take over because they are tired. 

So, I rise here, Mr Speaker, to express dismay because Government has collective action, and when we come here as representatives who are amicably checking Government, and we see the frontbench persistently empty, we have cause to worry.  

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, the issue hon. Ken Lukyamuzi is raising is a very important issue regarding attendance of Parliament by both ministers, and Members of Parliament who are not ministers. If we are to go by ratio really, the general attendance is not good. 

I have stood up on a point of order. Is it in order for hon. Ken Lukyamuzi to say that the front bench is entirely empty when there are six ministers? Are we not there? Are we considered not to be present? Is he in order, Sir?

THE SPEAKER: I think he is not in order to say it is empty, because there are Members of Cabinet who are there, save that there could be others who are not there. But it is not empty - (Interruption). Honourable members, according to our rules, you catch the eye of the Speaker not the ear. (Laughter)

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is a procedural concern. Repeatedly in this House, I have been asking the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs to answer my question I put to the Ministry through your office more than six months ago, about the shooting of a young man called Jim.  He was shot by a policeman on 12 January, the year of our Lord, 2001. To date, I have never received an answer, and yet the question was put through your office to the minister. Are they planning to answer this question at all, or have they not received it; or is it a matter of contempt of the august House?  

MR NYANZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Whenever we raise the concerns of our people here, we expect the Executive at least to respond positively. Now, in November last year, I raised the issue of the Busega-Mityana road, and the Minister of Works, who was here by then, confirmed that they were trying their level best to do something on the road. 

I want to assure you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members, that since then, even the contractors were laid off. Last week on Monday, I was really surprised to find only one worker on the whole road filling potholes with mere soil without even mixing lime with it. In fact, the soil has even been removed by yesterday 's rain. 

Now, I want to ask the minister, who is here today, to inform the House and my constituents when they will be ready to re-construct this road. If not at all, then we take other steps.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr Andruale Awuzu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank hon. Nyanzi for asking that question. I think hon. Nyanzi is very well aware that we had plans to get that road re-constructed. But it so happened that when we were about to begin the re-construction of that road, our plans which were made through DANIDA - all of you know very well that DANIDA withdrew from road development and said they were going to concentrate on other sectors within Uganda. That was not in Uganda only, it was also in other countries in the developing world.  

You are all aware that road construction is very expensive, and since then, we have been endeavouring to get different funding to re-construct that road, which means digging it all up and rebuilding it afresh. What we are doing on the road currently is just repairs to try and make the road barely passable. That is the amount of money we have for the intervention. And even now, we are trying very hard to get money for re-constructing that road.  So, until we get that money, there is nothing better we can do on that road. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR KASIRIVU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In yesterday’s newspaper, there was a press report that a disease called Foot and Mouth disease has struck Hoima District, and about five sub-counties had been affected, and about 200 animals had so far succumbed and actually died. 

I wanted to get a statement from the Minister of Agriculture; what steps have been made to contain this highly infectious disease from spreading, and especially to my constituency?

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know when the question was put, but whenever there is an outbreak of that nature, on receiving reports, we determine the strain and place the order for the vaccines. I have on my table a number of areas where they have declared quarantine in order to curb the movement of animals.  As of this particular case, I do not know now the latest. But I will I consult with the officials on the latest in his constituency, and I will be available to give information. I thank you.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. What I wanted to raise is related to what hon. Nyanzi did raise on the Floor of the House. He has told this House that what is actually taking place on the Busega-Mityana road is that potholes are being filled with soil. 

I need a clarification from the honourable Minister in charge of Transport whether this is actually true, because professionally it is wrong. I would have expected the minister to clarify on whether the material actually being used is earth or it is stabilized gravel, whether this has been silt or not. I wish to ask for further clarification, otherwise if these potholes are actually being filled using earth, then I think there is something wrong.

MR ANDRUALE AWUZU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable Member for seeking that clarification. Whether the material being used is earth or not, I cannot confirm because I have not seen that material. But, there are many Members in this House who are engineers, and I am sure they would support me that all our roads in Uganda, although there is tarmac on top, actually, below it is murrum. And it is that murrum, which gives the strength of the road. When it is stabilised with lime or cement then it becomes stronger. 

So, if you are repairing a tarmac road, then you have to repair it the way it was built; with murrum below, either stabilized, and then you compact it. The tarmac is to compact it; it is to seal it, to protect it from weather.  Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, the Annual Report for the year 2001, of the Uganda Law Reform Commission. In the same vein, I beg to lay on the Table, the Annual Report for the period of January 2001 to September 2002 of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let the reports be handled by the appropriate committees, which should make reports to us.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT REGARDING THE REGISTRATION EXERCISE OF WOMEN IN THE COUNTRY FOR PURPOSES OF ELECTING WOMEN COUNCILS

MRS MARGRET ZZIWA  (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to move that the House do consider a motion under sub-rule 40(K) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, the registration exercise of women councils for purposes of electing women councils in the country started on the 8 April 2003, and the exercise was officially declared closed on 22 April 2003.

It is of great concern that very many women have not had the opportunity of being registered, mainly because the exercise was very poorly publicised. Many, many, people did not even know that the exercise was going on. I beg to inform the House that yesterday, when I was sharing this with my colleagues, the Women Members of Parliament, hon. Namirembe Bitamazire was briefly rushing out of the House to go to Mpigi to mobilise the women to register, because she had just learnt of it the previous day, and she was going out to mobilise them. But I was letting her know that the exercise had –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, if I am hearing my honourable colleague clearly, I am hearing justification; I have not heard the motion. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, you are moving a motion under what rule and what is the motion?

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, I was giving the justification, but I am moving under 40(k).

THE SPEAKER: What is the motion? Then we see how to be seconded, then you proceed.

MRS ZZIWA: Mr Speaker, the motion is:

“WHEREAS the registration exercise for women for purposes of election of women councils started on 8th April and ended on 17th April in all districts in Uganda, and specifically on 22nd of April in Kampala; 

AND WHEREAS it has been recognised that this exercise has been highly marginalised, which is contrary to the constitutional provision, Article 33(2) and (4); 

AND NOTING that the registration exercise was carried out with very minimal publicity, consequently in some villages there is no registration which has taken place;

AND NOTING that during the exercise, where it took place, there is no evidence which was given for instance, a simple coupon for proof of registration and a lot of powers were given to the recording assistants, and these were passed over to them by parish chiefs who did not have very adequate training, which is not the case with other national registration exercises previously held where the powers were given to the presiding officers in the districts;

AND REALISING that there is no display period given for the voters to ascertain whether their names appear in the register, as is the case with the other national registration where a minimum period of 21 days is given;

AND REALISING that the registers have not been computerized, envisaging a difficulty at the time of election to look for a name in the register and to be able to ascertain whether there is no deletion or addition as the case maybe;

Parliament hereby resolves as follows:

    • That the Electoral Commission provides for a period of display of registers for purposes of women council elections 
    • That computerised registers for women councils are prepared for the exercise
    • That there exists an extended period of registration to ensure that proper registration is carried on
    • That the election date be extended to a later date to ensure that the above are in place.”  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it has been seconded; justify.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to add to what I previously said, since it is already in the Hansard. That many, many, Members of Parliament, just like many people in this country, did not even know that the exercise had started and was going on. I want to mention that other than the few television messages which I saw being carried on the television, I did not see any press release in the media, and maybe I did not hear many radio announcements; I could maybe quote any. So, that has really led to many people not to even know that the exercise is going on. 

I want to also mention that when the procedure was announced, for instance in Kampala District, it was specifically mentioned that the parish chiefs should take charge of the exercise. This meant that they were the ones to appoint the officers, or whomever they wished, to go and start the registration. Subsequently, very many centres have not seen any person registering the women. We consider that very gross marginalisation of the women.

There have been situations where some old registers have appeared at the centres, and when some women went to register, the officers would just check in those old registers. They would say, “Yes, you appear in the register. You can go home, you are already registered.” They were not being registered in the registers which were offered by the Electoral Commission. This really shows that there were double standards in the way this exercise was being carried out.  

Like I mentioned, there is no proof that someone has been registered. Supposing you come back on the voting day and you do not appear in the register, what happens? They will just say, “you are not in the register”, and you have no proof to say that you registered!

I want also to mention that several areas have not seen any registering officers. Personally, I have not been registered in Buyinja Zone, in Naguru II Parish, where I reside. And women in many other areas have not been registered. I guess several colleagues in Parliament have not had the opportunity to be registered.

I want also to observe that, if the Electoral Commission had taken this exercise very seriously, they would have picked the national register for the previous elections, extracted from it any female of 18 years of age residing in that village, and they would have produced those registers! We would have then brought those very registers to the villages for people to update.  I think that would have been more appropriate and more inclusive, other than this exercise, which has now been characterised by preferences. If an officer does not want to do something, or he does not want to include a household, he may not even come to that particular household! 

It is for those reasons, honourable colleagues, that I beg you to support this resolution requiring the Electoral Commission to extend the date, and to improve on their methodology. Otherwise, women still feel that this exercise actually continues to marginalise them. Thank you very much.

MS JALIA BINTU (Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion and to second it. 

Mr Speaker, as the mover has said, actually the elections of the women councils are expected to take place on the 30th of April 2003. You will remember that last year the honourable Minister of Justice told us that the elections of women council (I) was supposed to begin on 6th May. It means that some people had gone ahead to note 6th May as the day for election for women council (I). But when the Electoral Commission came up with the 30th of April, even most Members of Parliament were not informed, until some of us went out and tried to find out from the Electoral Commission. That is when we came to know. 

Mr Speaker, this exercise, right from the registration, has not been handled adequately. Sensitisation has not been made. The women down in the constituencies do not know the amended Women Councils Statute. We are aware that those women who were elected in local councils are not eligible to stand for women councils, but women do not know. Although Members of Parliament have tried to go out to educate them, you cannot finish the whole district within this short period, since we passed this amendment. 

The women have not been sensitised about the amendments that we passed here in this House.  So, definitely, if the Electoral Commission goes ahead to conduct these elections, then the Government will stand to be challenged. 

This would mean that some people would hold two posts, and yet in the Women Councils (Amendment) Bill, we said that a woman who was elected in local councils is not eligible to stand for the women councils. When you stand, then you are contesting, because you are supposed to hold one office. So, Mr Speaker, this affirms that the Electoral Commission has not gone ahead. 

I want to add that publicity has not been made.  Women do not know. The girls who have reached the voting age, especially those ones who are in schools and in tertiary institutions and have turned 18, were not registered and yet they are women. They have reached the voting age. Why should they be left out? They are supposed to elect and to be elected on the women councils. But most of them in these secondary schools and tertiary institutions have not been registered.  

So, Mr Speaker, this exercise has been haphazardly conducted. If we leave it at that, then we are leaving out all those Ugandans who would contribute a lot to the emancipation of the women.

Mr Speaker, you know that most of the women upcountry are engaged in farming, and this is a rainy season and planting season. You give them only 10 days for registration well aware that in the mornings they have to go to their gardens, and it is only in the afternoons when you will expect them to come for registration. 

Some of them even do not have radios. Like in Masindi District, there are very few people who have got access to television. Most of the women do not even have the time. They are in the kitchen. They do not know that the elections are supposed to take place. So, when you leave the period of registration at 10 days, you are leaving out the biggest percentage, and they will not participate in the elections. 

Ten days means 12 hours each day, minus the six hours when they are in the gardens. When they come back, they have to prepare lunch, which means two hours are gone; those are four hours remaining for registration. Four hours times the 10 days, those are 40 hours, and they have other roles to play. 

That means a woman really has been deprived of her right to vote for those people who would represent her on these women councils. And yet these women councils are supposed to monitor and assist these women in the implementation of government programmes on the women projects. 

So, Mr Speaker, this period of registration was such a short time. It needs to be extended. I actually got to know recently that the elections are supposed to take place on 30th. 

All along, I knew the elections were on 6th May. So, if a person who is in Kampala here, near the Electoral Commission, cannot get to know that the elections are on 30th, what about my local woman in Butwara? She does not know anything! And you cannot expect the honourable Member of Parliament to go around traversing the whole district within 10 days to mobilise and sensitise them!

Mr Speaker, I stand here to second the motion, and to urge the honourable members that let us not underrate this exercise. If the registration exercise is not taken up seriously, then it will even affect the youth council elections. Yesterday we passed the Youth Council (Amendment) Bill. It will also be affected, because the same thing will happen. 

So, I beg the honourable members to support this motion and pass it as urgently as possible, because it affects our people. We are well aware the women councils are meant for development. If we leave it at that, anybody will come in and women will be elected twice. 

You are aware that we removed the county women councils. They no longer exist as per the amendment we made in 2002. You are aware that we do not have women delegates to the national women council, because the chairperson of the district women council is supposed to act as the delegate. The women down there have to be sensitised about all these things. So, there is a great need for the Electoral Commission to ensure that women get this knowledge.

Mr Speaker, with those few remarks, I beg to second the motion, and to urge members to pass this motion as urgently as possible. Thank you very much.

MRS BERNADETTE BIGIRWA  (Woman Representative, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the motion. 

I also want to say that I hope for the first time, the Electoral Commission will take the elections of women councils seriously. In the past, they have not taken them seriously, to an extent that the women are registered in exercise books. At the end of the day, you find that actually, even the elected members on the committees sometimes do not even know their levels. 

This has been exhibited in the elections for women parliamentarians, where you find that the so-called registers are manipulated. There is no original list of elected officials sometimes. At the end of the day, you find another list appearing somewhere, because they are not handled properly. The whole exercise is done in a manner as if women councils are not taken seriously. So, for once, I would like to urge the Electoral Commission to take the elections of women councils seriously. 

I also hope, Mr Speaker, to improve on the registers of women councils, they will be able to even actually update them, like hon. Jalia said. The girls who have now come of age, should be given an opportunity also to participate in the elections. So, I do not know whether this is being catered for, or they are just calling women. 

I do not know whether they are even going to crosscheck with registers that are already in place. I just stood up to request the Electoral Commission, for once to take the elections of women councils seriously.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Justice did give us dates here, which we even communicated to the women in the district. Personally, on Women’s Day, I highlighted all those dates. I had hoped that since the dates were already known, the civic education, the publicity in the media, and all those things that go with elections prior to registration would have been properly done.  Unfortunately, this has not been done. 

Therefore, I would like to support my colleagues who have already spoken, that we support this motion and we extend the period, so that the exercise can be properly conducted devoid of manipulation. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR KIWALABYE MUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I seek guidance from you, because these bodies like the Electoral Commission are supposed to act independently. They are independent bodies which operate under nobody’s directive. The request here is to ask them to extend the voting period, to change their method of work so that they show seriousness in this. If Parliament were to pass this resolution, really, will it have effect on the method of work of the Electoral Commission? I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It depends on how you look at this resolution. Our resolutions are different, some are executive that you have to comply with, and others are advisory. 

It is true that the Electoral Commission acts independently, but this does not exclude other people making comments about its performance, especially Parliament. Because we represent 24 million people, and if we have seen that things are not going on well, it does not prevent us from coming up. Of course, in its powers they can say, “we are not considering what they have said. We go ahead”. 

So, this is just advisory. We are saying that as far as we see, these steps should be taken if the exercise has to succeed. But we do not compel them. If they disobey, we do not say they have disobeyed us. But if things go wrong, then in our oversight role we shall come and say, things did not go wrong because you did not do as we told you. Then we see what to do. That is what we can do about it.

MR THEODORE SEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sebambule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion presented by hon. Margaret Zziwa. This is based on the premise that for any credible elections to take place, it has to start with registration. 

Mr Speaker, pondering on the situation that prevailed in Sebambule during the women elections of 2001, I can say they left a lot to be desired. This is where the whole district was subjected to voting for two days. Some names were in exercise books, some on pamphlets, and some were non-existent. It caused trouble, such that voting had to continue overnight. Ballot boxes were transported to gombolola headquarters, others to the Police headquarters, others to the homes of individuals. Definitely, it was not the best outcome. 

Basing on that experience, I put my full weight and support to the motion that this exercise be respected. If we are meant to elect women leaders, let us have credible women leaders. Let us not be seen to be bending the rules; to be allowing the inconsistencies to happen; to be allowing the non eligible members to vote; to be allowing the non residents, the non leaders, the unconcerned people to vote, not to allow women leaders to vote more than once and all that.  

Mr Speaker, it is on that account that I convey the feelings of the people of Sembabule to the rest of the Ugandans that let us respect the women leaders as we did the youth. Let us not exercise double standards when it comes to women, to pay lip service when matters regarding their leadership comes on the Floor, and shy away from supporting them.  Let us be committed, let those mistakes not be repeated.  Because, whereas we prevail on the people to cool down their tempers, to let matters go by so as to have peace, the same situation may not arise again because another time, we may not be there to plead with the people to take matters calmly. 

So, as we have an opportunity now, let us address the matter. Let us ensure that women are properly registered, and then the computerised register, if it can be adopted.  If it can be processed now, let it be put in place.  Let there be a period of display, let all the procedures be fulfilled and then we vote and let women vote their true leaders. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

 MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I support the motion.  Mr. Speaker, at one time I said that the Electoral Commission should be put under the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and people laughed. There is no planning, Mr Speaker. The Constitution provides a framework, a timetable when all these things should be done, but they cannot be done. Why? 

It is not the first time we are moving by resolution; it is not the first time we are moving by an amendment of a law to make elections take place. Why?  Every time there is a local council election, we have to amend the law to extend the period of display or shorten this period or do whatever. Every time we are carrying out youth elections, we have to amend the law. Every time we are carrying out women elections, we have to pass a resolution. Why? 

Mr Speaker, it is imperative that we go to the root of the problem, which we are just dousing over there. We are giving a symptomatic treatment to the problem. That is why I am suggesting strongly that the report that has been shelved for very long, a report, which outlined and studied this thing in detail and came out with recommendations, should be brought to this House so that these matters are brought out and discussed, and a final solution is found. We cannot go on like this, on an ad hoc basis, by resolution, by amendment of laws, as if we do not have a constitutional framework, which is quite clear on these issues.  

Mr Speaker, I support the motion as a temporary measure to solve this particular problem, but the biggest solution lies in debating the report of the election violence.  I see the Chairman smiling at me.  We should debate this report and find out what happened.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS JANE ALISEMERA (Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Mr Speaker, time and again we have raised problems concerning the civic education in this House, but it seems the Electoral Commission does not receive the message. If it did, I do not think the same would be raised today. For example, last week, I happened to go to my constituency. I also wanted to register myself. To my surprise, I did not even find those people who are concerned with the registration. You can imagine; if I came out without being registered as an MP, what do you expect of a woman deep in the village? When will they be registered?  

Mr Speaker, I happened to go to the parish level where I was referred, and where the officers concerned were taking their registration. When I reached there, it was around 9.00. From 9.00 a.m. up to 3.00 p.m. women were seated there, but nobody appeared. This means that the Electoral Commission has not taken serious note of their people who have always failed to perform their duties. 

So, Mr Speaker, that is why I stand to support the motion and I propose that the day of election, which is the 30th of this month, should be pushed forward so that the women of this country exercise their powers as required by the Constitution.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do support the motion, but I am a bit saddened, Mr Speaker. Only recently, the President dismissed the entire Electoral Commission leaders and replaced them with new ones. There is a saying that a new broom sweeps better than the old one, and that the old one knows all the corners. Therefore, I want to send a clear signal to the Electoral Commission that we have a lot of hope in them as a new team. If we are to hold on that hope, they should know what they are supposed to do and when to do it. But I think we have a problem in constituting the Electoral Commission in this country.  

About two years ago, I had an opportunity to travel with the then Speaker, the hon. Francis Ayume, to India. We met, among others, the opposition party in India and I asked their leader whether they were satisfied with the workings of their Electoral Commission. The leader answered in the affirmative. Therefore they have no problems because the Prime Minister nominates the members on the Electoral Commission, and the opposition approves it. Therefore, chances are that these people will do a good job. So I think we also need to borrow from some countries to ensure that people who – (Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Dr Phillip Byaruhanga): Thank you, honourable Member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I am sure the honourable Member is aware that His Excellency the President makes nominations, which are approved by Parliament. So, I have a strong feeling that the approval of this strong body of the Electoral Commission by the whole House of Parliament is a strong message of support to this body. I thank you.

MR ONZIMA: But my argument is that members will be nominated by the appointing authority, and approved by the opposition. So here we have a situation - I think that we have to take part of that blame as Parliament. Because if you come around and some few people on the Appointments Committee raise their objections and the views presented by the few who will want things to be done in the right way are not taken, then we end in such kind of situation. If we can, at the level of registration of women, go and participate in the election, we can fail at that level, then what about the other higher levels where probably people who are in authority have interest?  

I would not want to go further, but I just want to send a signal to the Electoral Commission that this is a new Electoral Commission, which I think was instituted hardly one and half years ago. They should know what they should be doing, right from the top to the grassroots, so that every person who has a stake in the elections at all levels, whether presidential, parliamentary, women, youth and so on, are satisfied. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disability): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support this motion and thank the movers for having moved it because it has wider implications than what we can immediately see.  

Mr Speaker, I had the honour to serve on the Select Committee on Election Violence. In our report, we reported at considerable length on registration of voters. We discovered that one of the causes of the confusion in elections, which subsequently caused violence, was the mismanagement of the voters' register. We also found that the Commission had attempted to computerise the register, but because of corruption and mismanagement, these so-called computerised voters' registers died a natural death, almost from the time it was started. 

As one of our colleagues has mentioned, I think it is important for us to look at that report, because there is a lot to learn from it. The issues that are now being aired are issues that we have dealt with in the report. I know that we are so busy as we come to the end of this session and we may not be able to look at this report. But when we look at it, I hope that we shall learn a lot from it and we shall revise the laws in line with the experience that we shall have explained in that report. Therefore, it is important, if we are going to have clean elections, to start with a proper system of registration of voters. This is the beginning of proper elections.  

I want to mention another matter, which I have observed, that while the Constitution recognises elections relating to special interest groups, by and large, elections of special interest groups are marginalised. There are many cases relating to the youth, the disabled, and now the women.

For instance, with regard to election of local councillors representing the disabled, the election was delayed for very many months. Even councils were sworn in without the disabled councillors being elected, to their disadvantage, because they were not able to compete for positions on the executive committees. This came about because of the mismanagement of elections. As a matter of fact, if the disabled people themselves had not fundraised money for effecting the registration of voters, probably as we talk now, the councillors for the disabled persons would not have been elected to councils, which is very unfortunate.  

Mr Speaker, I appeal that we must, at all times, ensure that registration of voters is given priority attention, money and people who are able and properly trained to carry it out, so that we have proper elections.

Secondly, since we have accepted the principle of affirmative action and have provided for election of people representing special interests, it is important that we should not be marginalised again when it comes to elections. These elections of special interest groups should be taken as seriously as any other elections. I therefore, support the motion and the recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members don’t you think that we have got a balanced debate, and that I should therefore put the question? (Interjection) Let us wind up with the minister then.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to thank hon. Margaret Zziwa for bringing this motion, and I want also to thank members who have contributed to this motion. As you know, the Electoral Commission falls under the Ministry of Justice. The minister is not in the House at the moment, but I have noted the concerns of the members. 

I want to report what has been coming in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  The report we have heard is that in most upcountry districts, the exercise went on smoothly.  But, truly, in Kampala, there were problems and that is why the Electoral Commission had to extend time.  

MS KOMUHANGI: Thank you very much, Honourable minister, for giving way. I want to inform the minister that it was not only done in Kampala District. In my district, there are seven LCs in two sub-counties that have never been registered up to today.  So, it is not only happening in Kampala District, it is also happening in other districts and my district specifically.  I thank you.

MR BITANGARO: Mr Speaker, I have noted the concerns of the members, and I will definitely consult with the Minister of Justice and we shall report back to Parliament.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you heard the details of the motion.  I put the question on the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA TEA AUTHORITY DECREE (REPEAL) BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: I note that yesterday we could not proceed because there was no Certificate of Financial Implication.  What is the position now?

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Speaker, as you have correctly observed, we got a technical snag, and our attention was drawn to the fact that we did not have a certificate, and I thank the hon. Kiraso for having brought it to our attention. It was just an oversight on our part, and since then, we have managed to get the certificate, which I wish to lay on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you should read it.

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: “Certificate of Financial Implications made under section 10 of the Budget Act, 2001.
This is to certify that a bill entitled “Uganda Tea Authority Decree (Repeal) Bill, 2002” has been examined in accordance with the requirements of section 10 of the Budget Act 2001.  
I wish to report as follows:
a) That the bill has the following objectives-
    i) to repeal the Uganda Tea Authority Decree 1974, Decree No.8 of 1974.
    ii) to provide for the appointment of the liquidator to dissolve the Uganda Tea Authority.

b) That the bill aims to achieve the following output: 
i)	Repeal the Uganda Tea Authority Decree (UTA) 1974, and subsequently replace it with the Tea Development Programme and a tea policy within the framework of Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture
a) That the bill will have no direct budgetary implications for central government.
Submitted to Parliament under my hand. Prof. Peter Kasenene, Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development (Privatisation)
Dated; 24th April, 2003”

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MRS KIRASO: Mr Speaker, the financial implications certificate is not for a show; it is for a purpose and the relevant committee, which has examined the bill, is supposed also to examine the financial implications certificate so that we don’t only rely on that document from the ministry.  

We as Parliament rely on the committee’s report to show us that they have established that there were no financial implications. When the minister promised us yesterday that he is going to get this document, we pointed these things out.  

Now, procedurally, I would like to certify whether the committee, which has handled this bill, has examined the financial implications certificate and is satisfied that while we are appointing a liquidator, winding up UTA, which has got assets and liabilities and paying off peoples’ terminal benefits, there are no financial implications.  I would be very happy if the Chairman of the Committee stood and confirmed to this House that there will be no financial implications.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but this certificate is just saying, in as far as the national budget is concerned, there is no financial implication on the budget. There could be financial implications in as far as the Authority is concerned, because it has been self-financing.  But I think this certificate implies that in as far as the treasury is concerned, there is no financial implication. That is what it means.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to get a clarification from the minister, because yesterday when he was debating he was saying that there are some implications within the audited accounts, which I do believe. I don’t know whether the committee had those audited accounts. He said there is no financial implications, what about the assets?  What about people who are going to be laid off?  I would like to be clarified on that.

MR ARUMADRI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It appears to me that the minister is simply trying to circumvent a problem.  

One time, we passed the Leadership Code; we had a similar paper and then Government had to find a way of filling that gap.  They did cut 23 per cent from all the ministries and this is affecting most ministries.  We don’t want to have a similar situation.

In that certificate, the minister is saying that when we repeal this Act, the Tea Development Programme will replace it.  Now, can you take a programme to the countryside without spending even a penny?  How will you do this?  It is not correct for the minister to say that there will be no financial implications.  Really, let us take these matters seriously.  This is not true and we should not agree to this.  Let this certificate be examined properly as, hon. Kiraso, has said, and the House should be assured so that we don’t waste time again.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson, do you want to examine this certificate and make a report on it?

MR ODIT: Mr Speaker, I think it will be in order that we examine and verify the certificate. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, in these circumstances the committee should examine this certificate and make a report before we can proceed with the matter.  

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2002

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think really this is business for the Financial Committee.  Are you ready to – but then, is the minister the owner of the bill here, because the bill belongs to the minister.  The minister is not here; we cannot proceed.

MS KIRASO BIRUNGI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a matter of procedure on how we are going to deal with ministers.  I think we need your guidance.  Yesterday, we sat in the Committee of Finance and we made it very categorical that today, this afternoon, the Financial Institutions Bill will come back to the floor of this House.  The minister was in the committee.  This morning we had a meeting; the minister was in the committee.  The reasons why they had withdrawn the bill were raised by the committee and some of them agreed upon and others not agreed upon.  The minister who sat with us this morning was very much aware that this bill is coming on the floor of the House.  

I attended the Business Committee meeting where under your chairmanship we examined how much time this Parliament loses in things like this; where we are ready to proceed with business but then one party is not ready or missing.  Legislative business should take precedence.  So, could you please guide us?  If the minister decides not to come at all, what do we do? Because this bill, when it was presented, it became a property of the House.  I need your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it did become a property of the House but then, when we proceed with it, say, we finish the committee stage, what will happen?  We cannot say it is our property, therefore, we can proceed with it in absence of the minister!  It is not practical.  We own it, it is true, but there is somebody who must steer this kind of bill to the end.  It is not a private Member's Bill; it is a Government bill and the minister has to steer it up to the end! 

But what I can say is that we shall take note of your observation in respect of this business, and I will communicate in writing to the minister concerned expressing our displeasure.  Now, we have come to the end of today’s business.  The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.

(The House rose at 4.07 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 25 April 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)


