Tuesday, 21 April 2009

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to welcome you to today’s meeting and I would like to begin by thanking you very much for making your contributions, as we agreed, to the success of the Cranes in the last CECAFA Cup. I have just been handing over the sum of Shs 30,300,000 to which every Member of this House contributed. Thank you so much.

Secondly, I would like to say that as we agreed last week, today will be our last meeting for the next few days to enable us start on the budgetary process because with the timeline, the sessional committees must report by the 25th of this month and then the Budget Committee also must complete its report to be submitted to the President by the 15th of May. So, we are going to adjourn the House after today so that that work can be done. 

But in the meantime, I am happy to announce the presence in the gallery of the following leaders of political parties: Mr Erias Ssegujja, the Chairman of the National Peasants’ Party. (Laughter) He is up there. You are welcome. Mr Oyo Apolo Nyabongo, President of the Movement Organisation Party. You are welcome. We have Bisase Zakaria Saddam, Chairman of the General Congress Service Volunteers Party. You are welcome. We also have Joseph Nyanzi, the Chair of the National Unity Party. You are welcome. They are here to watch our proceedings. (Applause) Thank you very much. 
 
3.08
MR OWORI OTADA (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance under rule 51(1) of our Rules of Procedure and - allow me to give a very brief preamble to the concerns that I want to raise: 

Over the past few weeks, the country has been fed on newspaper articles about what is now known as the IGG debacle. I think that it would be important that we should all recall that the Appointments Committee received a letter from the appointing authority under Article 223(7) and (4) of the Constitution. And it was against that background that the Appointments Committee convened to carry out the role of vetting appointees namely; the IGG, the deputy IGG and other appointees to other portfolios. 

Whereas all the other appointees appeared before the committee, the IGG, Lady Justice Faith Mwondha, decided not to appear citing an argument that her appearance before the Appointments Committee of Parliament would be unconstitutional. We have also received reports that the Attorney-General gave wise legal counsel and we also read in the papers that the President urged the IGG to appear. 

To date, there has been a number of back and forth movement in regard to legitimising the IGG’s appointment. We have read that the IGG has been sent on forced leave. We have also read that the deputy – basically there is a lot of back and forth movement - has also been sent on forced leave. There is a whole debate taking place in the country about this situation. Therefore, we are in a very difficult position as Parliament because we had expected, under normal circumstances, the government to have come out and really given the way forward on this matter as opposed to leaving it to become a matter which is almost bringing total confusion in the country. 

Let me say that the country is not informed; many people are not informed. We interacted with church leaders, for example, some of them believe that this woman of God is being fought by Parliament and other institutions and yet Parliament did not invite the IGG. Parliament received an instrument from the appointing authority namely the President and it is upon that that now this Parliament is being mowed down by people who have different views on this subject matter. 

Therefore, may we know now today from government whether the IGG is still IGG or not? Whether the IGG or her deputy are the former or the current in the office and on a more serious note, in your Communication from the Chair, you told us that we shall be going to our committees to carry out our business in there because of the timelines that we have about MTEF and all these type of things. Some of us are worried that under 223(1), what forms the body of the Inspectorate of Government is the Inspector-General and the deputies and the lack of those two mean that the inspectorate collapses. Therefore, if we are going to get budgetary provisions set out for that inspectorate, then what does government want us to do under the circumstances? 

Finally, what is the true position of government on this matter? Because we thought that normally the Office of the President, as the appointing authority, should have come out with a clear and categorical statement but we are hearing different statements. Maybe if the Attorney-General would help us, what is his legal opinion on this subject matter? Thank you.

3.14
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter touches on the core of this Parliament. In the first instance, I am a Member of the Appointments Committee that handled the matter of the IGG. I wish to submit that we as a committee did not have the opportunity to evaluate the suitability of Justice Faith Mwondha for the reasons that she communicated. But I was surprised to learn that the person who was supposed to be vetted had the audacity to write to the Clerk of this Parliament to request for the official or confidential report about what Parliament came up with. That is very disturbing! It is not a snub to the Appointments Committee but a snub to this very Parliament which we as Members cannot allow to pass unchallenged. 

There is a possibility of being misunderstood but our perception now is beyond the person of Justice Faith Mwondha. We are looking at the Inspectorate of Government. We all need to have an Inspector-General of Government and her deputy or deputies in place but our hands are tied. The speculation that the Appointments Committee was not going to favour her is really a rumour. When you read reports saying that the IGG has gone on leave, that presupposes that she was in office in the first place. And this raises a question to government because you cannot go on leave unless you are in office. Is it true that the IGG, Justice Faith Mwondha, has been in office so that she can be able to proceed on leave? If not what is the position? Because we need to have institutions in place and government has gone a long way to build institutions. Why should we come at the last moment to destroy the very institutions we have been building? What is the position on this? Should we go by speculation? Should we be fed on newspapers? 

Good enough the Front Bench is in full attendance, and this is put to the Leader of Government Business and my neighbour here to come out in unequivocal terms and inform the country so that we do not continue with the impasse that is not well reasoned; that is really damaging government because I can tell you that when there is such an impasse the corrupt are going to have a field day and once you attempt to go to the Constitutional Court, who will command the Constitutional Court that, “Tomorrow pass a verdict”? Supposing the Constitutional Court takes its time? In the meantime, why do we cause a vacuum for an unnecessary reason? All of us are here serving our country. Tomorrow we shall not be here but that should not hold the country at ransom and that is why I demand that we get a clear and an unequivocal position from government regarding the fate of the Inspectorate of Government. I thank you.

3.19
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to get further clarification because what has been appearing in the media has portrayed Parliament as an institution against the person of the IGG. All the articles in the newspapers have portrayed Parliament v the IGG the individual and I think this undermines first of all the institution of Parliament; it undermines good governance and I think this is contempt of Parliament. 

There was a lot of communication in the media that the Attorney-General gave an opinion, which was not denied. Another communication came that the President sought another legal opinion from the Minister of Security, and we really need to get this clarification whether the Attorney-General is the absolute authority on that matter or whether the Minister for Security is more super than the Attorney-General! 

This is very disturbing because we all respect the opinion of the Attorney-General to guide government; to guide all of us to do government business but if we are now reaching a stage where we are disowning a person responsible for his or her own mandate, I think this is very disturbing for this country. Some of us did not have any personal problem with the IGG, Mwondha. For example, I want to tell you that when the IGG was reappointed, I expected her to appear in Parliament. I wrote to her a congratulatory letter and she replied me: “I am very glad you have acknowledged my contribution in the fight against corruption and I will stand with my Bible to fight on.” And we expected her to come to Parliament. I thought she would follow suit. I even wrote to her and referred the Temangalo report to her and said this is your – but I was especially disturbed that they now would refer to the Security Minister to give a legal opinion! (Laughter) 

And I think this matter must be clarified, Madam Speaker, because if this is how the institution of Parliament is going to operate - I am extremely disturbed with some people who have put themselves in the media as super people who know the struggle between Mwondha, the individual, and Parliament and are portraying Parliament in a very negative way! And I am wondering why the PRO of Parliament has not responded to some of these allegations on the institution of Parliament; allegations that are belittling Parliament, undermining not only the individual but the entire institution. If the IGG has problems with individuals in Parliament that really should not be Parliament. But also for the Speaker to sit and wait for the IGG to come and she turns it down, I think we should not take this matter lightly! 

I would request the Leader of Government Business; I have seen him looking through the Constitution, to give us the actual state of affairs. What is taking place? What is the latest position? Is Mwondha still the IGG? Where is the deputy IGG who was approved by Parliament? And who is currently in charge? What is happening with the pending businesses in the Office of the IGG? Will they not be challenged? What is the way forward?

3.23
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker, it is propitious that you should raise these questions. The questions regarding the IGG are so important that the issues surrounding her should be resolved but let me begin with the issue of the Attorney-General. Under Article 119(4), the functions of the Attorney-General shall include giving legal advice and legal services to government. So, it is only the Attorney-General who gives advice to government. So, if the mass media said that the President consulted Amama Mbabazi that is speculation. (Laughter) We do not want to speculate, we abide by Article 119 and other provisions relating to Article 119. But the President can informally ask hon. Regan for advice on a matter. The President is free to consult but the official person who gives legal advice is the Attorney-General. 

His Excellency is considering this matter and we should pray to the Almighty God -(Laughter)- that he should make a good decision and as soon as he makes a decision, we shall be able to answer all your questions. I thank you. 

3.26
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I would like to thank the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business for the clarification he has given us on the Attorney-General and advising us to pray very hard for the President to make a decision. 

The issues that were raised were the speculation outside there; the rumours that without doubt are adversely affecting the good image of Parliament and even the standing of the President in respect to his responsibility to execute state functions according to the Constitution. And all we wanted from government was to put on record certain things that they have done so that we allow the country to then pray and wait. Otherwise, at this stage the country has even no room to wait and pray because the speculation is merely fuelled by the almost mythical way the Prime Minister responded to these queries. 

It is not too difficult for government to say, “Yes, we received this legal opinion that is why we forwarded the matter to Parliament for it to consider”, and we know that what we read in the papers is not true but if you leave the speculation without denying it, it almost suggests to us that what we are seeing in the papers is true. And honestly some of us are at a loss; what do we do? Do we storm the IGG’s Office to find out whether Justice Faith Mwondha is there and throw her out? What do we do? (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I want to pray now and my prayer to the Prime Minister is that, please, set the country free by telling it what is going on. Thank you.

3.29
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Lira): Madam Speaker, mine is a bit different. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not on this? 

MR OKOT OGONG: It is on this one but from another angle. Last week while I was at my place in my sitting room at around 9.30 p.m., there was a programme on WBS and Lady Justice Mwondha featured. I attentively listened to her but it was really very bad! She accused the Speaker of treason. She actually undermined the person of the Deputy Speaker of this Parliament; she undermined everybody, including Members of Parliament and she made it categorically clear that her power is from God and that nobody else can interfere. She told us that her position is to defend the President because there are people who are working within the Movement – I know I am part of the Movement - who are actually planning to topple the government of President Museveni. So, she is there to defend him. 

I wonder whether government officials listened to this programme. Is this the government that we should defend? There must be order. A person who is the IGG, with immoral integrity, appearing before everybody and abusing everybody, and the Prime Minister is telling us that we should only pray! Prayer will not help! God wants us to act now. When we go to heaven that is when we shall be there. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter; it is about the Executive, Parliament, and other institutions. If the Executive is undermining Parliament, hon. Members of Parliament I want to appeal to you to stand firm on this matter, and it must be now. Government must know that we are here to promote democracy, and to promote institutions and not individuals. We are not here to promote individuals and get them nearer to God; we are not going to accept that. 

I want to appeal to this Parliament that we must create order in this country. First, we are not against the institution of the Inspectorate of Government. I fully support it. However, if we are to support this institution, there must be clear co-ordination for us to fight corruption. By the way, Members of Parliament do not even account for other institutions; like in government, we do not sign for any money. Corruption in on top (Laughter) Read about CHOGM money; institutions have been given money without the permission of Parliament. We have them there. Are we tackling those people? Some people are now suffering for Shs 15 million when others eat billions and trillions of shillings of taxpayers’ money.

I want to appeal to this Parliament to stand firm and make our position clear. If the President makes any mistake, then Parliament must stand firm and act appropriately. 

3.33
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you for this opportunity. I think some of us are not being fair when we ask the Leader of Government Business or yourself, Madam, regarding the issues. Those of us who saw that interview live on TV, where you were called names, where the Leader of Government Business was called names, and if you read the letter, I think it is not only the institution of Parliament but even you as an individual have been dented. 

Before I veer off, I want us to stick to the queries that are ringing repeatedly at the back of my mind. I am not somebody that relies on press reports, therefore, I want to ask the Minister of Public Service if her contract was renewed or not. If it was not, then how does she take leave?

Secondly, I would like to ask: is there a case in the Constitutional Court regarding the same issue? I would like to ask the Attorney-General.

Thirdly, I would like to ask the Minister in Charge of Ethics and Integrity what he has done after seeing that interview where the head of this Parliament, the head of Public Service, the Leader of Government Business were abused. I urge the Members of the Front Bench to answer these questions to my satisfaction. Thank you very much.

3.36
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue that disturbed me very much. Lady Justice Mwondha categorically stated that she is a member of the Movement and that she is fighting for the party position. So, how can we stand as Parliament when we know what Article 223(6) of our Constitution says? It says: “A person shall resign his or her office on appointment as an Inspector-General or a Deputy Inspector-General, if that person is -
(c) A member of the executive of a political party or organisation.” So, that person shall not be partisan. We are very disturbed as the Opposition because we do not know if she will regard those of us who are in other parties fairly. 

We want that to be clarified if the IGG is a member of the Movement and whether her role is to defend the Movement party. I want the Leader of Government Business to tell us whether Lady Justice Faith Mwondha will overlook her political party affiliation when handling the IGG office matters. Thank you.

3.38
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is now three years since I became a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Every year about this time, every vote holder that draws money from the public Consolidated Fund comes to present their budget. For the last three years, the person of the IGG has never appeared in our committee. We have been approving the budget for IGG Faith Mwondha, but I must confess that apart from seeing her picture in the papers and on the programmes which the members are referring to, I have never met her. So, how can I form a negative opinion against her?

In my opinion, we need to pray very hard (Laughter) I think Justice Faith Mwondha has a fear for Parliament. She is afraid of attending any committee in Parliament. She cannot come before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and she cannot even go before the Appointments Committee. So we need to pray so that we can exorcise whatever she is afraid of. 

Members of this Parliament have never been against the person of Justice Faith Mwondha. So, I would ask the Leader of Government Business to take a few counsellors to counsel her. Her fear is even spreading to us. She is making us afraid because she is saying so many bad things against people in this Parliament, making everyone think that every Member of Parliament is corrupt and against her. She has formed so many opinions, particularly in the press, against Members of Parliament. 

She says that she is fighting corruption; maybe she has issues with some ministers, but they are not Members of the Appointments Committee. So the person of the IGG needs to be helped. We need to pray and maybe take some counsellors for her. If we have a counselling institution in this country, let them help her. Let her not rub that fear onto us. We love her and she should do her work properly and follow and respect all institutions. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, can you say something to help the country understand what is going on?

3.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, you recall that when the IGG refused to meet the committee to discuss her budget, there was reluctance to approve her budget. I stood here and asked you to approve it. Later on, the IGG said that I am undermining her. (Laughter) So I am asking you to understand. Please, understand the problem we have. 

What I can say is that Cabinet has urged the President to resolve this matter. His Excellency the President wrote to the Speaker requesting the Appointments Committee to vet the IGG. The Speaker has written to the President. Of course as I told you, the Attorney-General did advise - so His Excellency the President has received a statement from the Speaker and he is going to give an appropriate reply –(Interjections)- I cannot say when because it would be unwise, but the President realises that the matter is urgent. 

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Prime Minister. The whole presentation he is giving to us is agreeable; it is correct to wait for the opinion of the President and it is correct to pray, but it is not correct to wait without knowing the actual status now. What we are asking as Parliament is: what is the status as we wait for the President and pray?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: More specifically, what will the sessional committees report? They must write a report by the 25th and submit the same report to the Budget Committee so that they can write a report by the 15th of May, so what are they going to report?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Madam Speaker, by that time, the President should have responded to the letter from the Speaker. So things should be clear by that time. Meanwhile, the President is considering the letter which the Speaker wrote to him. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the distinguished stranger’s gallery we have the joint executive group of the Smart Partnership Movement, led by Dr Smith. They are here to have a national dialogue which will take place tomorrow at Hotel Africana. 

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, I am standing here to support the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and to urge my colleagues to take seriously what the Prime Minister is informing this august House about. I want to urge Members not to lose faith in the power of prayer. I want to assure you that it works.

Having said that, it is very true that the country is facing a very unusual situation, the likes of which we have not seen before. The truth of the matter is, as the Prime Minister has indicated, His Excellency the President has fully understood the gravity of the matter and the strength of feeling of honourable members of this House. So it is only appropriate that we request the Members to be patient because His Excellency the President takes this matter seriously and before long, an explanation concerning this matter will come our way. 

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS & DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I stand here to state the obvious, that the Attorney-General gave advice to the appropriate authority and we believe that it will be acted upon. 

I just want wanted to answer one issue that was raised, on whether we are currently in court. Yes, it is true that a certain organisation called the Legal Brains Trust has sued the Attorney-General and we are in court. I think by the close of today, we should have put in our defence. The challenge is that the advice we gave is unconstitutional and we are in court to defend our position. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I do not know whether we shall receive better answers than what we have been given today. 

MR OTADA: Madam Speaker, I think everybody can see for themselves that there is nobody who can answer the concerns of the Members of Parliament. I want, therefore, to put my government on notice that we shall proceed under Article 101 and request the President to come and pronounce himself on that subject matter. 

MR OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would not have done my service as a lawyer if I did not ask the Attorney-General to tell us who the current IGG of the Republic of Uganda is. At least we need a response from the Attorney-General, the legal advisor of government. It is a simple question but it means a lot. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the question that hon. Odonga Otto raised is actually the issue for resolution. The Attorney-General was asked for a legal opinion. We do not know yet whether the legal opinion that he gave was taken and is being acted upon. 

In summary, the legal opinion concludes as follows: “I conclude, therefore, that a reappointment of the Inspector-General of Government and the Deputy Inspector-General of Government under the Constitution and the relevant law requires action by the President and Parliament. The President nominates for reappointment and Parliament evaluates and vets the nominee. Bypassing this procedure is in my considered opinion unconstitutional and illegal. This is my advice.” 
It is signed by Khiddu E. Makubuya (MP) Attorney-General, Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

However, in strengthening the submission made by the Prime Minister as far as the advice of the IGG is concerned, there is a very well known case of Bank of Uganda V Banco Arabe Espanol. It is Supreme Court Case No.1 of 2001, where the Supreme Court pronounced itself on the Office of the Attorney-General to the following terms – this was the lead judgement: “In my view, the opinion of the Attorney-General as authenticated by his on-hand and signature regarding the laws of Uganda and their effect of binding nature on any agreement, contract or any other legal transaction should be accorded the highest respect by government and public institutions and their agents. Unless there are other agreed conditions, third parties are entitled to believe and act on that opinion without further inquiries or verifications. 

It is also my view that it is improper and untenable for the government, the Bank of Uganda or any other public institutional body in which the Government of Uganda has an interest to question the correctness or validity of that opinion in so far as it affects the rights and interests of third parties”. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay this legal opinion on the Table, which was made by the Attorney-General, on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we have spent almost an hour on this matter and there are a few other issues that we need to deal with.

3.55
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a concern here which has been in the print and electronic media for quite some time. It specifically appeared in the New Vision of Monday, 13 April 2009. It is to the effect that police women cite sexual abuse. 

I would like to read from our Constitution - Articles 31, 32 and 33. Article 33 says: 
“(1) Women shall be accorded full and equal dignity of the person with men. 

(2) The State shall provide the facilities and opportunities necessary to enhance the welfare of women to enable them to realise their full potential and advancement.

(3) The State shall protect women and their rights, taking into account their unique status and natural maternal functions in society.

(4) Women shall have the right to equal treatment with men and that right shall include equal opportunities in political, economic and social activities.

(5) Without prejudice to article 32 of this Constitution, women shall have the right to affirmative action for the purpose of redressing the imbalances created by history, tradition or custom.”

I have gone to great lengths to read this because media reports point to the fact that – (Interruption)

MS SEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is not my style to interrupt members but I realise that my sister, hon. Alaso, has brought up a new issue before we resolve an important one. I would like to know how to resolve the previous issue. Did we adopt hon. Otada’s idea?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the Attorney-General has stated the position as it should be - there is no IGG. What more do you want? That is what I understood. Did you understand otherwise? I understood him to say that there is no IGG. He has said there is nobody in the office.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We know that the IGG has a deputy and the deputy was re-appointed and vetted by this Parliament. In the absence of the IGG, I suppose that the deputy should be there. This is a matter that I seek clarification on.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, please come and conclude on this matter because I thought it was clear.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I thought I would clarify my position as I laid it on the Table. I expounded on the legal advice given by the Attorney-General. In between, I sincerely do not know what actually goes on in the other circles of government. 

I also read in the media some existing instruments of appointment, but I do not know whether they exist or not. There is no way I can stand here and say there is no IGG in the office. I gave the legal opinion given by the Attorney-General and I believe that the advice given by the Attorney-General will be acted upon. That is all I stated.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, honourable members are justified to ask what exactly is going on within the Office of the Inspectorate of Government. The truth of the matter is that the person of Justice Faith Mwondha is not in office. Mr Baku is also not in office but the office is functioning very well. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you are now compounding the problem. Who is legally in office now?

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, as I indicated, the person of Faith Mwondha is not in office and Mr Baku is also not in office. I thought what the Prime Minister said a short while ago was instructive, namely that the appointing authority is taking this matter seriously and before long, we will know who should occupy that office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, stop confusing the country. The contract of those two expired and if they have not been reappointed then they are not in office. Please, do not confuse us. The contract expired so there is nobody.

DR NSABA BUTURO: Madam Speaker, I thought that was the import of what the Prime Minister was saying all along?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see what we are discussing as they are not in office. I think what we are telling the government is that since the office is empty, they should appoint. That is all. As for a timeframe, I do not know.

4.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga Latigo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me start by thanking honourable colleagues who brought up this matter. We do not want anybody to misunderstand why the matter came up. It came about because the country wants to know what is going on. 

We have received explanations and appeals from government but I think that for purposes of what we wanted, the record of what the Attorney-General advised has been cited by the Attorney-General and laid on the Table. In other words, the Attorney-General has informed the country that the President was formally advised on the matter, namely that when the term of the IGG expired, she ceased to be the IGG and, therefore, the only option left was for her to be vetted for fresh appointment. I am very certain that we, and the country, all understand this. 

It is also important to note what the Front Bench was trying to say that they will not say anything in response to what has been alleged in the newspapers. My appeal is that we have made our point. We are waiting to see the IGG pretending to be IGG before she is confirmed then we will sort out the matter. As of now, it is quite clear to all of us that Justice Mwondha has not been reappointed and therefore she has no contract and she cannot exist as the IGG. If she is waiting for the process to go on and wants to continue warming her chair and using the vehicle, I believe that is an administrative matter with the Ministry of Public Service. My appeal is that we let the matter rest. We are resuming Parliament next week -(Interruption)

MR OTADA: I do not intend to dwell much on this matter but I have heard that just two days ago the IGG ordered the arrest of the Mayor of either Busia or some other district in Eastern Uganda. This is the kind of thing that we are presiding over, and that is why some of us are disturbed about why we should be bogged down with a matter like this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR TANNA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for accepting the information. It is extremely unfortunate that we are in this situation. Like the Leader of the Opposition has stated, our colleagues on the Front Bench are struggling to say something and we must interpret what they are trying to say. (Laughter)

I raised three questions and I would like to thank the Minister of Ethics and Integrity for trying to explain, and the Attorney-General for being explicit and eloquent in what he was saying. However, the head of Public Service has not told us whether there is a contract or not. If there is no contract, then that order could not have been placed. If she holds a contract, then none of us can do anything now. Was a contract signed or not? Can that information be availed to us or be put on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know whether the person you want to lay that paper is here.

MR TANNA: The Minister of Public Service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see him in this House.

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my two colleagues. My appeal to the House is not to allow ourselves to be misunderstood as if we are after an individual. We sought clarification from government and even the last question that hon. Tanna raised remains pending. Next week when we resume the House, we expect an update on the matter. If we find new facts on what is going on, that will help us forge a way forward. 

As of now, I appeal to the House to accept the position as expounded by the Prime Minister and the facts - including prayers - for a while as well as the legal position and facts as laid before this House by the Attorney-General. Let us let the matter rest. Between now and next Wednesday, there will be new developments and we will proceed from there.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am seeking clarification from my Leader of the Opposition and as a professor I would like him to advise me. If the President appoints you and Parliament does not approve you like the case of our honourable colleague, hon. Mbeiza, does it automatically make her a minister? Should there be a difference in the case of the IGG that Parliament has not approved? Otherwise, Mbeiza should be on the Front Bench. Prof. Latigo, I beg for your clarification in that particular aspect, with all due respect.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I would like to agree with the Leader of the Opposition that we hold fire for one week. I am going to adjourn this House for a few days but we should resume on Wednesday for other business, so we expect an answer on Wednesday. Let us leave things as they are for now.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think that was a serious procedural concern and I thank my honourable colleague for raising it. 

I would like to revert to the matter I had raised earlier on. I had referred to media reports concerning sexual harassment in the Police Force. I had also referred to our Constitution that provides for the rights of women. I read from the media and noted that there are reports of harassment of women in the Police Force, sexual abuse and reports of women who have never been promoted and yet they have served in the Police Force for between 27 and 35 years. There are also reports of non deployment. I think that this is unfair to the women of this country who have taken up the difficult task of joining the Police Force. 

First of all, I would like to ask that the hon. Minister in charge of Internal Affairs clarifies the actual position to this House. Is this abuse actually happening? Of course, I am convinced, going by the media reports, that it must be true because there are also statements attributed to the Inspector-General of Police.

Secondly, I would pray that the minister institutes a thorough investigation into these allegations. What I have noted is that the Inspector-General is proposing an investigation, which I think narrows down to the districts that were affected like Kampala, Wakiso and Mpigi. I think that there should be a countrywide investigation concerning the abuse of women in the Police Force, and probably later on we could call upon the Ministry of Defence to explore the same because it is likely that the same troubles happen to women across the forces. 

Most importantly, if this is true, I would like to call upon Parliament to condemn this behaviour. It is not fair that women should be ill treated in the Police Force, denied promotion just because they do not accept the sexual advances by their bosses. Madam Speaker, that is the issue I am bothered about and I would like a response.

Secondly, I would like to thank you on behalf of UWOPA for the efforts on cervical cancer that you have put in and for this afternoon while you handed over the money to the Cranes. (Applause) We are thinking in the UWOPA circles that the mobile clinic will also come back to you to seek for your support, and we will move a motion to ask Members of Parliament to support the mobile clinic for cervical cancer.

4.15
MRS SARAH NYOMBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much. I would like to supplement hon. Alaso’s thanks. I want to put it across to all Parliamentarians and to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the support and for the commitment for having flagged off the walkers for the noble cause of cervical cancer awareness. Thank you very much. (Applause) I want to thank all the male MPs. I know cervical cancer affects women, but all the men have been very supportive and they are the carriers of the virus which causes cervical cancer. 

This is a matter which touches lives of women. According to the statistics we have, 46 out of every 100,000 women die of cervical cancer, which can be prevented. I applaud the move for the mobile clinic for screening. Hon. Members, we have that offer, which is free for all women Members of Parliament, for the wives of Members of Parliament, for their daughters and sisters. There is free screening which you can find in Mulago Hospital, Kampala Dispensary on Nkrumah Road and Kawempe Health Centre. Please, I call upon all of you to get these services. Once it is noticed early, it can be prevented from digressing into cervical cancer.

Secondly, we have a vaccination campaign which is going on. Young girls are vaccinated, as you are aware, but it is only done in Ibanda and Nakasongola. How do we get GAVI, the alliance which deals with vaccines, to reduce the price of vaccines and we get them through our Ministry of Health? First of all, I want to thank them because they have really been at the forefront of this. However, I want to request government to get these vaccines to all girls in this country. We are requested as Members of Parliament to write a letter to the GAVI board, in our own capacity, and we will get the Deputy Speaker to sign and we send it to GAVI and get vaccinations for all young girls in Uganda. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe, just to add to what hon. Nyombi has said; I want to propose that screening be done automatically in all the hospitals all over the country for all the women where they are. The ones we have had are in Kampala. Hon. Minister of Health, you are looking the other side but I am talking to you. We want you to ensure that there are screening facilities throughout Uganda. Really, we are appealing to you –(Interjection)- no, they should be up to health centre IIs; they should be in every parish. That is what we are demanding.

4.18
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a gynaecologist and I am extremely concerned about cancer of the cervix in women. We are only starting both prevention and management of the cancer of the cervix. We have started by screening. Normally in countries where this service is provided, for all admissions in hospitals, whether she has come in with pneumonia or any other condition, they have to be screened for cancer of the cervix in order for their record to be regarded as complete. So there should either be a result of the screening for cancer of the cervix or she should state that she has been screened recently and it was negative. 

We are just starting now. I continue to ask hon. Members of Parliament to publicise in their areas the risk of cancer of the cervix. It is the commonest cancer among women, and in this country it is usually discovered very late. We do not really carry out treatment. What we are carrying out is just palliative care but eventually these women die of the cancer of the cervix. So, we are only starting with screening. We have to make it part of the curriculum of training nurses; they should learn to screen for cancer of the cervix. That way, we shall be able to spread it all over the hospitals and all over the country.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard from Hon. Nyombi about testing centres but they are not even enough for Kampala. Going by what you are stating and, Madam Speaker, from what you are advising the government and the ministry, I had expected to hear from the Minister of Health when he intends to roll this issue of testing out of Kampala. I would go ahead now and propose that starting from the next budget we would be able to see money that is geared towards expansion beyond Kampala.

We do not want to hear this hullabaloo always from Ministry of Finance that there is no money. Good enough, we have a lady as a finance minister. This should be a challenge to her. We should fight and ensure that from the next budget there is money to enable the Minister of Health to roll out to all parts of the country. Thank you.

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to find out from the Minister of Health, because he is actually telling us that the process has started, when we should actually expect the screening process to spread all over the country, especially up to health centre IIs. This is because when we go to our constituencies, we would be able to tell the people to come over and be aware about the dangers of cervical cancer. Thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter and I feel we should give the minister time to come with a statement on how he is going to combat this problem. We can then discuss it as Parliament and pronounce ourselves on it so that it comes as a substantive matter to be debated by the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I want to remind you that during last year’s budgeting process, the women’s caucus had wanted us to drop the budget of the Ministry of Health because there was no funding for maternal health. The minister told us he would bring a loan request here, which has not come. By the way, Minister, we are very serious this time, including me; you will not get your money this year if that money on maternal health is not there.

DR MALLINGA: Madam Speaker, I am absolutely at your service; if you can give me the money to roll out this testing, we are ready to do it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the application?

DR MALLINGA: I would request for the support of the Members of Parliament.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: I want to seek clarification from the minister. The current testing centres are in Kampala, an area where an average person can afford certain things. I am wondering why the minister did not select, at least at this first phase, regional referral hospitals that would somehow spread out to the countryside and our people would start getting these services. That way, it would be a national outreach other than limiting it to Kampala. 

DR MALLINGA: What we have now is a mobile clinic, which is going throughout the country as much as possible. The long term plan is to spread out to the regional referral hospitals, then to the general hospitals, and then to health centre IVs and IIIs, which are in every sub-county. This is with the awareness that 80 percent of the population of this country is within five kilometres of a health centre. I think that will be enough. If we have the money to train the nurses to screen, we should be able to carry out the service all over the country. Just give me the money, I will do the job.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think there was something on the Police.

4.26
MS REBECCA AMUGE (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): I want to thank hon. Alaso for bringing up the issue of the Police, especially concerning the female officers. Madam Speaker, you have been complaining that there are sensitive cases on women that should be handled by the female officers, but in most cases they are very few. The few female officers in the Police, I guess, should be treated well so that other girls feel they must join the forces.  

Hon. Alaso has only spoken of one area. I want the minister to answer on other areas: one, their welfare, especially accommodation. We have been told that the female officers share houses with the male officers who are not even their husbands or their relatives. 

Two, in the same houses families are sharing and the children are also there. You can imagine the conditions they are going through. 

We have also discovered that there is no clear way of promotion or demotion. We have discovered that there is no means of performance appraisal. We want to find out how you are promoting those officers who are rapidly being promoted yet others have spent 30 years and they have retired without even confirmation. We have been told that some of them work for over 12 years without being confirmed and they call those 12 years a period of probation. Is it normal? 

What does the Employment Act of this country talk about? We must give equal opportunity to both women and men; they must be treated equally. I want to appreciate what the IGP has decided to do –(Interruption)

MR BANYENZAKI: Thank you for giving way. Mine is a living testimony that I received yesterday. I was incidentally on the phone while driving and a female -(Interjections)- I was going to park. I had an opportunity to ask the female traffic officer, who was advising me on what to do, and she gave me her testimony. 

She said, “Honourable, it happened to me.” She gave me her story. She was serving in Lango and she says they are harassed by their male counterparts, especially high ranking officers like DPCs, and when they raise their concerns, they are further harassed. She even told me that their promotion is not on merit. She said westerners are doing very well in the forces better than others. Even the issue of promotions needs to be looked at. She confessed that she has been in the Police Force for the last 13 years. She has a Diploma in Catering and Hotel Management but she has never been promoted. She is still a constable. 

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. We are aware there is a select committee of Parliament probing the Police. This morning we went to Naguru and what has been raised is coming out in our report. What we saw at Naguru was very sad. Indeed, any sensible man can stand up and say that was a sign of a failed state. 

If we are not pre-empting, we will hear from the Minister of State for Internal Affairs about this female issue in the Police. I think he could wait for the report, which is going to shock this House. Unfortunately, this morning we had no placement, so it will be till Thursday when we want the parliamentary press and other media to be available to take up what she is trying to raise. 

We went into one of the officer’s houses, which you cannot call a house; the children, both girls and boys, shared a small room. It was a big shame! I beg that we should hold on for that report, which is to come out soon. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concern of Parliament over this issue. However, the information that I would like to give is that sometimes we should also lead by example. On Women’s Day, I happened to come to my office to pick some papers but I can report that the people I found on duty in Parliament were women police officers - on Women’s Day! I asked them why they were not celebrating Women’s Day and their response was, “We have been deployed.”

Madam Speaker, I think you should begin talking about some of these things from within Parliament. I think sometimes you should appreciate that when it comes to night deployments, women should be preserved; have some respect for them. If you deploy a woman to guard at night even at Parliament, that is very unfair. 

The information I would like to pass on is that even in Parliament, this practice is rampant. There is total disregard for women police officers’ rights here. I think you should talk to the officer responsible to appreciate the rights of women police officers.

Lastly, I would like to say that while we focus on the female police officers, we should not forget the female prisons officers and also the UPDF female officers. I am saying this because they are working under the same conditions. More so, we should not forget the wives of those officers because they equally face a lot of difficulties. When their husbands are transferred, they are sometimes just abandoned in the barracks. 

It is even worse for the UPDF. Sometimes when UPDF soldiers are sent on some deployment – I hope the Minister of Defence is listening – their wives are just left somewhere. During the operation in the North, for example, the wives of UPDF soldiers were abandoned at Nakasongola. This place became a camp for abandoned wives. Some of them could not tell whether their husbands were still alive or dead. Actually, one day they walked out of the barracks not knowing where to go next. That is why I am saying that this practice is affecting the wives of all the security personnel; they are facing very difficult living conditions.

MS AMUGE: Thank you for giving me very useful information. Madam Speaker, maybe I should also find out from the minister whether these ladies have rights to their maternity leave like other workers in this country.

Finally, I would like to say that while I appreciate the initiative of the IGP to form a committee to investigate these allegations, I feel we need an independent body to do that. Thank you.

4.35
MS ROSE NAMAYANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alaso, for bringing out this issue. To me, professionalisation of the forces goes beyond acquisition of sophisticated weaponry or the use of sophisticated gargets; it also involves the human resource.

I read in total disbelief – if that was true - about an ordeal of a woman police officer who was lured into a relationship by a DPC in Jinja before he was transferred. It was only during the time she gave in that she got juicy deployment, according to her testimony. After this DPC was transferred to another district, his replacement also wanted to start from where he had stopped only that this time she refused to succumb. When she got transferred to Kasese, she again got sexually abused. This is a story that I read from the press and nobody has come out to refute, to this is wrong. 

This goes beyond welfare and sexual abuse; it is about the lives of these officers because many of them are contracting HIV/AIDS. So, I would like to find out from the minister whether there is a policy on HIV/AIDS –(Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, hon. Namayanja, for giving way. The information I am seeking is in form of a clarification. (Laughter) I am saying this because the lower ranking officers, men and women of the forces, earn Shs 180,000. Is the minister aware that women officers undergo more difficult biological situations in their lives that it is unfair to pay them the same amount as male officers? Male officers do not go through monthly periods -(Interjections)- no, these are serious issues. Can the minister clearly state that in the next budget they will make a difference between female and male officers as far as their salaries are concerned? That is the little clarification I am seeking.

MS NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I was trying to find out from the minister whether the Police Force has any policy on HIV/AIDS. I saying this because I know that in the Ministry of Defence, there is a relatively elaborate policy on HIV/AIDS within the UPDF. So, what goes on in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Police for that matter? 

Otherwise, what is happening in the Police is very unconstitutional. This is discrimination that is totally barred by our Constitution. These people are not enjoying their rights. When these female officers give in to get favours, they end up getting children. Some of them are single parents and they are getting meager resources so they cannot afford. I know the minister is going respond but I think we should get a substantive statement on the gender policy and the HIV/AIDS policy in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, particularly in the Police Service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Namayanja, I want to make a slight amendment. I think we should not narrow the issue to HIV/AIDS. What is the policy of this country on sexual harassment in workplaces?

4.41
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Alaso for bringing up this issue on the situation of our female colleagues in the Police Force.

However, I think this is a very wide area for discussion. When I look at our time and the items on the Order Paper, I agree with hon. Gutmoi that a select committee be put in place and they report to the House on the issue we are discussing right now. These are very important issues and I think Parliament would exhaustively –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Akol, that is how women’s issues get buried in other things. They will get buried in violence, beatings and teargas. The issue of women’s sexual harassment must stand alone.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, for your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

Secondly, honourable colleagues, right now we are going through the budget process and we are in the process of reviewing the national budget framework paper. I am requesting that as a short term measure, let us look into our sector budgets and identify areas where we can have some budget cuts and relocate this money to address the issue of accommodation especially in the forces, and Police for that matter. I think Parliament would have done a good service to address this issue. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.43
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I fully agree with the sentiments being raised. I think the issue of sexual harassment in the forces and other institutions is a serious matter which deserves serious attention by this Parliament and Government. I, therefore, agree that the matter must be seriously investigated by the ministry. We need assurance from government that a report will be brought here within a particular timeframe so that we discuss it.

The other issue is related to the one hon. Reagan Okumu raised, that is, the issue of Parliament. I would also like to voice a concern on behalf of the women Members of Parliament, although I am not one. I have observed that when you look at the demographic character of Members of Parliament, especially women, you find that we have many women who are still young and are mothers. However, we have failed to provide space where they can feed their children. I have, on several occasions, seen Members of Parliament as well as female members of staff breastfeed their babies in cars in the hot sunshine outside in the compound. I want to request your office, as the Speaker of this Parliament, to provide space - a room or rooms - for the women Members of Parliament as well as the female staff so that they can be able to feed their babies in this Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Baryomunsi, I can assure you that I am one of the most frustrated people in this institution because for the last six years, that is exactly what I have been trying to do and I have failed. I issue the instructions and the men disappear with my instructions -(Laughter)- yes! We took a decision as a Parliamentary Commission to set up a maternity room here but each time you ask, they disappear and they do not come back. So, if you have come on board, thank you for joining my cause.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am aware of the efforts that you have been making on this matter. I just wanted to inform hon. Baryomunsi that beyond feeding children in the cars, we actually sometimes have to leave them in the sunshine because we cannot get parking; there are no shades in this Parliament. So, we subject the children to ultimate abuse.

Also in terms of our output in Parliament, you know that these days you have to try and take care of the baby and then come here afterwards and sit for 30 minutes and then go back. If you do not want the baby to stay under the sun then you have to leave the baby at home. So, you meet the jam again. You take two hours to go home and come back and by the time you come back, the committee meeting will be over. Then you come to plenary, sit for 30 minutes and after that you are driving back home. It is so difficult to be a mother in this gender unfriendly Parliament.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. I think we all realise that it is a very big problem. Some of us had observed it and I think it must be sorted out by this Parliament. I do not know how we can do it, but we can probably urge the Commission to find space in this Parliament in a week’s time. I think we have a lot of space. We have this building as well as Bauman House. I do not think it should be difficult. 

I want to assure you that some men in this Parliament fully support the gender cause and the women empowerment cause. Therefore, you should see to it, since you are our Speaker, that within probably a week, space must be found to enable our colleagues to play their role in Parliament.

4.47
MR ERIAS LUKWAGO (DP, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs on this issue. 

I appreciate and indeed welcome the proposal that a probe be instituted into the case of sexual harassment. However, before we do all that for remedial action, I would wish to know from the minister whether any action has been taken by Police against these individual cases which we have read about in the press. I saw pictures of women in the press and they were giving touching testimonies on how they were sexually abused.

We have a whole chapter in the Penal Code about offences against morality: sexual abuse, sexual harassment, rape and what not. These women were even giving names of the individual officers who sexually abused them. These are criminal cases. When we institute a probe, at the end of the day our recommendations will be that those implicated should be prosecuted. I do not know whether on their own volition, the Police as an institution cannot take up action, as of now, on the police officers who are responsible.

Hon. Minister, is there any action that has been taken or have you opened up files as Police? Are there files that have been opened against these individual police officers who have assaulted their female colleagues or not? If no action has been taken and the individuals are known, then we are in serious trouble. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.49
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have two statements to make. 

First of all, I want to thank and congratulate you for creating awareness particularly among the women and the general population about cervical cancer. I am very grateful for that and happy to hear from the Minister of Health that something is going to be done about this.

It is not only cervical cancer or the population in the urban centres; we are talking about cancer, which is becoming a very serious scourge. I remember last year we pleaded with the Ministry of Health to come up with a budget that would convince us that Ugandans do not have to travel to India or South Africa in order to have cancer managed. This is the time that the Minister of Health should convince us whether something has been done in as far as cancer management and diagnosis is concerned. That is the first point I would like to raise. 

I think it is important that we also applaud the efforts of UWOPA. This young Member of Parliament called Sarah Nyombi has been very active in mobilising women and the general population towards cervical cancer awareness. We need to appreciate all these people because it is not easy to have these things done as they do not have the backing of the government; they have been doing all this out of their own efforts in collaboration with NGOs.

Finally, the issue that has been brought here concerning the Police is a blessing in disguise. We are just lucky to have had one bold lady who told her story but we are yet to hear from the teachers and Prisons department. 

I remember some time ago, hon. Miria Matembe stood up to say that even men in Parliament harass female colleagues. I will be very happy to know if we are now living by example, because I think it should start with us. Men must respect their female colleagues and be good examples. That is another issue that I wanted to raise. Most specifically, it is important that if there is any committee put in place to investigate the issue of the Police, we should not only concentrate on the Police but spread it out and include even Parliament. Thank you.

4.53
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much. I will begin from where my sister ended. If what my honourable sister has talked about is true, then it is very disappointing. I would like to inform this House that I am not among those that my sister is talking about. That is the first thing I wanted to put across. I know that there are so many colleagues who do not do this so if it is true, I believe that we must do something to put things right, but I do not believe that it is true.

Secondly, when it comes to sexual harassment in the Police Force, I agree with my sister that sexual harassment exists not only in the Police but also in other institutions apart from Parliament. We have been reliably informed that when we look at the various government departments and the private sector, they talk about two kinds of interviews - the technical interview and the carpet interview. This is what people are talking about outside there. They say it is very easy to pass the technical interview but the carpet interview requires going an extra mile. As Parliament, we strongly condemn that kind of arrangement because we know those who are doing it are doing a great disservice to our nation.

Lastly, what is really missing in various departments, especially the Police Force and UPDF, is that they do not have prayer room facilities. When you mention a church or mosque within the Army, it is something unheard of. We have been touring these facilities across the country and when you ask them about facilities for Christians or Moslems, the answer is “no”; they are not bothered. As such, we cannot talk about moral decadence in our various institutions when our motto, “For God and my country”, is not respected in our various institutions. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.56
MR SIMON OYET (FDC, Nwoya County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Alaso for raising this concern. Before I make my submission, allow me to appeal to the male Members of Parliament to support UWOPA - Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association. You do not have to be a female Member of Parliament in order to be a member. I am a fully registered member of UWOPA and every month I sacrifice Shs 20,000 for that cause. The bottle of wine that we take outside in the bar costs more than this. Why can’t we sacrifice US $10 to support the women’s cause in this country? 

I want to appeal to you, my fellow colleagues, that our female counterparts need our support. Unless we sacrifice and commit ourselves to identify with them, no one will do so. Please come on board, join me and the rest. So far, we are two Members of Parliament who are monthly contributing to UWOPA’s account and annually contributing Shs 100,000 which all of us can sacrifice. So, I want to appeal to everybody here to do the same.

It is true that the female officers in the Police force are sexually being abused and the unfortunate thing is that they are not being abused in the hotels or outside but in their offices, which is very painful. Before I made up my mind to come to Parliament, I attempted to join the Police force and even reported for the training but left after sometime. I have experience; I have this information. There are so many female police officers who can actually come and testify that they are being raped in their offices. It is very unfortunate! It is worse in the evening from 6.30 on wards and night deployment. I want the minister to take this matter very seriously.

It is a very serious matter and unless we get into this issue with all our heart and commitment, this thing is going to be a big problem. And this sexual abuse is not only in the Police force; it is everywhere. Private companies which are employing our daughters and sisters are also abusing them.

In fact, there are two interviews: the carpet interview and then the turn-around interviews. First of all, when you come to the office they say, “Turn around” – they want to see then they say, “What do you want, how can I help you? Are you ready for the technical interview and the carpet interview?” And the panel is only one person. After succumbing to all these interviews, you get your appointment even before appearing for the technical interviews.

What does that mean? We really need to come out as government to protect the young girls of this country. Otherwise, we are risking losing their lives as well as those of the next generation which will be in total darkness.

The second issue that I want to talk about is the welfare of the police officers. Generally, not only the female police officers even the male police officers, from the training wing you are out in a small room, five people, even if you are married. And it is worse for night deployment. Your husband is deployed and you have to share a room with someone who has his wife there - and all business gets accomplished in that small room. It is very painful to be passive enjoyer of certain things. You should actively participate when you are to participate. You should not enjoy it passively; that is the very unfortunate thing.

And another concern regarding the welfare of police is about the payment. PAYE should be raised from Shs 130,000 to about Shs 300,000. How do you expect someone who gets Shs 180,000 to pay PAYE? And this is a person who cannot afford to pay rent; he cannot afford to feed his family or to look after himself. And these are the same people we expect to perform well for this country.

We really need to come out as Parliament. In the last financial year, in the Committee on finance, we tried to raise the threshold from Shs 135,000 to Shs 250,000. The minister said that we were going to lose Shs 78 billion. I want to ask Parliament; is it very painful to lose Shs 78 billion in the name of saving the future of these low income earners? Can’t we sacrifice Shs 78 billion? How much are we losing to corruption? Can’t we sacrifice that money in order to put these low income earners to a certain point where they can also afford to take care of their families? And that should be really the concern which we must all embrace. Thank you very much. 

5.02
MRS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to say that practice perfects habits. About this sexual harassment, in Kampala many of our young girls have fallen prey to very harsh police officers. We know very well that we have many young girls on the streets. Their complaint has been that when they are arrested at night, on these 999s, these officers take them for service and that is abuse. It does not matter what these Ugandans are doing but if you are an officer and you are saying you are arresting them for their misconduct, and yet you go ahead to do the same - that has happened and it has continued to happen and these offices are perfecting their act. I think when they finish these young girls on the streets they go to their colleagues who are female. So, I think this is an issue that we should look into.

You know, some of these girls give us their votes; they are all over the city but when you are passing they will tell you, “Please, refrain the offices who arrest us and instead of charging us, they continue to abuse us on the streets even in the cars, the 999s.” So I think this is an issue that we need to handle. This is something that they do in the name of carrying out their duty.

MS OLERU: Thank you, hon. Sempala for giving way. Madam Speaker, the clarification I want to get from my colleague is, even those ones who line up near Speke Hotel at night, are they being harassed or it is another thing?

MRS SEMPALA: Thank for raising that. We know that these people are there on the street. When we drive we find these girls. What they are saying is that the police patrol cars come in the name of arresting them. So when they arrest them, they take them on the trucks themselves and abuse them, harass them. I think that is an issue that we need to note - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, allow hon. Nabilah Sempala, you know she is the Member for Kampala.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sympathise with my colleague, who I thank for giving way because these are her voters but I do not know if she is making a case for people who may be negotiating their way for release by giving out what they have. 

MRS SEMPALA: I thank you hon. Bayigga Lulume. What I feel is that these people are really outspoken and they have accused officers who arrest them in the name of duty and harass them instead, even on the road side and on the trucks. 

Another angle should be that the women have struggled, the civil society has struggled very much to break the cord of silence for young girls who have been raped, sexually harassed and they encourage them to report to Police. You can imagine the trauma of these people who try to gather the courage to go to Police seeing the women whom they are supposed to report to crying, and whom they should go to when they have these issues.

I think there is enormous trauma in this country, for those women who have been encouraged over 20 years to come out and speak out on sexual harassment and the first step is Police. Now you can imagine what will happen to these people when they observed their law officers crying tears. So they felt helpless. What will happen when these people go to them? They will end up both crying in the room. The one who has come to report will cry and the police officer will say, “It has also happened to me.” The case will just stop there because they are helpless.

Hon. Minister of Internal Affairs, when you come here, we want to see action taken because all the women in this country are looking at these police officers as the first stop call centre when they are sexually harassed. If they see them crying, then they stop in their trucks. All the people who were supposed to come out will just wonder where to report to. Even the ones they are reporting to are in tears. As women in this country, we want to have a definite position on what action the Ministry of Internal affairs is going to take on this issue of sexual harassment of police officers. Thank you.

5.07
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank hon. Alaso for this motion giving us an opportunity to speak about our sisters who are suffering silently in the forces not only the Police but all forces. I have been approached on many occasions especially by police women complaining about this kind of affair. I quietly one time talked to the Minister of Internal Affairs then about this very issue and he promised that he was going to handle the matter. But the other day when I looked at the papers, seeing my fellow women almost bursting into tears indicating how much they have been sexually harassed, it gave me a different indication that maybe there was nothing done. But we believe that the current minister today is going to take action. 

It is serious and I think it is prompted by many factors: one, sharing accommodation. This is very bad because it is encroaching on the privacy of an individual which is a human right. If I get a job as a woman, I have a right to get accommodation of my own and my privacy until I get a partner of my choice. I should not be forced to share a house just because the government does not have enough accommodation facilities to accommodate all of us. This has promoted so much of this sexual harassment.

I want to talk about the salaries of these officers; not only the women but the police force in general. This calls in the need of bringing the minimum wage policy on this Floor of Parliament. Look at the salaries of the police officers; they are not at all commensurate with the inflation levels of this country. Their salaries are stagnant, little and yet they are doing a lot of work. These are people who do not get overtime payment but they work 24 hours. When you are called upon, you have to wake up from wherever you are to go and work. This is very unbecoming and the government should wake up to bring a minimum wage policy on this Floor of the House to have a proper policy governing salaries in this country - on top of the employment policy as well.

Generally, if you look at the hygienic environmental conditions in the police barracks, they leave a lot to be desired. You find toilets which are already blocked, faeces flowing into the water they fetch from the spring; they consume this water; children play around there - I wonder what the Ministry of Internal Affairs is doing about this. The conditions of the houses themselves are not human. They are like cages.

Sexual harassment has been talked about by many Members but I want to alert this House that sexual harassment is a phenomenon in this country done by almost all employers. The examples that I can give vividly are casinos, supermarkets – I can give evidence on this because I have victims who have suffered this. It is continuous and a number of employers are using sex as a tool to allow any female worker to be admitted to work in this country. 

This calls for the government to bring a Bill which must be stringent to safeguard our girls. If we do not do this and yet we are ushering in foreign investors – yet even the local investors and the employers are doing the same - then we are having no next generation especially when we have the scourge of HIV/AIDS in this country.

When I look at the maternity leave for the women in the forces - I was approached one time by a number of police women who were denied further training because they were pregnant and they had babies. It is a right of every Ugandan to further their being in all ways. If you accepted them in the forces they must get all the facilities and the benefits attached to their jobs. I do not think that performing the biological role as a woman should be a key obstacle for me to further my academics.

CAPT. KYOMUGISHA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. I appreciate what you are raising but I would like to say that some of these facts are distorted. I have gone through military training almost similar to the police training and some of it you cannot do when you are pregnant. Because it is physically demanding, as a pregnant person you cannot afford it. Honestly, it is not fair to some of these institutions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the issue she is raising is that if she is pregnant this year, give her an opportunity next year when she is not pregnant to go for that training.

CAPT. KYOMUGISHA: Madam Speaker, I am talking from experience. Last year you are all aware that I was pregnant and the other year I was also pregnant and on those two occasions, I was at the same time supposed to go for training courses. It is basically my physique which could not manage but this time round I am already short listed to go for an army course.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what she is advocating for in the Police. They should not be disadvantaged just because they are pregnant. Opportunity should be given by the employer for them to proceed later with their training. That is what she is saying.

MRS MUGYENYI: I just want to respond to what hon. Kyomugisha has just said. I think it is unfortunate that here we have an army officer who does not realise that your institution, the Army, does not realise the role of giving birth and being pregnant is not a personal issue. It is a public issue because if women were not becoming pregnant and producing children, society and human kind would not be there. What we are saying is that institutions should be women sensitive; they should be gender sensitive to the effect that they should give opportunities - call it affirmative action taking into account the biological nature of women and the necessity for that role to continue to be played so that women are catered for and they continue to prosper and to grow in those institutions that they are serving.

And indeed in the Army, how many women generals do we have in Africa? But we know it is possible! In other armies where they exist, how has it been done? It is possible that armed forces can take care of the needs of women and women can do well and compete in the way that is possible biologically. I thank you.

MRS SSENTONGO: Thank you colleagues and Madam Speaker. I would like the government to ensure that a Bill is brought to Parliament regarding sexual harassment to cover everyone. Whereas the case of the forces is more particular as we talk now, it is a general problem and we must appreciate that we need to protect our daughters, sisters and wives. Thank you.

5.17
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let fear not be created among the young women of Uganda that there is hell in being a member of the security forces. That is very important. There are young women officers who have made it both in the Police force, in the Army and other institutions. That is a fact. If there are cases which are isolated, those should be handled firmly and specifically. I am sure that when the minister is finally responding, he will say more about that.

Secondly, there is the profession of a police officer, a woman sergeant, a lieutenant, an officer of UPDF, a major et cetera. You cannot say that simply because you are a young lady, you cannot do night duties. That is part and parcel of training. You will be deployed and you will spend a night guarding a national institution. That is part of the profession. We cannot say that at 5.00 O’clock, all women police officers go home to the barracks and sleep. No, because the profession is there.

You know very well since 1986, there has been tremendous improvement both in the Army and the Police about respecting the women in the security forces as I am sure the minister will be able to explain later. There have even been women and children’s desks in the police force to cater for the interests of the woman police and army personnel. Cases have also been reported –(Interruption)

MR OYET: Thank you. I want to inform the House that in May last year, I was in London and I met a female former Ugandan police officer who is now based there. She was actually based at CPS before she left. When I tried to pass greetings from some of the police officers, I mentioned a name which I am not going to say here and she said, “Don’t mention the name of that rapist -(Interjections)- yes. I was with hon. Nabeta. She is still alive and ready to confess before any commission of inquiry. The sexual abuse in the Police force is true and should not be denied.

MS ALASO: I am seeking clarification because I do not want a situation to arise where our sisters in the forces are portrayed to be lazy and therefore demanding kid-glove treatment. I would like to know from hon. Butime who I know is a person with a lot of experience in management of internal affairs in this country – I would like to know from him whether the matter of routine deployment in the forces is a question of law or it is administrative. Is it possible for my immediate supervisor to look at me and say, “This police constable Alaso is pregnant and therefore I should not send her to guard a bank because she cannot run after robbers”? Is it possible or it is so cast in stone that no matter what your condition is, the structure of managing the Police force in this country is that you must be deployed because you committed yourself to be a police woman, you must go. Is there no room for gender sensitivity in deployment? 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Your immediate commander, the one you are responsible to is supposed to know the state of your condition if it is brought to his attention by yourself or if his eyes or her eyes – by the way, there are also women DPCs, commissioners, deputy Inspector-General of Police -(Interjections)- well, they will be many very soon and there is no doubt about that. But your immediate commander should know that you are pregnant and therefore you cannot carry out night duties. You have every right to inform him/her that, “I am in this condition and therefore I ask for light duty”. And they will give you light duty to serve from 9.00 O’clock to 2.00 O’clock and you can go home to do other things. There is no doubt about that.

In the case of a London lady – it is a pity she left the country; she cannot help us because why did she go away leaving the rapist here? If you have been offended or harassed, it is also your duty to inform the relevant authorities about that harassment or the attempted rape for that matter, but she chose to take off; she cannot help us –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Butime, what is the structure for a police constable to report to the Inspector-General of Police? Supposing her immediate supervisor is a rapist, what is the channel? Where does the woman police constable have to report a commissioner who harasses her? 

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Speaker, I know that you are about to tell me to sit down because I am not making very nice statements for you to listen to. (Laughter) Anyway, I was surprised that these complaints went to the Inspector-General Police, yet they should have been handled a little early by respective district and regional police commanders and so on. I was really surprised, but I hope there will be a solution.

Finally, allow me say that here in Parliament, former hon. Sekiziyivu fell in love with the then MP for Kiboga and who is still a Member of Parliament. When they started their relationship, it was not anything to do with sexual harassment. Isn’t it? And they ended up getting married. They are still in love, but people could have thought that Sekiziyivu was harassing her. If Members of Parliament can fall in love with their colleagues; if lecturers can fall in love with their students later not when they are still teaching them, but after the girls have graduated –(Interjections)- I am not downplaying –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, sexual harassment is not defined in the context of two consenting adults falling in love. I would like to think that the instance that hon. Butime has referred to was about two consenting adults who just fell in love. Sexual harassment is a power issue; the boss over the subordinate. When your boss demands sex so you get a favour, for example, to be promoted, paid your salary and to be deployed in a juicy position, is what we call sexual harassment. So, is he therefore, in order to come and refer to a friendly relationship between some two consenting adults more so Members of Parliament who agreed to go by their own terms, as sexual harassment?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the honourable member is completely out of order –(Laughter)– because he does not know how to define sexual harassment.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Speaker, much obliged. I will not pursue that matter any more. Anyway, all I would like to say is that we should not create fear among the young women of Uganda that they should not join forces because they will be subjected to sexual harassment. I am sure that the Inspector-General of Police, Chief of Defences and the Commissioner-General of Prisons will definitely put in place measures that shall protect the young professionals in the security forces. I thank you for the opportunity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us have hon. Rutamwebwa, hon. Capt Peace and lastly the minister.

5.30
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking you for taking time and effort to improve the environment for women Members of Parliament.

However, I would like to pose a question. If at your level as a Speaker, you are still struggling to make this environment user-friendly for women and still failing, what do we expect of people who have less resource and less in terms of status and influence?

If the police officers who are supposed to be enforcing the law; who know the law very well because I believe that part of their training entails that – if these women are not able to take advantage of where their positions are, it shows you what could be happening to the rest of the women in this country. This is a serious issue. And I would like to thank the women in police who came out to talk about this issue; they really were aggrieved because you know what it takes to report your boss; you are likely to suffer or be victimised. So, if they could be encouraged to continue doing this because they have done a favour to the women in this country. I am saying this because this harassment is not only taking place in the police force. I am sure it is happening in many other work places. I think Parliament needs to pay serious attention to it and support women to come out and report or talk about such issues because it is not just the men subordinating or harassing women, some women in positions of power are not able to protect fellow women yet they know that they are suffering.

I would like to call upon Parliament to take on this issue and not to leave it here. As a way forward I would like to suggest that the committee investigating police goes down to this issue and shades more light on what is happening to the women in the police force. I remember I once got involved in a study, in Makerere, on women who participated in the NRA war. That particular study was not only about those women, it was generally on women. It took us into establishing where these women were. What we found out was that many of the former women fighters and informers had either been demobilised or put in a particular place but they did not really have the opportunity to grow. I think we could have more information on that because my study was not conclusive. 

Hon. Grace Kyomugisha is telling me something different and I know it also has to do with the nature of the woman being able to grow but it also has to do with the nature of a man being able to grow. So, it is not by accident that men are growing in the armed forces and women are not. Something is not right in encouraging them to be able to perform within the context of their biology. 

There is the UN protocol on the protection of women and the work environment, and it clearly spells this out as one of the areas that should be focused on. I am wondering whether we have really domesticated that protocol so that it becomes meaningful to our women so that they are able to be protected in work places, including the Police force and the Army. May I propose that we get a committee to investigate women and sexual harassment in work places so that we can be more knowledgeable? We seem to want to prescribe what should happen but we need to know the facts. Some of what we are saying is probably exaggerated but if these facts come out clearly -(Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: The information I want to give is on the issue of examples that have put in place measures on sexual harassment. One of them is Makerere University because sexual harassment is very rampant there. Lecturers harass their students under supervision. An institution was set up for girls to go and report their cases. That is something that we could study to see how it can be mainstreamed in many of these institutions. 

Of course, it is not perfect because I was inquiring last week on its performance and one lecturer who sits on that committee said that some girls ask - and that would answer my honourable colleague who was asking why these women do not report to their supervisors - this lecturer said that some girls say, “Let me first finish my course -(Interjection)– yes, and it is true. They say, “Let me first finish my course and then I can come back and report and make my submission.” So sometimes these people do not have the opportunity to first stop - like these students - in the Police Force you cannot stop your profession to report and be brought back. You may go forever. That is the information I wanted to give.

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you colleague. I was actually winding up. Madam Speaker, if I can just use myself as an example: I remember when I went to Makerere University as an undergraduate student I was supposed to do Economics. I had been one of the top students in Economics from Namasagali College - the Speaker was there and the record is there. However, I found a lecturer who harassed me so much that I gave up Economics as a subject. Up to now I still regret but I have not forgotten it. I know I should have been an economist but because I found this male lecturer who just made it impossible for me to do Economics unless I yielded and became whatever he wanted me to become, I did not become an economist. So, those examples are everywhere as I said. 

I was going to say that we need a committee which will just bring together existing information from researchers and women organisations and put it together for us so that we can come here and debate the matter from an informed point of view.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I want to encourage you not to give up the struggle to make this environment in Parliament user-friendly for women. Quite frankly, sometimes I wonder: when you go to other Parliaments you will find that for example there are sanitary towels in ladies’ bathrooms because women menstruate and it can happen any time. The fact that there is none in our bathroom is not a matter of not affording. It is a matter of not being sensitive to the needs of women so that the environment can be made friendly. 

The fact that we have this whole building and we do not even have a nursery for young mothers is not lack of resources -(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. The information I would like to give you my friend is that if you compare the toilet on the women side with that on the men’s side, you will find that ours cannot even accommodate two people at a time. You see the women dancing outside while all the men are inside there but whether they are dancing or not, nobody sees -(Laughter)- so let us first improve on our toilet here which is not friendly for women. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MRS MUGYENYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had concluded.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mary Mugyenyi, in one of the ministries where I served as a minister, I think I was the only female minister there and it took me a long time to convince the accounting officer to buy a sanitary bin for me.

5.38
CAPT. GRACE KYOMUGISHA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable colleagues. I want to thank hon. Alaso for bringing this concern to this House and I thank you all for all the voices that you have added to this subject. It is a clear demonstration that you are concerned and committed to improving the livelihood of the women who are in the armed forces and who are serving in male-dominated institutions. We thank you for your concerns.

However, I want to say that some of these facts are seriously distorted. I want us to look at the quality of a serving woman. Sometimes we seduce these guys into sexual advances. Ask me what I mean. I am talking from experience. I represent the Army in Parliament and I am also an active officer serving in the UPDF so I know what I am talking about. I have gone through the training where most people say they are harassed. Some of these females do not want to do the exercises that they have gone there to do and they would like to manipulate things here and there. They would like certain favours, which might not be professional. So much as we are looking at the men; let us also look at the female person who has entered a male-dominated institution.
 
I would like to say that in the UPDF, we do not have sexual harassment because I have not experienced it -(Interruptions)- I am a clear testimony and those who have experienced it should come out so that their cases are investigated. What I know for sure is that the culprits will not go free –(Interruption)

MS OTENGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform my honourable colleague that you probably come from a section where you are favoured. We are talking of the common woman who has come from Lango and joined the military. I want to tell you that if the women you represent listen to what you are saying now, they may be very disappointed with you -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from my honourable colleague. I have deep respect for her; she is always fighting for causes and particularly that of the women in this Parliament. A few minutes ago we talked about cervical cancer and we were very passionate about this. There are those of us who have screened and those who have not. There are those of us who know, for now, that we don’t have cervical cancer but we are all passionate about it. Does it necessarily follow that if she hasn’t undergone sexual harassment there is no sexual harassment in the forces?

CAPT. KYOMUGISHA: Thank you, hon. Alaso. The question of saying that I am from a favoured group raises another subject and I may not be in position to answer that but for hon. Alaso’s case, I could say that I gave a general situation. Since we are part and parcel of this society, maybe some people are facing it but what I know is that if you come strongly to voice it, the culprit will not go free if he is in the UPDF. We are making the general situation very difficult for female members of our society who may be eager to join some of these male-dominated positions; we are scaring them away. 

I am saying if I can’t actively serve in the forces in a male-dominated position, why not other female members in our society? Let us not make the situation look like it is hard for them because it is not. What I would like to add before this House and maybe the general public is that when you are a female and entering some of these male-dominated disciplines or institutions, you need to take yourself, your work, assignments and training seriously. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I don’t want the Members, especially those from the forces, to say that the country is being frightened. We are talking about sexual harassment in all work places: in schools, hospitals and elsewhere where there are employers who exploit their workers. That is what we are talking about. If it is here, we should also deal with it.

5.45
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mr Hilary Onek): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a very difficult area to investigate but I support the investigation and report. It is very difficult because from our experiences, even young men in positions of authority get sexually harassed. I became managing director at the age of 30 years. I was a very young man and married and I know what I went through. I was sexually harassed –(Laughter)- but the only difference is that because I was a man, the African nature dictates that the man has to make a move. I am saying that investigations must be broad to cover all ranges of sexual harassment -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Onek. The way this debate came about was that male senior officers are the ones who are exploiting or sexually harassing our female colleagues but from the revelation hon. Onek is giving that he was a managing director - who was harassing you, the boss?

MR ONEK: Thank you, Mr Okupa. You are all men and you must know that the approach varies. Women handle you gently and cause or coerce you gently and most of the time men die softly without raising issues. Anyway, what I am saying is that even young men are often lured by sugar mummies to indulge in activities, which ordinarily they would not do and those are all forms of sexual harassment. 

I would wish that this area be thoroughly investigated and I thank hon. Alaso for having brought it up. It all centres on the morality in our society. Morality is the bottom line because as human beings, we all have animal instincts if you are normal. We are all lustful and both men and women can have lust but there is a situation where a man maybe lustful towards a lady but the lady does not respond. Because he is stronger and has the power of authority, he imposes his lust on another. This is what happens and it all borders on self control and morality.

Whereas I would wish that these studies in the Police and public service - secretaries in offices and junior professionals in ministries all face the same scenarios. By the way, even an old man like me still gets passes so these are normal things but we don’t begin to say – 

5.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE, INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I think you will agree with me that this has been a very fundamental debate; one that has excited our minds. It started as a Police issue but I think we are now saying that it is not only a Police issue but one that cuts across our society. 

I want to thank hon. Alaso for bringing up this matter because I was thinking of coming with a statement to this House on this same issue, at an appropriate time, after investigations have been completed. In my response, I will answer questions as they came and, therefore, there may be a tendency for ideas to be flying across and not being consistent or flowing in a way one would want it.

But I think there were two main issues:  there was a question on sexual harassment or abuse or unequal treatment of women police officers. There was also a question related to women not being promoted on merit but on sexual favours - if I understood the question very well, from hon. Alaso.

From the beginning, I want to make it absolutely clear that there is no policy within the institution of Police or Prisons or the Army where there is unequal treatment to either girls or boys or women or men officers. They are all supposed to be equal in accordance with our Constitution. Police would be the last one to violate the Constitution, but like any other institution, including Parliament here, you may get what we call the black moles, you get a wrong person. In my own language, we say in a banana plantation there will always be a small banana, which makes the plantation look shameful. But really in principle, there is no question of making a distinction between women police officers and male police officers. They are supposed to be treated equally and they are all supposed to be given equal opportunities.

As to the cases that have surfaced, I want to assure this House that investigations are in full swing. A committee has been set up because we want to see how far this matter goes within the Police but for the individual cases that we know all about I inform this House that we formed a fully fledged department within the Police which is called the Professional Conduct Unit. This is a unit that counterchecks the behaviour of an officer. It is criminal to sexually harass your – they always say the opposite sex because these days we have even homosexuality amidst us. But it is criminal to subject anybody to sexual harassment, be it a man or a woman.

MR ACHIA: In light of the fact that the women police officers say that some of those people who sexually harass them are now senior persons within the Police and they are still working, I would want to seek clarification from you: what is the position of the committee that has been put in place to investigate the same issue and receive these kind of confessions?

MR KASAIJA: With your permission, Madam Speaker, I will come to that later on, to show you the mechanism we have put within the Police to counter this kind of behaviour.

Sharing of rooms: I am not aware of a man and a woman in the Police force sharing a room. They may share a house, but not a room. Please -(Laughter)- they may share a house but not a room. If that is happening -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, supposing that house is a uniport? 

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, again I will state and say I am not aware of a female officer sharing the same room with a male officer unless they are husband and wife or girl friend. Let us not take this matter emotionally and I would not wish to talk in generalities, if you have information, I want to be told, “Barracks this, officer so and so, the woman and a man, they sleep in a unit, this in one room”. I want that information with me.

MR ACHIA: Thank you, hon. Minister. You probably are right that you are not aware. This morning at around 9.30 a.m. we were in Naguru Police Barracks with a select Committee on Police. Hon. Gutomoi was there, many Members of Parliament were there. We went into a room in a house which for a long time has been shared by both male and female police officers and the clerk was with us, he got their names. What they did was to put a few pieces of wood and a curtain. But they enter through the same door, one room, which has been divided into three small compartments!

MR KASAIJA: That goes to prove my point. I have said one room -(Interjections)- can I be protected Madam Speaker? We have talked of one room - (Interruption)

MRS SEMPALA: Thank you, hon. Minister for giving way. I want to be clarified on what you describe as a house. I want to know the standard description of a house in the Police Force.

MR ANGIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Minister, what we saw and what we are trying to describe is if a room is divided by a curtain, do you call it a house of a room? And if that house is only one room divided by a curtain, do you call that one a room or a house? That is what we want to know. Otherwise, that is the situation we are trying to discuss.

MR KASAIJA: I am not an architect, I am not an engineer but I have got common sense –(Interruption)

MRS SSENTONGO: Madam Speaker, I just want to find out whether the minister is in order to tell us - by the time he was appointed to be minister he was first looked at as someone who has the skills of that specific ministry, including the architectural skills. As a political leader, you are all embracing. If there is a need like we are talking about the lack of housing for the Police Force, you do not need to have the skills of an architect. Therefore, you must concede that the problem is on the ground. We can go and show you. Is the minister in order to say that he is not an architectural officer so that he could know how the house was constructed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue of bad and inadequate police housing is well documented in this House. It cannot be that the minister does not know the conditions under which the Police live. It is on the Hansard of this House that they share uniports divided by curtains. You do not have to be an architect, hon. Minister, please! You just say there is a problem. 

MR KASAIJA: I am not disputing that we have inadequate accommodation; we have poor accommodation. But what I still cannot and will not accept is that we get a female and a male officer sleeping –(Interjections)- can someone produce to me evidence in writing that a woman officer is sleeping with a male officer?

MR OCULA: Madam Speaker, we have been debating and the honourable minister is still insisting on evidence and yet a whole committee of Parliament this morning went and got that evidence. They have already told the minister that the evidence is with the clerk. Is it procedurally right for the honourable minister to continue insisting on the evidence yet he has already been directed to get the evidence from the clerk to that committee? I think it is not correct for the minister to take this Parliament for a ride - that a Member of Parliament must go to Naguru, walk from room to room to get evidence and the names and so forth when a committee of Parliament has already done the work for us. 

MR OKUMU: The minister has been in the Ministry of Internal Affairs for some time; I do not know whether he takes some time to visit the Police, Army and Prisons barracks to see the situation instead of waiting for Parliament to go and visit for him when he has been there for all these years.

Secondly, I have personally seen males and females sharing a room some of them divided by a box, others by a curtain. 

The further clarification I am seeking is whether there is a policy in the Police that allows marriage to take place because it looks like there are some difficulties at certain levels. These police officers are not allowed to marry their colleagues and they find some difficulties so in a situation where you find a lady in a room and a male – sometimes they develop a relationship that is not recognised by the Police. Do you allow your police officers when they fall in love with each other to marry or you do not?

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Sixth Parliament, I was a member of the Committee on Presidential and Internal Affairs. We toured police barracks around Kampala. In Nsambya Barracks we found three families in one uniport – married.  In the same barracks, the former police mortuary had been converted into residential accommodation. Up to now, they sleep in a former mortuary. I wonder whether the honourable minister would sleep if he were given that kind of accommodation. It is over ten years since this matter was discussed on the Floor of this Parliament. The minister is telling us, “Give me the money.” I cannot remember any Parliament since then cutting down the budget of the Minister of Internal Affairs. If the ministry does not budget adequately and bring the budget here, when does the minister think that this problem will be solved? It has taken over ten years, when will it be solved?

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, are police officers allowed to marry each other? The answer is obvious. If two people fall in love, who are you to prevent them from consummating their love? There is no law or regulation that would prevent police officers from getting married if they considered so. As I said and I want to inform colleagues, there are very few police units that I have not visited in this country. I have been to Naguru, Kibuli, Mityana, Mubende, Lira, Moroto, name it and the situation is appalling – I agree. It requires attention but I do not want also to generalise issues. I think it is wrong for us to do that. Maybe let me go to another point.

A question was raised on whether we take into account maternity leave for women police officers – the answer is, yes. I think that is per law and we go in accordance with the law. But there is one point, which I forgot. It is about promotions. I would like to inform the House that we have now worked out a system that cuts across to help –(Interjections)– can I be protected, Madam Speaker, so that my trend of response is not interrupted?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Minister, what I know is that the Member for the Workers wants some information from you because he is in charge of the police.

MR KASAIJA: Okay, Madam Speaker.

MR PAJOBO: You talked about maternity leave, but do you also give paternity leave of four days, which is prescribed in the law?

MR KASAIJA: As I said, we act in accordance with the law. What the law says is what we do. When you check out with our labour law, you will realise that what that law says is exactly what we do.

Before he came in I was developing a point on promotions. I was saying that we have now designed a system where every police officer will be given a chance to have their performance recognised so that they can be promoted accordingly –(Interjections)– no, it has not been there, I must say. When I went to that ministry I found one very queer practice that I had never seen in management. It was for somebody to apply for a promotion or salary increase. Anyway, that is now history. Every person will be given an opportunity to demonstrate their ability; they will be promoted in accordance with the policies. 

On deployment of women police officers during difficult times, which hon. Butime touched, I would like to say that police officers are also human beings; they are not machines. I remember hon. Alaso emphasized this point – as a commander do you take into account the conditions of women? I would like to say that we do not only take into account conditions of women, but also of men. We take into account marital status, studies and sicknesses. However, generally speaking I would like to inform the House that once you are sworn in as a police officer, you must be prepared to work at any time of the day and in any part of the country and we are usually 24 hours on duty. So, administratively, we take into account the various difficulties each officer maybe facing.

There was an issue to do with equal pay. The principle is equal pay for equal work; that is what it should be. I am not aware of anybody who is paid less because she is a woman, no. We pay according to rank –(Interjections)- well; I would appreciate if women could get more pay.

On the policy on HIV/AIDS, colleagues, I would like to say that you should remember that a few weeks ago I did launch a project in this regard. So, as we speak this project is going on; there is sensitisation among both the police and prisons officers so that the scourge can be tackled head on.

I will not talk about nursing MPs because I think, Madam Speaker, you already have covered that.

Some people asked whether we have taken any action on proved cases of sexual harassment. I have already responded to that; the answer is, yes.

Hon. Nabilah Sempala asked something about girls that have been abused by police officers. I would like to say that again these are criminal cases. My appeal to anybody who happens to find herself in this kind of situation is to report a case at the nearest police station so that a case file can be opened for appropriate action to be taken.

There was something about salaries and wages being low. I would like to say, yes, that is quite true, but I am happy to report to this Parliament that the Ministry of Finance, in the coming financial year, has given us Shs 10 billion to enable us adjust the police officers’ pay especially to increase the minimum pay for every officer. They are still working out the figures and once they complete, I will come and report to Parliament. Otherwise, we hope the minimum for any police officer to be Shs 200,000 to bring it to the same level as that of the lowest paid soldier.

There was a question on policemen, the custodians of the law, breaking it. But as I said we have got wrong elements in the police like in any other society. One person may break the law although I know that police officers should be exemplary in ensuring that things are done according to the law.

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to inform you that we have a structure of disciplinary committees within the police, right from the police post to police headquarters. Any police officer who behaves irregularly should be reported to one of those committees or the committee that is within the unit in which the said violator is serving. I was amazed when the women officers told the IGP that they could not find a way of airing their concerns about sexual harassment within the police. I am saying this because the structure is in place. Maybe what has happened -(Interjections)– yes, that is the point. I entirely agree with you, hon. Member. What has happened is that these people have been intimidated. 

But I would like to assure you that that intimidation is now not going to stand because we have told every woman police officer that they have got a right to be heard. And when we are assessing an officer at the end of the year in our promotional arrangement, ability to communicate up and down is going to be one of the issues to look at. We have now freed every police officer; they are free to communicate to anybody, including the IGP and the minister on any issue, if they think the issue can only be sorted out at that level.

Lastly, there was the issue of setting up a committee to investigate sexual harassment. As far I am concerned, there is no objection because this matter, as you have seen, cuts across. It is not only affecting police officers; it is affecting every member of society in general. It would be good for us to support this committee the way we supported the select committee on police affairs. I would like to say that we are prepared to come and give testimonies over what we know. The police officers will be encouraged to submit their statements to the committee in order for us to improve the welfare of the police officers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there is a motion?

6.17
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Yes, Madam Speaker. This is a motion calling on government to do more to address sexual harassment in public service and other work places. It is moved under rule 51 of the Rules of Procedure.
                                                   
“HAVING debated issues of sexual harassment and listened to the minister’s response;

AND NOTING the dangers of sexual harassment to career development, productivity, health, family stability and childhood development;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

1.	Parliament urges government to formulate a policy to address sexual harassment in the workplace with a view of tabling a Bill before this Parliament to address sexual harassment.

2.	Parliament calls upon government institutions and departments to investigate matters of sexual harassment in Public Service and put in place measures to address it.

3.	Parliament calls for the formation of a select committee of Parliament to conduct an independent and thorough investigation into the allegations of sexual harassment in the Police, the UPDF and Prisons.

4.	Government is urged to mainstream and address gender concerns in the Police, Prisons and the UPDF.

5.	Parliament condemns sexual harassment wherever it has been reported to happen.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded by hon. Oyet.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, we are moving this motion in order to help us focus our energies that we have had this afternoon, to specific matters, particularly the issue of policy. Where there is no policy, it is very difficult to administer or to provide direction on matters of sexual harassment. 

Also, where there has been no law, some of these matters have been taken more in very general terms and it is for that reason that we think that moving this motion and urging government to formulate a policy that will guide the enactment of a law will go a long way in addressing matters of sexual harassment. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.20
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Mr Chrispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Alice Alaso for the initiative she has taken to move this motion. 

On the side of government, the issue of having a policy and law in regard to sexual harassment is long overdue and therefore we would agree that we take that up immediately and return as soon as possible.

But I wanted hon. Alaso and colleagues in the House also to consider the circumstances under which we have discussed what honourable members picked from the press regarding the sexual harassment in the Police Force. This arose when the leader of the Police Force was meeting his staff and they felt free and brought up these issues. Immediately, the Inspector-General of Police undertook to do a thorough investigation into this particular issue of the Uganda Police Force. My advice would be that let us give the Inspector-General of Police some little time to conclude the work that he has already started rather than us moving parallel.

So if Members do not feel very strongly, I would suggest that we adopt the first part of the motion and urge the Inspector-General of Police to conclude his investigations quickly. If we are not satisfied with the results of his investigations, then we can move to the select committee. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.22
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think that what we are agreeing on does not stop the work that is being done by the Inspector-General of Police within the Police Force and it should continue. However, as Parliament we can also make our own decision on how to proceed.

I want to propose an amendment that we increase the number of institutions to be studied so that in addition to the armed forces, we also give opportunity to victims or survivors of this harassment in various institutions to come up. 

I also want to suggest that instead of a select committee, we could empower one of our own sessional committees like the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to undertake an investigation, call for public hearings and get testimonies from the various concerned people. For instance, I have been approached by some women who work for employers of Asian origin - I am not a racist - that they are also sexually harassed. I am sure there are very many people out there who are willing to come and testify before this kind of committee.

So my proposal was that we assign the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to study the magnitude of this problem by accepting public hearings and conducting assessments and then we give them like three months to come and inform Parliament on the magnitude of the problem. In that way, we shall proceed. That is in addition to the various parts of the motion that hon. Alaso moved and that I support it.

6.24
MR MICHAEL OCULA (FDC, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I agree with hon. Baryomunsi that the scope should be widened because arising from the discussions in this House, it has been observed that it is not only in the Police Force but in many places of work, generally. So I totally agree with the amendment moved by hon. Baryomunsi that let it be general committee work covering whichever place of work. 

However, I would like to request that let it be a select committee. This is because our committees of Parliament are generally loaded with various activities. We always make provisions for a select committee because certain matters should be handled with special seriousness. The way discussions have been going on this House; I think the matter of sexual harassment is a specific and more serious matter. I will request honourable members to empower the Speaker to form a select committee so that we can go a bit deeper into the analysis and everything else. The report will help government to come up with a law which will finally help to stop sexual harassment at the place of work. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, of course I want this matter to be properly addressed. But right now the sessional committees are about to expire. In addition to that, for the next three months we are going to suspend the standing committee work and concentrate on the budget. So in making those proposals you will have to take into account the time we shall have to spend on the budget and then after that when we can begin the other work. It is something I want you to bear in mind. We are going to suspend the standing committees shortly so that we focus on the budget. 

6.26
MR ELIODA TUMWESIGYE (NRM, Sheema County North, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, I also don’t support the appointment of a select committee because it would be overwhelmed by work and tantamount to loss of taxpayers’ money. Sexual harassment is everywhere; I don’t even know the terms of reference for that select committee. It is everywhere from homes to workplaces to carpet interviews as people go to get jobs, so it would be overwhelmed. 

I suggest that rather than trying to open Pandora’s Box, Parliament can make a law. If government takes its time to bring a law, Parliament can make one. I want to give an example: although it is a bad law, in Afghanistan they had a very big problem of women denying men sex. Last week the whole of Parliament had to sit and make a law saying that women must agree to sex at least four times a year. You can imagine if Parliament can sit to discuss how many times people must have sex! I am not saying we have to do that but rather than trying to have a select committee to investigate issues of sex, we would rather get Parliament to make a law against sexual harassment. If the Sexual Offences Bill is so huge and there are many people who are opposed to some of its clauses, we can repackage it and have a Private Members’ Bill specifically addressing sexual harassment rather than spending time trying to do research when there is a lot of evidence on sexual harassment. Thank you. 

6.28
MS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My main concern is policy. Unfortunately we don’t have copies of the motion, which talks of mechanisms to deal with sexual harassment. My concern is the policy to guide the Public Service on how to deal with sexual harassment and abuse. What I would urge the mover of the motion to do is first of all ask government to bring to the floor of Parliament a policy. Based on that policy, we can then make a law and move from there. 

As regards the idea of select committees and calling for public hearings, the issue of sex is very private. There are very few people that will want to come up and speak about it, particularly women. Housewives have been sexually harassed and abused but they would not want to come and speak publicly in the hearing of their children and husbands on such an issue. What we need is a policy and a law. 

I would, therefore, urge the mover of this motion to agree to an amendment that will focus on a policy, which will guide the Public Service in dealing with sexual harassment. I do not support select committees because I think Parliament is over stressed. We are only supposed to supervise and we are not going to continue carrying out some of the responsibilities, which the Executive should do. Once we have a policy in place, we will be able to ensure that these policies are implemented. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I think there have been varied views on the Floor and probably we could handle this motion in terms of resolution prayer by prayer. The first one that I had presented is exactly what hon. Ogwal is asking for: that Parliament urges government to formulate a policy to address sexual harassment in the work place with a view to tabling a Bill to address sexual harassment in Parliament. That is the first prayer in this motion. I am wondering if we could go through it one by one so that whatever members want to retain they retain and whatever we want to remove, we remove.

6.32
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the mover of the motion and agree with the first prayer. I would also like to add that in order to simplify things and make Parliament accountable, we should put a time frame. We all know that we have passed very many resolutions but at times they stop at being laid on the Table. 

The second issue I want to raise regards the setting up of a select committee. Members agree that Parliament has been undermined in terms of monitoring. In most of our committees, apart from sitting and deliberating on policies and programmes, we don’t go ahead to monitor. Now that we are starting the budget process, Parliament must be informed. Actually there is no need to have a select committee. If all sessional committees could monitor government projects, this issue would have been identified a long time ago. 

Why should we wait for the press or the Inspector-General of Police to hold a press conference or a staff meeting then we capture this? We would have discovered this a long time ago. It is because committees of Parliament don’t take issues a step further. If this had been discovered earlier, we would have planned. Therefore, the idea of coming up with a select committee will not solve the problem. Instead, let us empower committees of Parliament so that they can do their work for the betterment of this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, usually a select committee is instituted to identify causes but I think from the debate we are aware that sexual harassment exists so why don’t we address that instead of finding out who did what and when?

6.35
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Unfortunately, we don’t have the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to guide us if there is such a policy, or if on his desk there is a proposal or policy on the question of sexual harassment and other issues, unfortunately all the ministers in his ministry.

The select committee –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: As a veteran politician we are very conversant with the policies of the Ministry of Gender. We know what is contained there and we know that the policy is based on the fundamental rights and freedoms, equality and freedom from discrimination. So the policies which the minister would want to know, actually based on this, we know them, we may not know them by heart, but we know them well enough to propose that a new set of policy be brought up to deal specifically with sexual harassment and sexual abuse. Thank you.

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Precisely, Madam Speaker, I agree with her. That is why I am saying that the way forward now should be a policy, and the law. After the policy, there will be a Bill which will be brought here, which you will send after the first reading to the committee. That committee can now invite everybody, the Army, the Police, the Prisons, the carpet interviewers and all these sort of people to work out and finalise with that Bill and get out a law; and I think that will be the best product. 

For a select committee, yes, it will do all this. But at the end of the day the same select committee recommends a policy and a law at the end of the day. So, why don’t we move now to tasking the minister or the Leader of Government Business that there be – hon. Alaso can put that better that there be a policy and at the end of the day a law on sexual harassment? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But do we actually need a policy on that matter? Why don’t we just move to the law? Do we need a policy there to come here to be debated, Attorney-General?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I am very happy because you ended on the note on which I thought I would start and in agreeing with hon. Tumwesigye, because I agree that we should focus on the law really and a lot has been done. The Uganda Law Reform Commission undertook a study; there is a very big study report on the Sexual Offences Bill, and I want to assure you, I was a bit reluctant to come on the microphone, particularly when Madam Speaker is in the chair, because I know she will want to say, “Where is the Domestic Relations Bill?” But I want to assure you that the two Bills so far are under printing at the Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation and very soon we shall introduce them in this Parliament for the first reading, except for the Moslem law, which had a few hiccups in Cabinet and we are straightening it up -(Interjections)- no, those two Bills are under printing right now. So we are doing our best to make sure we get them out of the printery and present them here for the first reading, in about one month.

Having said that, I also want to assure this House that there is already in place a Sexual offences Bill, if we can – if there are a few missing aspects - because I must say I have not actually internalised it very well, but I know it captures most of these aspects we are talking about. We wanted it to be an exotic law, capturing most of these other ingredients, even giving rise to a modern way of doing things. This is all included in this new law that we are actually bringing. 

So if the responsible ministry, Gender, can work together with the Ministry of Justice and we expeditiously finalise discussions of this Bill in Cabinet and also bring it here, I think that one will solve many of our current problems.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do we say that we expect the government to bring these Bills here before the end of May? (Interjections) Yes, before the end of May. You have said the other one is in print? The other one has also been around for a long time. So bring them.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure do not allow us to anticipate Bills. So the spirit in this motion is that until we have it, we need to urge government to do something. So, I do not know whether we will be proceeding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe what we do is to add the policy and the law and put them together.

MS ALASO: That is what we are urging government to do. Also aware that sometimes it takes unusually long, perhaps urging government would even speed up the process. But we cannot really anticipate. We do not know where it is.

MR RUHINDI: I am not quite sure about the policy but for the law I am very sure and my ministry undertakes to assist the responsible sector ministry in coming out with a Bill to this House and I want to – because sometimes it is very difficult to make commitments on behalf of other sector ministries - but I want to emphasise that our ministry has under the Uganda Law Reform Commission done a lot in terms of various studies and aspects of the law and in terms of our social fabric. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can we then urge the government to expeditiously bring the laws to the House? Would that be satisfactory, hon. Alaso?

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, there are two different issues here. There are two laws that are being printed, that is true: the Domestic Relations Bill and the Domestic Violence Bill. The Sexual Offences Bill, which the minister is referring to, the consultations have not yet even started -(Interjections)- even if it is on-going at least within Parliament, as women parliamentarians we have made an input on the two, which are being printed but the Sexual Offences Bill, the minister cannot definitely say it will be here in one month.

So if we are going to base our resolution on the motion, let us tackle the Sexual Offences Bill, which I think the minister is saying is under Gender. I do not know which ministry it is under. So our resolution can be on sexual offences in relation to the subject matter of today, because there are two which are under his docket, which I have personally confirmed are in the printery as he has indicated. He would make a separate pledge on that but it would constitute part of our resolution on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But we need to put the time frame.

MR TUMWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I tend to agree with this but I do not think that we should add a policy and a law because what happens is that as we say we urge government to bring a policy and a law, the people who were against the Sexual Offences Bill will say, “Let us first work on the policy before we come out with the law”. But we know there is already work, which started on the Sexual Offences Bill. So why don’t we urge government to expedite the Sexual Offences Bill? And on a lighter note, I also want to clarify for correctness of Hansard, when I referred to the Afghanistan war, I did not mean four times a year, it is actually talking about four times a week.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Actually hon. Tumwesigye, I did not want to take you on but I do not think Afghanistan is a good example of a Parliament that made a good law because the President of Afghanistan is under pressure to revoke that law because they said women must give sex four times a week by law. And then we were asking, “How do you enforce it”? It is not a good example.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I am not even very sure that the Sexual Offences Bill is necessarily the Bill that will address sexual harassment in the work place. That is why in framing this motion, we had said that, first of all, we need a policy formulated but then also, we are asking government to table a Bill with provisions, or whatever it is, not necessarily calling it the Sexual Offences Bill. For us we are looking at a Bill that is tabled to address sexual harassment. I do not know whether it is the Sexual Offences Bill; I do not know whether it is the Domestic Relations Bill, but there has to be that Bill which defines sexual harassment and provides for ways of managing it. So I am not very keen at tagging this particular prayer to the Sexual Offences Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And actually I think what we are addressing is the sexual harassment related to work place, not just a general offence. So, can we urge the government to present a Bill expeditiously on sexual harassment in the work place? Hon. Alaso, what time frame?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, given the gravity and urgency of the matter, I want to suggest that we urge government to bring this Bill within three months, to be realistic.

MR RUHINDI: But Madam Speaker, we all know, we are legislators, formulating a law, the legislative process that is involved, and all sorts of things, my view is the word expeditiously is good enough –(Interjections)- this is business of one month or half a month, we know where we have come from. You actually rush here, when they bring here the Land Bill, you say, “Go back and consult, you have not consulted enough.” A Bill! The only comfort I have and I actually pleaded a little bit guilty because I said I have not yet properly internalised the existing Sexual Offences Bill. As government, our only comfort is that it covers most of the aspects of sexual harassment.

If it means just expounding on the Sexual Offences Bill and coming - what you want is a law on sexual harassment, if the aspect of sexual harassment can be covered in the Sexual Offences Bill and it is brought together that will be much better because we shall have even broadened the scope of our presentation. So let us focus on that and we say, “expeditiously bring a law on sexual harassment”. If we bring it together with the other aspects of sexual offences, well and good.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, if I were not aware that SIDA was ratified here in 1979, I would agree with you. These are things that should have been done already, 30 years ago. We are late. 

MS SAUDA MUGERWA: Madam Speaker, I want to seek clarification from the Attorney-General whether these Bills are going to cure the problems that have been discussed as far as the Police is concerned. I think we are transferring the burden from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. In fact, the minister is now relaxing; he is not bothered - (Laughter)- there is an urgent issue as far as sharing rooms is concerned. That is very urgent and I do not think it is discussed in these Bills. How can we cure that problem? I cannot imagine myself sharing a room with strangers - I do not imagine myself - sometimes some of these women start their periods at night, they want to rush outside, but the man is just there next door. So how are we curing those problems that are pertinent to the Ministry of Internal Affairs? Are they covered in the Bills? So I want to propose that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should handle this problem independently of other issues that have been discussed as far as sexual harassment is concerned, because this is an urgent issue. Coming after three months, we will be referring to the Police; my sisters will have forgotten about what has happened. 

Whether government is cares or not, I want to beg this House to give this matter to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to see whether we can come up with a budget, which can improve on their accommodation. These are things pertinent to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. And the minister should be active and know actually what his responsibility is as far as the women accommodation is concerned, but now you are just relaxing? (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When I was communicating today, I informed you that I want to release you to go and look at the medium term expenditure framework up to the 25 April 2009 and to report to the Budget Committee before 15 May 2009; those are the issues you are going to deal with during this time. The channel is already there. But what do we do about sexual harassment?

MR MIGEREKO: Madam Speaker, I heard you at some stage guide that we should be dealing with sexual harassment at work places. It is true work places have been the subject for discussion here. But I also know that incidents of sexual harassment in education institutions and other places have come up during this debate. Developing a Bill really takes time. If an opportunity comes up, it is important that we come up with something that will be all encompassing in as far as sexual harassment is concerned; whether in work places, schools, name it, so that it goes on record that the NRM Government comprehensively tackled this matter. (Laughter) 

I would like to thank hon. Alaso for the work she has done this afternoon. My prayer is that you give us time as government to look at what the Attorney-General has brought up here, the Sexual Offences Bill, and see if it brings on board all the issues that have been debated this afternoon.

Second is the issue of what is being done immediately regarding what has been happening in Police. Madam Speaker, you have guided that we are now debating the budget in the committees and it is important that areas that require funding to ensure that mitigations are found and incidences of sexual harassment are minimised be addressed. But it is also true that the Inspector-General of Police has set up an inquiry – maybe what we shall have to do with the Ministry of Internal Affairs is to ensure that this inquiry is speeded up so that it can take advantage of the discussions we are having in our committees on the budget. 

But I want to inform hon. Sauda Mugerwa that for the immediate term, on the part of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there is something that is happening. What we need to do is to see what happens after – actually hon. Bahati has also suggested that within three months we come up here with a Bill. We rarely bring policies for debate on the Floor of Parliament. That is for the Executive but it also helps in formulation of a good Bill. So we are prepared to do that. 

The Attorney-General says it may yield better results to use the word “expeditiously” but we all know the spirit in which the timeframes are being set. I would like to request that we handle this matter of the Bill fairly expeditiously. And you know that lately we have been following up on every commitment that is made here on the Floor of Parliament. We write reminding the ministers of the directives that the Speaker gives and we give the Speaker copies. If within a given time the response is not adequate, we take other pertinent action and we intend to do this one as the Leader of Government Business said.

MR TASHOBYA: I just want to inform Members that it is true that the Uganda Law Reform Commission has been working on the sexual offences Bill together with the civil society interested parties and all these are very keen to have this Bill brought to Parliament. 

I have attended a number of workshops with the Attorney-General in which these concerns and feelings have been put across to us. The Attorney-General is also clear that he wants this Bill brought here as soon as possible. But I think the concern of the Members is clarity – because he is talking about expeditious. And I think what Members are saying is that expeditious is vague. Three or four months are clear and we know the timeframe within which we are working. I think we are in agreement but we are trying to be clear and precise on when to expect this Bill in Parliament. Thank you.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the position of the Attorney-General because the Sexual Offences Bill is one of the items UWOPA has been trying to see that it comes to this House and is passed. But because of other reasons, it has been lingering there for a very long time. As women, let us look at this as an opportunity now that we have brought this up, and the Attorney-General has accepted that the Bill is going to come. Let us accept it and give him a timeframe so that we discuss it and include sexual harassment as part of the Sexual Offences Bill because that is wider and it will be done faster. 

As UWOPA surely, the Sexual Offences Bill has been trodden over and this is the opportunity – hon. Alaso, please accept that sexual harassment is part of the Sexual Offences Bill so that the minister can bring it as soon as possible. Since it has already been discussed, let us give him three months so that it comes to this House. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for the time you have given to this business. Since we have this motion on the Floor, I would like to request that we just move prayer by prayer so that we dispose this of. 

First of all, if we could assess whether we are all agreeable to a policy being formulated; secondly, whether we are agreeable to the tabling of a Bill to address sexual harassment - I insist that the words “sexual harassment” be retained in this motion. It is up to the Attorney-General to find space for them in whichever Bill he wants, but I want something that addresses sexual harassment. If we are agreeable that there has been a proposal of three months and the Attorney-General has talked of the need for expeditious handling, is it okay if we propose that it be done within six months’ time? Okay, so within six months – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we should not talk of three months because of the upcoming budgetary process. We will be handling the budget and even if it is brought, we might not have time to handle it. So let us do with six months so that when it comes we can deal with it.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, we have agreed on the need for a policy and two, the tabling of a Bill to address sexual harassment within six months. 

The second prayer is that we call upon government institutions and departments to investigate all matters of sexual harassment and put in place corrective measures to address this. I do not know whether that is okay. 

If that is okay, then we can go to the third prayer. This one calls for the formation of a Select Committee of Parliament. There is another proposal that instead of a select committee we should have the relevant committee report on the progress in regard to this.

The fourth prayer is that we urge government to mainstream and address gender concerns especially in the police, prisons and the UPDF. That includes ensuring that a man and a woman should not necessarily share one room against their will. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is important; it is important. Okay, yes, hon. Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL: The issue of welfare is important, but I thought this could also be broader to take care of other sectors as well. In one of the prayers you said that the welfare of the female police officers should be checked so that the issue of one room demarcated with a curtain - as the minister said - should be improved upon. I would like to request that that prayer includes something to do with the Parliamentary Commission providing facilities for breastfeeding colleagues –(Interjections)– that is one of the facilities we are looking for.

Madam Speaker, this facility is long overdue. We have been asking for it – personally as a mother I feel embarrassed to see my fellow women move around with babies. Although the babies are silent, they have a right. So it is important that the Parliamentary Commission provides facilities for breastfeeding mothers to take care of their babies. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for coming to my aid. I am sure nobody will refute that one. So, hon. Alaso, I think it is only the select committee that Members are comfortable with.

MS ALASO: Yes, I think it is only the select committee, but I would also like to say that I am very excited with what hon. Ogwal said. Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, it looks like, if I am not mistaken, that the honourable member has replaced the select committee with a sessional committee. In my view, if the law is supposed to come it should be that same committee to deal with that law. It would be double work if we set up another committee. I think the issue of another committee should be dropped. We should now focus on the Bill, which will still come to the committee; I do not know what the sessional committee will be doing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But don’t you think that after the budget, the sessional committee can follow up on our behalf?

MS AMONGI: What the sessional committee will be doing has to be clear. I am saying this because earlier you had talked about a committee to deal with the causes and so forth yet we already know the causes. The issue now should be about the policy and the law, which I think the Bill will deal with, including public hearings and so forth. Unless there are specific issues that will be attached to committee, I still think that it should be dropped.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I think the sessional committee, which has replaced the select committee, first of all, will follow up the motion in its entirety. 

Two, it will probably have room to explore administrative matters and the process of policy formulation. I believe that Government would like to interact with Parliament on this issue. That is where the sessional committee becomes relevant.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They may even carry out public hearings on our behalf. I think it is important for the committee to retain some residual oversights on our behalf. Yes, hon. Minister of Health.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is about the general consensus that a Bill must be brought to this House to cater for all the concerns. What is important is to have all the concerns that have been said here are catered for. And I am sure it is the Bill that can do all that for us. The most important thing is to incorporate all that has been said into that law. Once the Bill comes, all the concerned people should go and air their views to the relevant committee that will be handling it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not want a committee to follow up this issue on our behalf?

MR KAKOOZA: I think we already have a relevant committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is what we are saying.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Prayer No.4 talks about officers sharing rooms, am I correct?

MS ALASO: Prayer No.4 urges government to mainstream and address gender concerns in the police, prisons and the UPDF. The fifth one is that Parliament condemns sexual harassment wherever it happens.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Members, I put the question – okay, hon. Kiyonga?

MR CHRISPUS KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I would like some clarification on, I think prayer No.3 where you talked about investigations - what I would propose is that we should first recognise the effort by the police to investigate cases that have been verbalised. And for the other departments, we need a formulation that is clearer. In my view we should urge those departments to be vigilant and if any cases arise, they should be followed up. We should not put it as if there are already cases and we are telling them to go and investigate. So, when they arise, yes, they must investigate them. They should remain vigilant about cases of sexual harassment in those departments and then cases which arise should be effectively investigated and handled.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I would like to alter that a bit. What they should do is to put in place reporting procedures so that the victims can have a channel where to put this. That is what is missing. I think it is important for them to have a channel through which to bring up the complaint.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I have no problem recognising the efforts that have been initiated by the Police Force and it is in that spirit that we are calling on other departments to also conduct investigations wherever these issues have arisen. Also, I would like to take on the reporting procedures because that will help them filter the information. Thank you.

MR TUMWESIGYE: I still have reservations about including No. 4 because the output is not clear. What we know is that government has always said, “We are mainstreaming.” Many workshops have been held on gender mainstreaming. We have been mainstreaming even PEAP. It becomes difficult to get a clear output and when you load the resolutions then you might lose out on one, which is more important. So, I am not so sure whether we need to keep No. 4. If we need to keep No.4 then rather than saying gender mainstreaming which will also take care of men and youth, we would rather be specific and talk about women in men-dominated work environments especially those particular departments. 

And then we need to have a specific action in that resolution which needs to be taken in that circumstance. My fear is that when we leave gender mainstreaming, they will say, “No, we already have this; we already have a gender a mainstreaming policy in our department.” So, this one is redundant. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But is there any harm in restating? If they had been mainstreaming we would not have had these problems. Is there any harm in restating it for emphasis?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I agree with hon. Elioda that we have been using the word mainstreaming and some people think mainstreaming means throwing the stream. I just want to probably amend and qualify the prayer that we urge the Police, the Army and the Prisons to develop policy guidelines on sexual harassment and probably ask them to table those guidelines here within three months. That will clarify the reporting mechanisms and the sanctions involved and so forth. Policy guidelines on sexual harassment within the three armed forces should be developed. That is more specific and is measurable.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification. I thought that at the end of the debate, we had agreed that it should be sexual harassment at places of work. This was not restricted to Police, Prisons and the Army because we have similar problems in schools. I understand that at Makerere and in some of these other institutions of higher learning it is the case. I have been hearing that lecturers want favours from girls in order to make them pass exams. So, why don’t we, if it is the wish of hon. Alaso, rather than specify Police and Prisons, say, “All public institutions -(Interruptions)- oh, private as well. Why don’t we say, “All places of work, whether private or public”?

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I want to give the minister is that Dr Baryomunsi specified the Police, Army and Prisons because of the reporting mechanisms. A private will not say, “I was harassed by an ASP”, and yet in the ordinary tertiary institutions like universities, they can easily walk to a Police post without reprisal. In the military you can even be disciplined for insubordination. So, we are specifically asking for a sexual harassment policy in those three military institutions for their own good. We should not bring in Makerere and the churches. (Laughter) We can deal with those ones later. (Laughter) But those ones where they can cane you for reporting your boss are where we want the policy within three months.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If we go on enumerating Police, Prisons and universities, we shall not end. If you want to come up with a very good law, it should be sexual harassment at the workplace because it will also include - the first sexual harassment case which appeared here was concerning the AGOA girls. And what did Parliament do? I do not want a scenario whereby next week we also come here for the private sector like the case of the AGOA girls’ sexual harassment. So, it is better to capture everybody. The issue of the Police and the Army could be administrative. For example, in the Army they can have committees where you can go and report secretly so that if you disclose by the time -(Interruption)

MR TUMWESIGYE: Thank you hon. Nsubuga for giving way. I think the law will relate to everybody. Some of the institutions already have polices on sexual harassment within their manuals of operations and we might not have to impose that. However, I think this debate arose out of seeing women crying in the government newspaper. The public needs to see that Parliament is taking cognisance of what was really happening. Therefore, I do not think it would cause any harm for Parliament to pass a resolution urging specifically the Police to come up with a sexual harassment policy or guidelines whether in six months or whatever then the public will know that their cries - if a woman cries in front of the IGP and then we as Parliament keep quiet, it is not good. 

If we say we have a resolution and policy covering all the institutions, it will be lost. But if we specifically come out and say, “Because of the cries and because of what we have seen in the press; because of what people have heard on the radio news, Parliament has come up with a resolution urging the Police to come up with a policy.” That is better.

And I think as a minister you should not get worried over that because it also gives you clout to ask your officers, “Where is the policy? Parliament is demanding for this policy.” Once that policy comes out it helps everybody. It clearly identifies how work can be done in the Police. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should really close this matter.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I think the first prayer we made, which talked about the general policy will address all other institutions. I also want to buy into the idea that we are being specific for now because of the origins of this debate this afternoon. 

I would like to ask colleagues to maintain the prayer that we ask these institutions, Police and Prisons to trim and address gender concerns. This is because some of issues are administrative and not necessarily sexual harassment related. 

It may be administrative in that the officer in charge of the Police barracks should ensure that when he is giving accommodation, he gives men alone and women alone. Therefore, it could be administrative in the sense that they take special cognisance of the needs of women in the workplace. I think leaving this position in general terms will help because they are not necessarily sexual harassment related. 

I would also like to add the proposal that hon. Baryomunsi brought that we add, in very specific terms, that the Police, Prisons and UPDF in the short term say three or four months, provide workplace policies to address sexual harassment. So we would have that blend, the specific and very general one. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that this House approves the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much. It has been a long day but we did very important work. As I indicated in my communication, we would want you to start your budget work tomorrow. So the standing committees should be suspended for now. The sessional committees should hold meetings in the morning and afternoon. On Wednesday, we will reconvene to complete the work that we have not yet completed, one Bill and one or two other reports. The House adjourned to Wednesday next week.

(The House rose at 7.23 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 29 April 2009 at 2.00 p.m.)
