Wednesday, 21 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: In the first place, I want to adjust the Order Paper to allow the Prime Minister make a statement. So, adjust it accordingly.

Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. I would like to inform you that in the distinguished strangers’ gallery, we have staff from the Sergeant-at-Arms Department of the National Assembly of the Republic of Kenya. They are: Ms Ibrahim Ali, Sergeant-at-Arms; Samuel Nyambei, Assistant Sergeant-at-Arms; Boniface Mbithi, Patrick Mulindo; and Faith Makena, all staff of the National Assembly of Kenya. They are here for a one week attachment. You are welcome.

Also, you will recall that a few weeks ago we heard the shocking news of the helicopter crash in Busoga. One of the passengers was the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who got injured in the crash, but fortunately he was rescued and taken to hospital. Although it is unfortunate that he has been away for many weeks, today I am happy he is here with us. (Applause) I take the pleasure to welcome him back to Parliament. I have been following your situation and I know you have been anxious to find out what was going on in the House despite the fact that you were given bed rest. I am happy that the moment you gained your strength you decided to join us in the House. So, hon. Members, please, join me in welcoming him back. You are welcome.

Hon. Members, it has come to my notice that a number of both standing and sessional committees have been arranging programmes that would carry them away from Kampala in form of field visits. I would like to say that this should stop for the time being. We should concentrate on working in Kampala. 

And as I said yesterday, the standing committees should also stop their work to allow the sessional committees process the budget because that is very important. So, all activities should now be in the sessional committees, but confined to Kampala, not even Entebbe, Jinja, Masaka or Kisoro. The staff of Parliament have been directed to enforce this. So, if they do not give you transport or any other allowances, it is because we want you to do work within Kampala. Thank you very much.

2.44
MR GEORGE WOPUWA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I want to join you in welcoming the Prime Minister back. The day he got involved in the accident, he had just visited my constituency where he was supposed to receive the Vice-President of Kenya who was delivering support to us. It was very unfortunate. At the time of his departure, I saw him off, but after one hour we heard that the helicopter in which he was flying had crashed. I would like to join my people in the constituency to welcome you back to the House and wish you very quick recovery. Thank you.

2.45
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance but before I say it out, I also would like to take this opportunity to thank the Almighty God for allowing the Prime Minister to return and continue with business in this House. (Applause) Sir, welcome back.

Mr Speaker, I rise on the point that our Army has been engaged in wars in Northern Uganda, Eastern Democratic Republic of Congo and Southern Sudan for a very long time. The soldiers have had very difficult times and many of them have suffered from trauma having gone through very many difficult circumstances.

Recently, while I was watching television, I saw how the Americans were handling their soldiers who were returning from Afghanistan and Iraq. I witnessed them give possible therapy to their soldiers. Mr Speaker, I stand to ask the Leader of Government Business what programme they have to address this situation. It is true the war has ended and our soldiers have gone through very difficult, traumatic experiences, but there seem to be no programmes to handle their after-war situation. Some soldiers are being retired, but they return without being rehabilitated mentally; others are just redeployed in the army, which is causing us a lot of problems.

Today, there is a story in The New Vision about a soldier who shot himself dead in Jinja Barracks after shooting his wife dead too. Also, over the weekend, a soldier who was guarding one of the senior officers around Luzira went on rampage while in a bar and shot three people, killing two of them instantly.

Mr Speaker, these cases are all over. And you cannot blame the UPDF as an institution for not maintaining discipline within the army because when you follow up on some of these soldiers, you realise they have had a very difficult past and very challenging days while they were still in combat operations. But Government seems to have no programmes to address them mentally, resettle and rehabilitate them so that they can begin a normal life while in society.

I beg to find out from Government – because this is a matter that is causing us a lot of problems in the countryside even to those who are being retired. Soldiers are just retired without any proper rehabilitation. Also, those who get deployed are just transferred without catering for their psychological status. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.49
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, I too, would like to thank the Almighty for permitting the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to come back in good form to continue serving the institution of Parliament, Government, the country and humanity. I think we are extremely lucky as Parliament and as a country.

I would like to comment on an important matter that has been raised by hon. Reagan Okumu regarding soldiers from the front line or battle areas, many of whom suffer effects of trauma. This is a very important issue because we have got a number of soldiers who need serious attention in order to resettle into normal life. 

I have conferred with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on this matter and he has directed that I get in touch with the Minister of Defence so that within two weeks, he can come up with a paper on this matter to bring Parliament and the country up to speed in regard to the kind of programmes that the Ministry of Defence has come up with to deal and cope with the problem as you have stated it. I thank you.

2.51
MR BALYEJUSA KIRUNDA (NRM, Budiope County, Kamuli): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance. Ten days ago, some of the local leaders in my constituency informed me that there was a strange disease that had attacked their cassava crop with most root tubers rotting at an alarming rate. 

Five days later, I went to the constituency to have an on-spot assessment of the situation and to share with the constituents, information on how best we could handle this situation. I also spoke to the agricultural officer in charge of the area on phone, to get his impression of the situation as the technical person on the ground. The agricultural officer told us that this was a viral disease that had been caused by cassava brown strings and that it affects all the root tubers causing them to rot away. He also told us that so far three of the five sub-counties in Budiope County had registered the presence of this disease and that even the remaining two were prone to attack. However, he suggested that the only way to handle this situation would be to provide fresh cassava cuttings for distribution to the people so that they can take advantage of the prevailing rains and plant immediately to guard against food insecurity.

Mr Speaker, hon. Members, for Budiope and indeed many areas that lie along the Lake Kyoga strip; cassava is the leading food crop having overtaken all the other food crops in the area because of its resistant nature to situations of draught. This is so because draught in these areas is a very severe phenomenon, which characterises the climatic condition for a greater part of the year. It is, therefore, not surprising that the people there are worried about their survival being at stake.

I, therefore, would like to call upon Government, through you, to make an early intervention by causing the distribution of fresh cassava cuttings to the people so that they can plant immediately using the prevailing rains. I thank you.

2.54
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, we have taken note of the issues raised by hon. Kirunda, Member of Parliament for Budiope. I would like to inform him that I will accordingly communicate the same to the hon. Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for a pertinent intervention.

PERSONAL STATEMENT 

2.55
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I thank you very much for warmly welcoming me back to Parliament. (Applause) Thank you, for your prayers.

I want to preface my statement by saying that hon. Dr Okupa – I have given him a doctorate – hon. Oyet and hon. Odonga Otto, among other Members of Parliament, came to see me at my house. But before we ended, hon. Dr Okupa said, “Let us pray for the recovery of the Prime Minister.” (Laughter) So, hon. Odonga Otto gave an excellent prayer. (Laughter) My wife and I were touched by that prayer. That has made me discover another side of hon. Odonga Otto –(Interjections)– no, no, he is not a bad man -(Laughter)- So, I want to thank all of you. I have written a statement, which is being circulated; it is headed, “Appreciation to hon. Members of Parliament.”

As you know, on 08 March 2010, I was involved in a helicopter crash at Bugiri Hospital. The passengers in the helicopter were: Mr Pius Bigirimana, the Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister, Mr Peter Isabirye, my ADC, Mr Apollo Muyinda, the Information Officer and leader of the Prime Minister’s Press Unit, Ms Rose Oyera, camera woman, Mr Emmanuel Basulwa, a pilot and Mr Elijah Matovu, the co-pilot.

Following the accident, Mr Edward Naddumba, a senior consultant orthopedic surgeon at Mulago Hospital diagnosed my back problem to be a stable compression fracture of the second lumber vertebra. I hope you still remember your biology -(Laughter)– especially, hon. Alaso.

He recommended that I take sick leave for six weeks in order to recover. I am delighted to inform you that today I have resumed my official duties having achieved a high degree of recovery. (Applause) Indeed by 7.30 a.m. I was in my office. I wish to thank God for having miraculously saved us from death. When you eventually hear the report of what happened, you will understand what happened but I am not going to disclose the details now.

I am grateful to His Excellency the President, for having evacuated us from Bugiri Hospital to Mulago Hospital using his chopper. In fact when he rang me and said, “I am sending a chopper,” we were reluctant to fly again -(Laughter)- and I told him, “Well, it is night and it is drizzling. Why don’t we wait?” He said, “Let the pilot come and a proper decision will be made.” And of course my doctor advised me that with that fracture if we went by (road) ambulance for four hours, it would lugubrious the system. (Laughter) But the chopper was extremely comfortable and as you know, it has two engines and there was a doctor on the chopper. 

I thank His Excellency, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Prime Minister of the Republic of Turkey, His Excellency, the Vice-President of Uganda, His Excellency, the Vice-President of Kenya, the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, the hon. Chief Justice, the hon. Deputy Chief Justice, the Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Al Hajji Moses Kigongo, Vice-Chairperson of NRM, His Highness King Oyo Nyimba Kabamba Iguru Rukidi IV, Omukama of Toro, the Nabagereka of Buganda, Sylvia Nagginda, Queen Mother of Toro, Best Kemigisha, Deputy Premiers, honourable ministers and ministers of state, Justices of the Courts of Judicature, their Excellencies the Ambassadors and High Commissioners, development partners, hon. Members of Parliament, His Grace Luke Orombi the Archbishop of the Church of Uganda, His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese, bishops, permanent secretaries and other public servants, the Katikkiro of Buganda and the Buganda ministers, members of the academia and other dignitaries, who visited us and wished us quick recovery.  

I thank the print and electronic media for having accurately covered events surrounding the accident.  Too often, sometimes, the media tends to add garlic to the situation -(Laughter)- and they cause problems but this time they captured the events accurately. I thank the doctors and nursing officers at Mulago and Bugiri hospitals.

I am grateful to Esther, my dear wife -(Applause)- who diligently took care of me and my family members, relatives, friends and in-laws for standing by me throughout the recovery period. 

Although I have been on sick leave, I have been following the proceedings of Parliament. I thank you for what you have done. I request you to ensure that we complete amending the electoral laws so that the Electoral Commission may receive the amended laws in time. There are also other matters which must be disposed of urgently. I look forward to working closely with you.

May I take this opportunity to point out that on Sunday, 25th April - that is next Sunday - at 10.00 a.m. sharp, we shall be thanking the Lord for our recovery and I do invite you, honourable Members, to join us -(Interjections)- he is asking, “Thereafter?” -(Laughter)- but we shall announce that at a propitious time. I thank you.

3.05 
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Mr Speaker, honourable colleagues and Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the entire Parliament and the entire country went on their knees to thank God for saving you and your entire team. They continued praying for your quick recovery to the extent that there was a delegation from my constituency led by Mr Peter Ajeko who had brought a white cock to the Prime Minister - he is a member of the Opposition. 

His reason is that after the accident, the Prime Minister did not ask Government to airlift him abroad. Even after being discharged he did not ask the medical board that he should be sent abroad for further examination. Therefore, the people of this country; the women who go without drugs; those who go without gloves and the medical team in Mulago are very happy that you are a model of leader that this country deserves –(Applause)- and they trust you and that you trust the doctors and you trust the service they can give you. Some of us fear them to the extent that we rush abroad.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the request the medical team have is that we should use this opportunity to improve the health and the medical infrastructure that are by the roadsides: Bugiri, Lugazi, the one at Lyantonde and throughout the country. That is their request. They are saying they have the capacity to save more lives, more presidents, more MPs and more local people but most of the time they are constrained.

Lastly, while you were in Mulago, some equipment in Mulago could also not work and the medical team who some of us met said they had to go extra procedural to ensure that you are comfortable. They request that Parliament takes keen interest to provide more resources to Mulago hospital and other hospitals. May God bless you and may the Almighty God be praised for saving you. Thank you. (Applause)

3.08
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister. I would also like to thank God for your fast recovery, and all the Ugandans for all the prayers. We are happy that you are back in the House and you are on the road. We thank you for this statement because it is important that the country knows that you are well.

As you know, Mr Speaker, I am a Member of the Social Services Committee and I would have expected the Prime Minister to make a comment particularly on Bugiri hospital and not only thank them because during our tour we found that Bugiri hospital and Lugazi hospital, which are highway hospitals, need a lot of attention. I am happy that the Minister of Health is here. 

I am sure, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that if you were to explain what you went through in Bugiri hospital, you would know that we need to put a lot of effort as a country -(Interjection)- Don’t say, “Ah ha,” because this is what we are supposed to do on these highway hospitals. The Minister of Health is here and he should hear it from the horse’s mouth. The condition of Bugiri hospital needs to be improved because it is a highway hospital and they need a lot of attention because in a situation like this - because you remember what happened to the medical team that got an accident along that road? There was not even a formula to help one of the health workers who lost his life. So it is important that as a country and the Ministry of Health, we allocate some good money to highway hospitals to make sure that they can handle emergencies because every other time there is an accident like the one which the Rt Hon. Prime Minister survived. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Pastor Otto. (Laughter)

3.10
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker for that title. Being an ex-seminarian, it is not a misplaced title; if I had not left, by now I would be a priest somewhere in one of the catholic parishes.

Prime Minister, I am so delighted to see you here. Hon. Nusura Tiperu led a team of some Members of Parliament to visit the Prime Minister, which included hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Simon Oyet and I. Mr Prime Minister, we want to tell you that our prayers worked –(Laughter)- and you should be a very lucky man for Odonga Otto to pray for you. (Laughter)  

But that aside, Mr Speaker, we also want to thank you because we stayed at the Prime Minister’s residence up to 1 O’clock, and when you arrived at the airport, you even had the courtesy of talking to us to find out how the Prime Minister was doing. So, the simple message I got from my visit to the Prime Minister’s residence is that you need to work for this country when you are in this institution so that when you are in problems people have a justification to visit you. I really want to -(Interjection)- yeah, people should have a reason to visit you. (Laughter) At least some of us were so delighted to visit the Prime Minister - we were welcomed by a whole garage full of books as we were in the queue waiting to see him. He is indeed a professor. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, we were still interested in seeing the detailed report on what happened because the Prime Minister is not an ordinary citizen. We have helicopters flying everyday but it is only once in two or three years that we hear of such incidences. So we are still waiting for a comprehensive report as to why one of the most influential persons in the country can get to a very unfortunate and compromising situation.

I am happy today that I am talking when the Prime Minister is alive. We have had situations when we have talked when our colleagues are lying here in their caskets. So we need to get a detailed report on what happened to the Prime Minister. Mr Prime Minister, if only the Secretary-General could give you a little more seconds to listen to my kind words - Secretary-General of the NRM – we welcome you back, we were missing you, and we hope to work with you very closely. Now you can proceed with the Secretary-General. Thank you.

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Mr James Kakooza): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I also want to add my voice to that of previous speakers to thank God for what he did for our Prime Minister. I also want to thank the Prime Minister for the work being done in the Ministry of Health where we are trying to improve things. And I believe that when we combine efforts, we can improve the situation in this country. 

I would like to give this information as regards to my honourable colleague about the strategy of renovating all the highway traditional hospitals: Kiryandongo, Kawolo, Bugiri and all the other hospitals. We have a strategy at the beginning of this coming financial year, which is in July; we have a master plan of overhauling all of them and renovating them to the required standard. We only need the support of Parliament to get the resources. Thank you very much. (Applause) 
  	
BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before we proceed, I must say that I know this is a Wednesday when normally Cabinet holds weekly meetings, but I am happy that even the ministers have nowhere to sit on the front bench. I, therefore, thank you for your diligence.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, as the Opposition, yesterday you took a high ground and advised our Shadow Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs/Attorney-General to circulate the proposed amendments.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ekanya is the Acting Leader of the Opposition.

MR EKANYA: Our Shadow Attorney-General circulated the proposed amendments; he has done so diligently. Mr Chairman, as the Opposition we want to assure you that we expect good faith from the Government side to accept the position that was agreed upon by the Inter Party Organisation for Political Dialogue (IPOD) in the proposed amendment Bill that is before the committee of the whole House.

We are going to sit and the Shadow Attorney-General will bring the proposed amendments and we really request the NRM side which is the Government side to accept this in good faith. Otherwise, if we behave in a manner that is not proper and walk out, the NRM side will not have the necessary quorum as provided for by the rules. Therefore -(Interjections)- I want to commit the entire Opposition’s will to ensure that these electoral reforms are completed today so that the Electoral Commission conducts the necessary preparations for the coming elections. Thank you. 

Clause 1

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, immediately before clause 1 of the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, the committee proposes to insert the following. Section 3(2) should be deleted. The justification is that the provision has lapsed by the passing of time as it applied only to a commissioner who, at the commencement of the Act on 2 May 1997, had been appointed a member of the commission. 

Two, amendment of section 5 of the Electoral Commission Act, sub-section 7: The committee proposes that it should be deleted and the justification is to bar public officers from being seconded to work in the Electoral Commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you have heard the proposed amendments by the committee. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in clause 1, the committee proposes an amendment by deleting the words, “for one more term only” and replacing them with the word “once”. The justification is for better drafting.

Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to section 16 of the Electoral Commission Act by inserting, immediately after sub-section (1), a new sub-clause (1)(a) to read: “Political parties or organisations and representatives of independent candidates shall be accredited by the commission as election observers”. 

The justification -

THE CHAIRMAN: I called clause 1, are you amending clause 1 (a)?

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, the justification is to have automatic accreditation of political parties or organisations and representatives of independent candidates.

MS ALASO: Thank you. I am just wondering how we are proceeding. I thought we were going to dispose amendment by amendment and then clause by clause. It looks like the chairperson is presenting all the proposals. I am asking the chairperson, Mr Chairman.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, my first set of proposals were amendments, which come before section 16, which clause 1 amends. I first listed the amendments, which were proposed and then -

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I think to help people let us handle one amendment at a time. So can you read the first one, please?

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that before clause 1 of the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, we insert the following: Sub-section (2) of section 3 should be deleted and the justification is that the provision has lapsed by afflux of time as it applied only to a commissioner who, at the commencement of the Act on 2 May 1997, had been appointed a member of the commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that is clear. Can I put the question to it?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: He is just deleting it because its purpose has been served.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. That is agreed. I just want to seek your clarification because I noticed that earlier on, the chairman of the committee had gone as far as proposing that we look at amendments on clause 16 and yet there are other amendments we would like to propose before the next amendment; so how do we proceed from here?

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we disposed of clause 1? Do you have any other amendment to clause 1? Then if it was before clause 1, you should have started with it.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman that is exactly what I did. The other proposal we have before clause 1 is the amendment of section 5 of the Electoral Commission Act, sub-section (7). We propose that this be deleted and the justification is to bar public officers from working for the commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the next is an amendment on clause 1. The committee proposes -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: You also have an amendment before clause 1?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I don’t know how we shall proceed chronologically, because even before clause 1, there are these amendments. I thought we would handle section by section, because we also have some amendments, which affect other sections that are not in the Bill and I suggest that - I would proceed to move an amendment - I will move it after clause 1.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, in the amendment to clause 1, the committee proposes that clause 1 should be amended by deleting the words “for one more term only” and replacing them with the word “once”. The justification is for better drafting.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you got any other amendments to clause 1? 

MR TASHOBYA: Yes, I do. Mr Chairman, the committee proposes amendment of section 16 of the Electoral Commission Act -

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, clause 1 is in respect to the amendment to section 5 of the parent Act. Before we go to section 16, because if we are to move chronologically and systematically, we should look at -

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, if there are no more amendments to clause 1, then what I have to do is to put the question that clause 1, as amended, stand part of the Bill. But if you have other amendments to clause 1, make them otherwise I will close it and move to another clause. Do you have any amendment to clause 1?

MR LUKWAGO: Yes, Mr Chairman, it is in the report.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 1, as amended, stand part of the Bill. Have you got any other amendment on clause 1 of this Bill? Is section 16 part of clause 1? So, I put the question that clause 1, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman -

THE CHAIRMAN: We have been doing these things before. What we are amending is this Bill. So, I am closing clause 1 by saying that clause 1, as amended, stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, procedure. Clause 2 is in respect to section 25 of the parent Act and we have amendments to sections preceding section 25. So, systematically, we need to have this because we have these amendments -

THE CHAIRMAN: As far as I am concerned, when I dispose of clause 1 and move to clause 2, and there is an amendment you want to effect, you stand and say so. 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I think my colleague might have overlooked one matter. Before clause 2, the committee is proposing that we have another clause 1(a). I think that is what my colleague should have done. 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that before clause 2, we have an amendment to section 16(1)(a) to read as follows: “Political parties or organisations and representatives of independent candidates shall be accredited by the commission as election observers.” The justification is to have automatic accreditation of political parties or organisations and representatives of independent candidates. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you have heard that after the original clause 1, there is another one that would allow political parties to be election observers. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we are proposing an amendment. As per the document circulated, there are agreed proposals. The amendment we are proposing is on section 16(4) to insert “except for political parties”. The amendment we are moving is that the accreditation should be in respect to other organisations other than political parties or that political parties should have an automatic right to observe and supervise the conduct of the electoral process. The justification is – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. Therefore, you agree that political parties should be recognised as observers. That is the amendment. Then in addition, let us dispose of the first one and then you can add yours. Or are you objecting to the proposed amendment by the committee that parties be recognised? Don’t you agree with him that political parties be –

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we are improving the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then that is an addition. Do you want to tie it in the same formulation? 

MR LUKWAGO: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Then if you want to tie it in the same formulation, read it. 

MR LUKWAGO: It is in relation to the amendment suggested by the committee. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you read your formulation. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the whole sentence here reads, “Political parties or organisations and representatives of independent candidates shall be accredited by the commission as election observers”. And we are saying that in the parent Act, the position is that all organisations shall be subject to accreditation by the Electoral Commission and we are saying that political parties should be exempted from the accreditation by the Electoral Commission. This is why we are saying that there should be a prefix here; a provision to the effect that “except for political parties” -(Interjections)– this is a proposed amendment and we have a justification for that.

THE CHAIRMAN: What do you lose if political parties are accredited to be observers? What harm does it cause you? But I think what you are saying is that there should be others; nobody said so. But don’t you agree that political parties should be recognised that way?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the accreditation process presupposes giving discretion to the Electoral Commission whether to approve, to vet or not. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But once you have said political parties “should be” then there is no discretion. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I do not see a major difference in what hon. Lukwago is saying and what the committee is proposing because the committee is saying that political parties, organisations and representatives of independent candidates shall be accredited by the commission as election observers and “shall” presupposes that it is mandatory. It is not “may” that it is at the discretion of the Electoral Commission whether to allow them or not but it is mandatory. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we need to look at the current position of the law in order to understand the context in which that amendment is being brought. Sub-section (4) of section 16 provides that: “No person, group or institution shall observe any election unless the person, group or institution has obtained prior accreditation from the commission”, and what we are saying is that the process of “prior accreditation” involves vetting. You are giving the Electoral Commission powers to vet political parties. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, this is being improved in favour of political parties because they have specifically mentioned that they are entitled to be accredited as observers. Hon. Member, do you need time for people to – 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, if what you are saying is what was proposed, then we would have had no problem. The point is that currently – 

THE CHAIRMAN: We are not talking about “currently” we are talking of improving the current position so that political parties are entitled to be accredited as observers. As of now, it is not clear. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, our proposal is that let the Electoral Commission accredit other organisations, but political parties that are registered and supervised by the Electoral Commission should not pick accreditation again during elections. It should be automatic -(Interjections)– Mr Chairman, I am on the Floor. For any political party to exist, the Electoral Commission must verify its authenticity annually. All political parties are required to submit their annual accounts and before they participate in elections, political parties engage with the Electoral Commission and therefore during the time of voting, political parties should not go to the commission for accreditation because it is cumbersome and that is what we are objecting to.

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem is you are assuming a position those political parties become observers because they are supervised. What this amendment is doing for you is to guarantee you a right to observe, don’t you like that? Hon. Member, do you need more time to make consultations, I see no progress being made?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, without prejudice to the position being proposed, by operation, the law would make the political parties and organisations automatically accredited. However if there is that lingering doubt we can improve it by saying “Notwithstanding sub-section (1).” This is because sub-section (1) is the one which gives discretion to the Electoral Commission. So, “Notwithstanding sub-section (1), political parties and organisations and representatives of independent candidates participating in the general election shall be accredited by the commission as election observers.”

MR LUKWAGO: To make it very clear let us add the word, “automatically.”

THE CHAIRMAN: The word “shall” is a command; it is obliging you to do the needful.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we have had situations where the word “shall” has been interpreted to mean directory and not mandatory.

THE CHAIRMAN: If you are directed to accredit, you must accredit.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, what is the mischief if we inserted the word “automatically”.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us not go there; “shall” is a command.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, the process of accreditation means that a political party must write to the Electoral Commission to submit the names of the observers and then the commission must reply. But we have had a situation where the Electoral Commission rejects some of our observers. This has sometimes cost us an election, which is why we are saying that political parties should not pick accreditation from the Electoral Commission to observe an election.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Leader of the Opposition, they did not say “may” they said, “shall” and there is a difference. I put the question to the amendment.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we concede on that issue; we beg to proceed.

MR CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: Before clause 2, we are proposing an amendment on page 2 of our IPOD proposals. The amendment we are proposing is to insert a new section entitled Section 18(a) to the principal Act. That is immediately before Section 18. It should read as follows: “Political parties to get copies of the register. The commission shall transmit to every political party taking part in an election an electronic copy of the voters’ register six months before the elections and an updated hard copy of the register containing the photographs of the voters to be used on the polling day two weeks before the polling day.”

The justification is that parties need to get adequate information about the number of voters on the register and also for transparency purposes.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, the Shadow Attorney-General would like to create some mechanisms of ensuring that things are done and done properly, but I have not personally heard of instances where any party or organisation has requested for a register and that opportunity has been denied.

This would involve serious financial implications. Do you have a different certificate of financial implications? It certainly has serious financial implications and the requirements are not tenable in my opinion.

MS ALASO: I am surprised that the Attorney-General of the Government of Uganda should be worried about financial implications and in the same breath be assuming that political parties, which are smaller than the Government of Uganda, can afford a copy of the voters’ register. I think what we are looking for is a transparent process. If we feel that having a voters’ register enhances transparency, I think Government is in a better position to facilitate this process by giving political parties a copy of the register.

Mr Chairman, in my other role as secretary-general, I have tried to get this voters’ register and it is practically impossible. It is too expensive to get it even for a by-election and you do not have the authentic version until you get to a polling station and discover that even what you paid for is not the real voters’ register that is being used in a polling station. So, since we are all committed to a free and transparent process, I therefore think that the Government of Uganda should demonstrate beyond reasonable doubt its willingness to help us acquire voter registers through the Electoral Commission.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, when you say political parties, do you refer to all political parties or parties participating in an election? We have over 60 or 80 political parties.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, it is there, “… to every political party participating in an election.”

THE CHAIRMAN: You want them to be given six months before the election. So, when do you know that a political party is taking part in an election?

MR LUKWAGO: This is a proposal – 

THE CHAIRMAN: No. I am just helping you – 

MR LUKWAGO: This is a proposal and we are giving a justification for this – 

THE CHAIRMAN: I am just helping you to improve on it because when do you know that a party is taking part? It is after the nomination. Maybe you can say, “After nomination.” 

MR LUKWAGO: I do not want to allude to other provisions of the law but if you looked at the Presidential Elections Act, it gives room to parties aspiring to sponsor candidates at presidential level to crisscross the country one year before nomination and that room is given under the law. So –
 
THE CHAIRMAN: Let us go slow. Does it mean that if it gives you one year, all those who have been crisscrossing the country for one year will participate in the elections? Why don’t you narrow it to “After nomination”? I am just helping you.

MS ALASO: We thank you for that guidance. I would like to amend this amendment by providing for, “After nomination,” so that it would read, “The commission shall transmit, to every political party taking part in an election, an electronic copy of the voters’ register immediately after nomination, before election and an updated hard copy of the register containing photographs of the voters to be used on the polling day two weeks before the polling day.”

MR RUHINDI: Can we be protected? That is a good improvement and I concede on that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR RUHINDI: We have to be very careful because there are certain other provisions we shall see in other laws that we are going to debate like the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill and Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill where, for instance, persons can get access to duplicate cards, can get updates – what I intend to say is that any necessary variations under the due process of the law as a result of any law if there are any variations on the register, the commission should still submit the variations because the problem that I see is if a party or a political organisation gets a copy and later on there are any necessary legal changes they can say, “No. This is actually a different matter that we are getting.” So, I want to take care of any variations for as long as the variations are the due process of the law to be transmitted still to the principal parties and organisations. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, I am putting the question to the amendment as improved on by hon. Alaso. We have agreed that the register will be given after nominations.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: I thank you. We are moving another amendment - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Before clause 2?

MR LUKWAGO: Yes, before clause 2.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR LUKWAGO: Still on page 2, we are proposing an amendment to section 19. I am sorry, Mr Chairman, it is not in that document but in a different one –(Interjections)- we supplied those documents together - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukwago, you remember that I rang you and I said, “Please, can you do me a favour and send me a copy?” Did I not? 

MR LUKWAGO: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why did you not send it to me?

MR LUKWAGO: We sent the copies and – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. 

MR LUKWAGO: We endeavoured to send copies and if they did not reach you, we do apologise for that –

THE CHAIRMAN: It is okay. 

MR LUKWAGO: But the proposal – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you read it.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. We are proposing an amendment to section 19 to add (iii) which provides as follows: “Or where one is employed or carries on business -(Interjections)- I beg for protection. Section 19 reads as follows – 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Member. Even in the copy which my sister has volunteered to give me, there is no amendment to 19(iii).

MR LUKWAGO: These copies were submitted to the committee and copies were circulated to the Members –(Interjections)- these are IPC proposals. They are here and a supplementary copy was sent. Members have got copies and I wanted to read the substantive provision which reads as follows: “Any person who is a citizen of Uganda and is 18 years of age or above shall apply to be registered as a voter in a parish or ward where the person -
(i)	Originates from; 
(ii)	Resides.”

We want to add (iii) “is employed or carries out business.” 

The justification is to give opportunity to eligible voters to have a choice as to where to register and vote from nearest to their place of convenience. We have got so many people who cannot travel back to their places of origin –(Interjections)   

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please!

MR LUKWAGO: Even in their residences, they work several hours and they cannot go back over the weekend – I mean the electoral officials do work and the only option they have is to register from their places of work. The practice – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukwago, that was the position before that law was made, of registering in Parliament, you register in the High Court –(Laughter)- but then people realised that it did not make sense and that is why registering where you work was deleted. We have dealt with this situation before – I am just giving you the background. What you are stating was the position before where people said you can register in Parliament although you stay in Bugolobi. It was changed to that one so that you register where you reside either in Kampala or you go to Busia where you were born.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Chairman, I have information. Reference was made to the IPOD submission. This IPOD submission was arrived at after detailed and lengthy discussions by all the parties here. It was decided that all of us in this country, even when you are working in Kampala and you have some place where you reside, a place of abode - the confusion that has been experienced as a result of registering and voting from places of work had been taken note of and it was unanimously agreed that we drop this position. When you look at the IPOD document - the only problem is that hon. Lukwago never attended the IPOD meetings. But if he had been attending, he would not have had any problem. He wouldn’t be making this submission because we had very lengthy discussions on this matter. Mr Chairman, I beg hon. Lukwago to drop this and we move on.

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, the Deputy Attorney-General has just conceded some amendments. We appreciate the challenge our Shadow Attorney-General has, but I am proposing that this be stood over briefly so that the Shadow Attorney-General and the other side can consult -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, but hon. Ekanya, you have been here longer than the Shadow Attorney-General. This issue about the place of work came up and it was dropped. 

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, part of the electoral law reforms require establishment of a tribunal also - 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, let us deal with this first.

MR EKANYA: Yes, I am coming. So, for purposes of moving forward, we want to concede. 

MR LUKWAGO: Painfully we concede to this, but I just want to –(Interjections)- I am begging for protection, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: You are protected.

MR LUKWAGO: We have carried out consultations about this, but painfully one thing I want to say for the good of this country is that this section 19 has been abused. Military personnel register in barracks where they do not reside. We wanted to make the law uniform for other people who work in other places but now that - what I am requesting for is that even the military personnel should go back to their places of origin; they should not register in Parliament.

THE CHAIRMAN: This provision will be a provision of common application.  

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. Mr Chairman, before clause 2, the next amendment is on page 2 in respect to section 20 of the principal Act. We are proposing as follows: “That the parliamentary constituencies created under Article 63 of the Constitution shall be the basic electoral units for the management of elections headed by returning officers to be responsible to the commission.” 

The justification before the Attorney-General jumps on to the Floor – 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, can you repeat that, please? Read the amendment again.

MR LUKWAGO: Most obliged. “The parliamentary constituencies created under Article 63 of the Constitution shall be the basic electoral units for the management of elections headed by returning officers to be responsible to the commission.”

The justification is to make a constituency instead of a district as the basic electoral unit for the effective management of elections and improve efficiency of election management because constituencies are smaller units compared to districts. We beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I believe we all accept that we live in Uganda. We know our challenges as a nation. We want fair and transparent elections and I know the saying has been at whatever cost. Yes, I agree, but let me tell you; the principle is good hon. Lukwago. I do not have any problem with the principle. In fact, if that went to the sub-county or parish level, I would even be happier. However, due to the times in which we are, if we are to engage in that kind of process, it would need a complete overhaul of the electoral infrastructure because you are not only talking about a returning officer per se, a returning officer must be supported with the necessary personnel, the necessary equipment. But we are already at pains in raising resources to manage the few administrative challenges that we have at hand. So, much as this principle is good, it is certainly not tenable at the moment.

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I just wanted to add on to what the Attorney-General has said. This is because besides talking about the resources, it is also duplication. You will create the 214 electoral areas, but at the same time, where will the women MPs and the LC V chairpersons – I mean where will the tallying point be? That will mean you will maintain the district returning officers and create the constituency returning officers. To me, that is duplication and I am wondering whether it does not have any effect on Article 93? Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. It is true that when you create this, there will be a charge, it will add more costs. As you are aware, there are very few districts in Uganda, which have more than one constituency. As you are aware of the creation of the districts – I can read for you: we have Bushenyi, we have Sironko – I am giving examples, which I know but the majority are one district constituencies. I want you to carry statistics. You know for me I walk with figures at my finger tips. Having said that, I think we should be fair. If we say that we want districts to have more than one constituency, then we should have one person as the overall registrar at the districts and then have sub-registrars at the constituency level to deal with declaring results at the constituency level; the districts would deal with merging them. 

This would be very good because many Ugandans are unemployed and this is another way of creating employment. Mr Chairman, democracy is not cheap and I suggest that we should not put other places at an advantage while placing others at a disadvantage. Thank you.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This Parliament has been complaining of the cost of public administration and this has always been articulated by hon. Nandala. It is surprising that today, he is making a U-turn to support and promote excessive increase in public administration costs. 

What I read in this is that we want to make it completely impossible for the Electoral Commission to be efficient. Previously, the Electoral Commission was using other civil servants and this Parliament said, “No, the Electoral Commission should appoint it own staff, including returning officers”. You are aware that we are continuing to create more districts, and part of their concern will be covered under that arrangement. So I would like to plead to this Parliament that we retain the district returning officers but not returning officers at the constituency level.

MR OLENY: Thank you, Mr Chairman. While I sympathise very much with the views held by hon. Nandala-Mafabi on the aspect of strengthening the position of the returning officers at constituency level, I am also very mindful of another experience in terms of the tension that goes with having to declare results at constituency level. 

Remember, even at the district level, it has always been a very tensed up situation that requires a lot of security and other additional logistics to just keep the voters calm. Now if we say that declaration of results should be at constituency level, I can assure you that there will be a lot of violence in this country; they can spin out of control.

THE CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Members, don’t you think that hon. Namayanja made a point that should be put in account in one way or the other? Don’t you think that what we need is to put efficiency at the district level? There is likely to be a clash because the district registrar will be, for instance, in charge of women, and the other one – you know, there will be a clash! So, don’t you think we would rather leave the leadership at the districts and put efficiency there?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, we appreciate your concerns but we need to have consensus on this matter. Currently, results are declared at polling stations. Currently, we have several electoral colleges, like the youth, persons with disabilities, workers and so forth, whose results are not declared at the districts. 

The main import of this proposed amendment is to ensure the shortcomings of the Electoral Commission and the Supreme Court ruling which established that the Electoral Commission in the last elections declared that Dr Col Kiiza Besigye got only 37 percent, but when the forms were submitted to court, court raised the percentage to 38 percent. Therefore, if results are declared at a constituency level, let them be final so that the Electoral Commission in Kampala and anywhere else does not manipulate them. There is a Constitutional Court ruling that the Electoral Commission failed to add up all the results when they were adding in Kampala. We believe that once results are declared at the constituency, they should be final. That is the import of that argument. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, the argument the honourable member is giving is actually misleading. When you refer to youth elections and the persons with disabilities and workers, they do not vote from their respective districts; they converge in one area. Even then, it is the district returning officer of that particular district where they vote from who acts as the returning office. Therefore, for him to refer to youth elections and persons with disability is actually misleading. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, I put the question to the proposed amendment by hon. Lukwago.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 2

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes an amendment to clause 2(1) by deleting the word, “fifteen”, and replacing it with the word, “Twenty one”. The justification is to increase the period of display of voters’ roll.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that sub-clause (1)(a) should be amended by deleting the word “Fifteen” and replacing it with the word, “Twenty one”. This is a consequential amendment. 

Secondly, the committee proposes that in sub-clause (1)(a), we delete the word “six” and replace it with the word “ten”. The justification is to increase the period within which objections or complaints may be raised or filed.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that immediately after sub-clause (1)(b) we insert the following (1)(c): “For purposes of this section, the complaints on the voters’ roll shall be received by the tribunal”, and the justification is to enable the tribunal to receive complaints on the voters’ roll.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes an amendment to paragraph (c) of clause 2 and we propose that sub-clause (5) should be re-drafted as follows: “The returning officer shall appoint a tribunal at a parish level comprising of five members not being public officers to determine objections”, and (5)(a) “The tribunal shall comprise of the following:
 
(i) Two elders, one female and the other male; and
(ii) Three representatives nominated from political parties or organisations by the National Consultative Forum”.

The justification is to enable the constitution of tribunals at parish level and for better reading.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, any comments?

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we are opposed to the idea of the National Consultative Forum being involved in the issue of sending representatives of political parties because the National Consultative Forum as a body will not have original mandate from the political parties who would wish to send their representatives directly to the tribunal or to the commission to be appointed as members.

THE CHAIRMAN: Whom do you want to substitute for National Consultative Forum?

MR LUKWAGO: It should be the parties doing that and the original proposal, if you looked at our proposals here on page 3 -

THE CHAIRMAN: Which parties?

MR LUKWAGO: The IPOD proposals on page 3 -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you say parties, which parties?

MR LUKWAGO: Parties participating in elections.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, the element of five would again be affected because you cannot tell the number of the parties that will participate in the elections. If you looked at the agreed position here on page 3, it was saying to be subjected - we are proposing that in sub-section (5) of section 25, we should insert between the words “shall” and “appoint” the phrase: “With the approval of representatives appointed by political parties participating in an election”. This is what is stated here.

The idea is that all the five appointed members of the tribunal should be subjected to vetting by representatives sent by parties. That was the original proposal but if we are to go by the proposed amendment suggested by the committee, the representatives should be sent directly by parties to sit on the tribunal.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, since you are likely to have a problem because you have many parties, why don’t you give it to a body, say a chief magistrate of the area? You may have disputes in the parties themselves especially if, for instance, you have three representatives and you have seven parties participating. They are likely to disagree. Why don’t you give it to a magistrate to nominate these people to sit there? I think it may serve you better than this.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, with chief magistrate, it should be formally moved and here we are saying the complainants should take their complaints —

THE CHAIRMAN: No, what I am suggesting is that once this is done, they know that there may be objections, complaints about the register; the chief magistrate of the area nominates people who would be sitting on - the complaints may come or may not come; it does not cause any problem.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, maybe in an event the parties disagree, then the complainant can formally move to court; then we give powers to court only when a disagreement has emerged among the parties.

THE CHAIRMAN: But the process is going to be delayed.

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, just a few days ago, we passed the Political Parties and Organisations (Amendment) Bill in which we operationalised the Political Parties Forum and one of the reasons for the existence of this forum is to adjudicate matters of this nature between the parties. I think it would be the rightful organ to nominate the participants on the tribunals.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Maybe, you would want to tell us the legal capacity of the National Consultative Forum? What is its legal capacity? What is it legally?

THE CHAIRMAN: Personally, I think you should get an independent person to choose the tribunal.

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I have been hearing about this concept of parties participating in elections. I am not exactly sure what this means because if you look at the report of the Electoral Commission on the 2006 general elections in the country, we are told that there are over 30 parties in the country and if you check the list of which parties fielded presidential candidates, they are less than five.

If you get the parliamentary elections, the majority of the parties did not field candidates. Very few fielded a miserable number in these local council elections. What will this concept of parties participating in elections mean? I have a bit of a problem because if you have a party which has failed to produce a presidential candidate, a parliamentary candidate and all these other candidates at the national and district levels, can these parties also be called participating parties? Shall we have a definition? I need assistance here, please.

MR RUHINDI: If you look at Section 20 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, it spells out under Clause 4 the functions of the National Consultative Forum. The purpose of our being here is to make electoral laws; some other electoral laws are in place. In fact, the challenge is to implement the existing legislation and not so much in terms of keeping on making laws. But this provision when you read it in - 
“(a) Liaising with the Electoral Commission on matters pertaining to political parties and organisations.

(b)Ensuring that political parties and organisations comply with the code of conduct described under section 19.” 

I want to assure the House that through a consultative manner the code is ready and it will be following suit upon enactment of these laws so that we also debate the political parties and organisations code of conduct.

“c) Communicating the complaints and grievances of political parties and organisations to the Electoral Commission.

d) Representing political parties and organisations in any case where the parties and organisations have to give a common position.” 

This is where some of these matters we are talking about fall; like the resolution of disputes among political parties and organisations, making recommendations to the minister on any matter under this Act and such other functions as may be prescribed by the minister with the approval of Parliament. 

All I want really, with the approval of Parliament, is to urge all of us to be comfortable in the provisions we have and to bring the institutions that we have created to perform certain functions. So, I do not see why the National Consultative Forum cannot undertake these functions we are talking about.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like the Attorney-General to help us. From the time we enacted the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 to date, the Attorney-General is aware that the National Consultative Forum has not taken off and as a result all those functions that he has been quoting from the law have not been undertaken by the consultative forum. Therefore, I want him to help us. 

I understand the hon. Amama Mbabazi wants to clarify. I want him to help me because matters of disputes over the voters’ register are going to come up very soon. Already the update of the voters’ register is going on and people’s names are being deleted here and there and we wait for an organ which has not been functioning since 2005 and we think it will be the one to set up the tribunal? Aren’t we really deceiving ourselves? Aren’t we leaving issues of dispute to chance that they may not after all be worked on?

Secondly, if we say the National Consultative Forum looks at disputes amongst parties, wouldn’t it therefore wait so that we constitute the tribunal differently then if the parties disagree they will submit that matter to the National Consultative Forum? Now, if you start with the National Consultative Forum constituting the tribunal, where do we take the complaints thereafter? 

Thirdly, what assurance do we have that next month the National Consultative Forum will be working in every village in this country and that it will be in place, having failed to take off for the last five years?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Mr Chairman, when you look at sub-clause (5) they have already defined that the returning officer shall appoint a tribunal at parish level comprising five members, not being public officers. 

That is good but when you come to (5)(a), “The tribunal shall comprise the following: Two elders; one female and the other male.” To me, this one is also left hanging just to add to the redundancy of the National Consultative Forum. Who are these two elders, one female and the other male? This should also be clarified and we must be clear on who these are as we go on to (2) also, because we do not want on No. 2, to have to pass an Act for political expedience. We must be careful on what forum we are going to elect or take these disputes and who these people are who are going to constitute the tribunal. 

I know time is against us but let us not just hurry on (5)(a)(ii) when actually we know, like my colleagues have said, that the Political Parties and Organisations Act has been with us but it has been redundant as far as the National Consultative Forum is concerned.

THE CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Members, first of all, you say the returning officers appoint the tribunal but you should realise that these complaints will be complaints against the returning officer or his staff on handling the register. Why do you give that duty to the returning officer rather than giving it to an independent person who is not interested in this to deal with it? The complaints will be against the returning officer. Imagine the returning officer setting up a court to try complaints against him! So, that is why I think we should give this duty of setting up the tribunal to an established judicial officer, to the chief magistrate of the area, of the district and this should be a routine that you automatically set up this tribunal. They may have no work, they may have work. I think it is better that way, honestly. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The question was, why has the National Consultative Forum not worked so far? Why has it not been activated? And the answer is FDC - 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Minister -

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, Mr Chairman. I want to explain -

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, these things are going to delay us for nothing because -

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I am ready to substantiate even before anyone raises a point of order. The fact is, the Political Parties and Organisations Act in Section 19 says, “The minister…” meaning the Attorney-General, “…shall in consultation with the Electoral Commission and the political parties and organisations, and with the approval of Parliament, prescribe a code of conduct,” and so on. 

And in Section 20, one of the basic functions of the National Consultative Forum in subsection (4) paragraph (b) is ensuring that political parties and organisations comply with the code of conduct. This code has not been done even after the best effort when the President in July 2006 convened a meeting at State House in order to generate consensus among the political parties so that then the minister could act in the terms of Section 19. Now that we are working together under IPOD, the code is coming and I expect that the National Consultative Forum will be fully activated and I welcome FDC on board. I know that was the only reason and I believe -(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I think it is important – I would not have to stress my lungs trying to raise a point of order but I think that it is important for the record of the House that we put it to the hon. Minister that you are not telling this House the facts that ought to be told. I want to put it to him that we in the FDC have deep respect for institutions and it is actually when you - as Secretary-General of the NRM together with your party chairman - you usurped the powers of the Electoral Commission that we refused to join you in a tea party. 

I want to tell the House that we have been religiously going to the Electoral Commission, we participated in the formulation of the draft code of conduct and unfortunately again it is the NRM, which you are representing that has let down the process. I want to repeat for the record of this House that unless you in the Movement respect institutions and the legal framework that governs this country, we will unfortunately not respect your invitation. So the sooner you work by the laws of this country, the better for us all. Thank you. 

MR WACHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. We have been moving very well and I really beg our political leaders to stop flexing muscles here. We have been working very well and I support your suggestion. I think this can be rephrased to reflect exactly what you are talking about. 

With the permission of my Chair, I think 25 could read as follows: “The chief Magistrate of a magisterial area or a magistrate Grade I appointed by him shall appoint a tribunal comprising five members not being public officers to determine objections received by the returning officer under sub-section 4.” 

And then you continue, “The tribunal shall comprise: 
1.	Two elders, one female and the other male; and
2.	Three other members who shall be appointed by the chief magistrate or magistrate grade I in consultation with political parties participating in the elections in the area.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, you have heard; I think it is clear. 

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, just one little thing. Since it starts with the chief magistrate appointing and then the complaints are received by the returning officer, we needed to make the law clear – the link there – how will the submissions be forwarded to the chief magistrate? How will the chief magistrate be put on notice? 

THE CHAIRMAN: They are not submitting to the chief magistrate. It will be dealt with by the tribunal; the chief magistrate only constitutes the tribunal. 

MR LUKWAGO: But the tribunal is constituted after receiving the -

THE CHAIRMAN: No, it is a routine matter. Whether complaints will come or not, each area will have a permanent tribunal. 

MR LUKWAGO: Then it is okay if it is a permanent one.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Chairman, I think that it is difficult for that to work. It is difficult because if this tribunal is going to have three representatives of political parties or organisations and you have, like we have today, 37 and you give the responsibility of choosing three out of the 37 to a magistrate, you will have a major problem. I think that you will be putting the magistrate in a very difficult situation. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Which one?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The reason why the National Consultative Forum was a better option is because the National Consultative Forum has representation of all the political parties and the idea here was that the outcome would be as a result of a consensus. I believe that it would be a major error to say that a magistrate should choose among these people. 

THE CHAIRMAN: No, you see hon. Minister, what we have to test is this, the consultative council you are talking about has failed to take off and we want to move. While parties are thinking of constituting it, we want to move. We are proposing this as legislators because we want to move tomorrow but when time comes for parties to sit down and form it, they will. 

MR WACHA: Mr Chairman, I think the minister may not have got me right. I am not talking about the 37 political parties being consulted; that will be a practical impossibility. I am talking about the stakeholders in the elections in the area. That is why I limited it to political parties which are taking part in the elections in the area. And that is important. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. My concern is something that appears to be a contradiction. We have on the one hand said that public servants should not participate in politics; they should be apolitical. The way I look at a court is that it is for arbitration. Now you engage a chief magistrate to appoint people to a tribunal, what happens when political parties appear before this chief magistrate? I find it a contradiction. So let us leave the court system out of politics completely so that they can do their arbitration without being involved in politics. The returning officer who is a public officer -(Interjections)- the duty of a returning officer whether he or she has a political affiliation should be to manage - let them appear before court if there is a problem.  
 
THE CHAIRMAN: You see, you cannot say that you will forget about the judicial system in this matter when we are talking about a law, which may eventually end up in the courts of law. You cannot.

MR WACHA: Not only that, Mr Chairman. What is the purpose of tribunals? Tribunals are for adjudication and the matters which are coming before these tribunals would have been caused invariably by the returning officer. If the elections were going to proceed fairly, there would have been no need for these tribunals.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: If there is a dispute arising out of a decision of a tribunal, where do you go? It would be very unwise because I do not know when a magistrate would know which political parties are going to be participating in terms of what hon. Ben Wacha is suggesting. Really, it is very difficult. I am not saying this just to become difficult but I am seeing a real problem and I hope you share this with me that to bring in a magistrate to constitute membership of a tribunal -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. For your information, if I am disgruntled that the voters’ register in my village is tampered with, I have legal options even to move to court directly. That option is not closed. So if your fear is that we are involving a magistrate of a particular area into politics, I think that fear is unfounded. Because what I am foreseeing is next month we are beginning the voters’ registration. I send my team; they inspect and find that very many voters are not on the register. Now we are looking at the remedies we need. 

The amendment before the Floor is that the magistrate - there would have already been a fully constituted tribunal in that area, which the magistrate is not party to. We just have the tribunal in place so that if you find your name John Patrick Mbabazi not there on the nominal roll, at least you can go before a fairly independent tribunal. 

This is because the fact that you are not on the voters’ roll is already a problem of the returning officer as he should have exercised due diligence first of all. So if you are not on the voters’ register, the returning officer would have failed in his role and that is why you need a fairly independent body to question why the returning officer did not have you on the voters’ register. 

So I don’t see any contradiction by having the magistrate appointing this tribunal. In any case, if you are fearing that the magistrate is getting involved in politics then I will personally move to court that my constitutional rights to vote have been denied and I can even go up to the Constitutional Court. So I would really beg the Secretary-General to concede to this.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, I think we have a fundamental problem because in actual practice, we have got watch dogs; the Judiciary, the Executive - we all know that separation of powers is never absolute. More often than not, when we are swearing in the Speaker here, the Chief Justice comes and does the job but in this particular area, we are likely to create a very big problem. 

I am telling you that if you delegate this responsibility to magistrates and I speak for the justice sector, we already have problems with some of our staff. We already have problems with people who have completely become partisan, people who have created problems in their areas of jurisdiction. We have these problems and I keep receiving complaints from hon. Members –(Interjections)- let me finish my submission. One of the greatest problems that we faced with the operationalisation of the National Consultative Forum was actually operationalisation of Section 20 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. As much as it provided for its composition, it never provided for the Chair of the Forum. The amendment that just passed a few days ago here is indeed to provide for the Chair of the Forum and I believe henceforth, this National Consultative Forum will become meaningful and a reality.

With that challenge, I really think that we should still leave this mandate with the National Consultative Forum.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I have immense respect for the learned Attorney-General and with due respect, I would like to disagree. I think it is not correct to attack the integrity of our judicial officers. I think if there is any institution of Government, which has really acted fairly and justly under the circumstances, then it is the Judiciary. 

In fact it is problematic for the Attorney-General to say that judicial officers are partisan and the returning officers or even politicians are not. Really it doesn’t make any sense. In fact everybody knows that most of the returning officers are partisan. The only institution in this country today where all of us have got some faith, of course with varying degree, is the Judiciary.

So I will implore the Attorney-General - maybe the proposed amendment took him by surprise. We can stand it over while he thinks over it and then we come back to it after some sort of consultation. Otherwise, I don’t see us making headway on having any other fair tribunal wherein all the stakeholders have faith and are running there for arbitration other than the proposal as forwarded by the hon. Ben Wacha. 

I implore the Attorney-General and the chairperson of the committee to think about it so we can proceed with consensus. What we are trying to do is to bridge the gap and that is why some of us are seated around here where we don’t normally sit to make sure that if there are wide instances, we can close up the gap. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WACHA: I thank you, Mr Chairman. I am really sure that my learned friend, Fred Ruhindi, said what he said in the heat of the moment and, therefore, I will be the first one to excuse him.

Even if you go back to the concept of the National Consultative Forum, we have already decided that these tribunals are going to be at the parish level. How many parishes are there in Uganda? Over 4,000 and they are now coming to about 5,000. Are you going to entrust this body with choosing tribunals at these miniature levels all over Uganda? Are you sure that you are going to act judiciously? 

We are trying to make work easier for you, honourable Attorney-General by saying, look at a level where there is a chief magistrate and let him do the work. Where there is no chief magistrate, let the chief magistrate appoint a Grade I Magistrate because we know the magnitude of the work that is going to be handled in appointments only. I really don’t see any problem. 

On the issue of these judicial officers being partisan, well, my learned friend has already handled that. I just think it was in the heat of the moment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you have heard the amendment moved by hon. Ben Wacha on constituting the tribunals.

MR RUHINDI: I want to be on record. When I spoke, I may have raised my voice but it was all in the name and hope that some of our institutions need to be protected and not generally exposed to temptation. On that note, the Attorney-General’s Office concedes to the amendment. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman –(Interjections)- I seek for your protection. We are moving a consequential amendment following that and if you look at page 3 of our document, we propose to amend sub-section (4) of Section 25. We suggest repealing the words: “through the chairperson of the parish council of the person raising the objection”, and replacing them with: “election officer in charge of the voter’s register in the area.” 

For the benefit of the Members, sub-section (4) of Section 25 which we are seeking to amend reads as follows: “An objection under sub-section 3 shall be addressed to the returning officer through the chairperson of the parish council of the person raising the objection.” So, we are removing that element where you are required to channel your complaint through the parish chairperson. The justification is that we want to leave the whole process in the management of those officers and not bring in the political leaders. The chairperson of a parish is a political leader and this is to enable an objection against the inclusion in the voters’ roll of any name of a person to be transmitted by an officer in charge of the register but not a chairperson of the parish who has got nothing to do with that register. That is the amendment that we are proposing. 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I think the Shadow Attorney-General moved a little bit faster before our proposed amendment in 6 where we are proposing that: “For purposes of this section, the complaints on the voter’s roll shall be received by the tribunal.” The conflict should go directly to the tribunal and not through any other person, which I think should be the right way to go. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I think it is okay for the complaint to go directly to the tribunal because the complaint may be affecting the election officer through which you are channelling it. I think a citizen should be free to deal with that. 

MR LUKWAGO: We concede to that, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we proceed then? 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The committee proposes amendments to paragraph (c) of clause 2 that sub-clause (5) should be drafted as follows -(Interjections)– oh, I am sorry; this one is done.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, any other amendment? 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, immediately after sub-clause (2), we propose that a new sub-clause should be added to read as follows: “(9) The members of the tribunal shall elect amongst themselves a chairperson and a secretary”; and the justification is to provide for the election of a chairperson and a secretary to the tribunal. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes amendment to clause 3 that sub-clause (3) should be amended by deleting the word “ninety” and replacing it with the word “sixty” and the justification is to reduce the period within which duplicate voter cards can be issued. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But I want clarification because the other day somebody was complaining that his card was burnt in the house and he knows it. Why should somebody wait to go and get a duplicate card which has been burnt in the house, for these days? Why shouldn’t the commission be there to assist somebody? He is sure that the card has been burnt and then you say, “Wait. We are going to have elections.” It doesn’t make sense to me. It should be a continuous thing. If we have the efficiency and the funds, everyday one should walk into the Electoral Commission offices and say, “My card has been burnt or lost. Can you give me a new one?” What do you lose?

MR RUHINDI: I do not know whether we are getting the import of this provision. The import of this is that within that period, a duplicate card shouldn’t be issued. What does it mean, Mr Chairman? It means that the Electoral Commission needs adequate time to update its records and to plan accordingly. The current provision provides for seven days; the Electoral Commission has found this completely impracticable because it would mean that even within eight days, a person can go to the Electoral Commission and seek for a duplicate card. For purposes of updating its register and keeping proper records - and we are the ones who want the submission of these registers to political parties - I think we also need a period to create certainty in terms of our management activities of the electoral process. Therefore, you can speak in terms of a lesser period but I think two months are enough to enable the Electoral Commission to plan accordingly. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Attorney-General, if somebody’s card has been destroyed or lost, is there any problem for one to immediately walk into the commission’s office and say, “Mine has been damaged”, and they look into their computers and give him a new one?

MR KIVEJINJA: I think this needs to be clarified; that anytime you lose your voter’s card, you are free to go to the Electoral Commission and get it renewed. This provision is only meant for those people who may lose their cards and only wait when the elections come in and then demand for new ones within seven days.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, then it is clear.

MR OKECHO: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. There is an advert being run on TV and radio stations about the renewal of cards or the registration of people who want to get cards. In that same advert, there is also a requirement that one has got to go to the police station to report that his card has been lost. This, to some people, is very cumbersome. So, I do not know whether that requirement could be upheld by this. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just this morning I informed the Electoral Commission in Pader that I need a new voter’s card because I couldn’t trace the old one and they told me that they need a police report. I have personally not yet figured out which police station to report to because I do not know where it is. I would still imagine that for a man deep down in the village, it may be a little cumbersome to go to the police. They may even ask for money. Since on the voting day you come with a card, they check your name; you put your hands in the ink - assuming that the mischief you are trying to cure is not to have two or three cards at the same time; I do not know hon. Minister at which point we can make this process easier because I have now incurred almost Shs 10,000 in airtime trying to get a new card. I do not know what an ordinary person down there would do. People do not even report defilement and rape to police what about this one?

THE CHAIRMAN: But with the location of these police stations in the country, is it realistic that everybody has to report the loss? Why don’t I report to my parish or Gombolola chief? Actually some counties have no police posts.

MR KIGYAGI: I think we need to be more careful and sane when we are considering this situation. Presently in this country, voters’ cards are regarded as very good identification pieces. When you go to open an account, you may not have a passport but use only a voter’s card. When you go for a loan, they will ask for your voter’s card. They are becoming increasingly important. You will get a situation where dubious people will just go and ask for multiple voters’ cards and they will commit crime. What is the requirement? When I lose my driving permit or the ATM I report to the police, they give me a number and I go and ask for a new one. Within the period towards the election, they will give 60 days for people to go and manage this exercise. So if you want to water it down, it will not be good.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Chairman, the current law is not saying that the card should be issued within seven days. They are just saying that they should not issue you a card seven days prior to the elections. That means that at any time, if I lose my card, I can get a replacement. 

We have seen an incident that a man goes to a polling station with a card yet his name is not there, he does not vote. I do not manufacture a card, the card is manufactured by the Electoral Commission and the same commission has deleted my name or has refused to put it there and I cannot vote. Another one comes without a card but his name is there and he votes. We must now cure those two circumstances. In this law, we have just proposed 21 days and ten days for disputes to be handled such that a card can be issued on the last day.

If I have proposed 21 plus ten days for disputed names, that means within 31 days everything is okay and the new person who has been registered should be able to get his card within 45 days. Those are people who are being registered at the last moment but if I am a registered voter and I need a card, I can report to the police. However, my LC I or parish chief should be able to give me a letter to allow me get a card because he is the one who can identify me and I have reported it to him. The days we are talking about are for people who are registering afresh not old ones. At an appropriate time I would love to move an amendment to the same. If I have a voter’s card and my name is missing on the register, I should be allowed to vote because it is not me who issued the card.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let me put a question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Mr Chairman. What hon. Nandala was pointing out is actually the subject of other Bills that are supposed to be coming. I do not think that at this time we can pronounce ourselves in terms of an amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Bring your amendment - have you exhausted your amendment?

MR EKANYA: Mr Chairman, I just want to propose that maybe under the regulation, the minister should provide that the Electoral Commission should issue a standard form which a person who has lost his or her card will fill at the police station. This is to avoid issues of police saying that there is no stationery. The police can send this to the Electoral Commission and also the record will remain with the police to avoid criminals seeking to have triplicate voters’ cards.

I am just proposing to the minister and the Electoral Commission to come up with a standard form which the police will use for complainants seeking a new voters’ card.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we finished the amendments? 

MR TASHOBYA: Mr Chairman, the committee proposes that immediately after clause 3, we insert the following: “All polling stations for a general election and places where the register shall be displayed must be gazetted at least 30 days before the polling day.”

The justification is to require the Commission to gazette all polling stations and display places 30 days before the polling day.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the purpose of gazetting?

MR TASHOBYA: It is to inform all the stakeholders.

THE CHAIRMAN: But are you realistic about achieving the intended goal? Why don’t you add a local newspaper operating in the area? How many people get copies of the gazette? This issue has been addressed in other courts and so forth. Previously, they used to gazette most of the court issues in the gazette but they realised that many people may miss the notice in the gazette simply because they cannot access it. Even you Members of Parliament here, you do not normally see the gazette, therefore the courts extended it and in addition to the gazette, they publish them in local newspapers because it is easier to use Shs 2,000 to get a newspaper and see what is happening and it does no harm I suppose. 

MR TASHOBYA: I concede that we can include, “Or any other media”, in addition to the official gazette. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay - in print media? Is it okay?  

MR TASHOBYA: “All polling stations for a general election and where a register shall be displayed must be gazetted and published in the print media.”

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question - 

MR LUKWAGO: This clause is still ambiguous because it talks of at least 30 days before polling day. It is not clear. Earlier on, this is where the amendment was picked from – it is on page 4 of our document. We were suggesting –(Interjections)- yes, I understand but I want to bring it to the attention of the House that we had raised this matter in the proposal for six months before polling day because there is the period of display – there is everything and so if you were to say 30 days, then it is fine. We would then say, “30 days before display.” I am moving an amendment to say: “30 days before the display of the register.” 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. It is a question of increasing – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: There is problem. If we say 30 days, people are fond of creating polling stations towards the end of an election. It is very important that a polling station is known early enough so that somebody can go and see which polling station – 

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. So what are you suggesting? How many days?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I think six months is okay –(Interjections)- it is simple because it will serve the purpose that we would have known our register in advance and whatever.

MR RUHINDI: I think it is good to legislate for the ideal. We all want the best and there is no doubt about it. But we must also be very mindful of the practicability unless we want to increase litigation in our courts of law as far as electoral laws and processes are concerned. What is the objective of this? That a person should be adequately informed of where he or she should vote from. So, instead of actually specifying this period before display, it should actually be before the polling day – that before the polling day with the sufficient time, you should be able to know where you are supposed to vote from.

THE CHAIRMAN: So what is the formulation? 

MR RUHINDI: Instead “of display before polling day” –(Interjections)– in other words you remove the words, “of display”.

THE CHAIRMAN: No. There are stages. A stage of display is important to an election so that people can go and see whether they are on the register or not. And the stage of polling is also different - you know it is not only polling day but even display. People should be given notice of location of the place where the display is going to be done. I think that is the intention. 

MR KATUNTU: This morning we had a meeting with the Electoral Commission and they informed us that they actually are going to publish the list of the new polling stations next week. Between next week and the polling day, you can see there are eight months –

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. 

MR KATUNTU: But they are going to do it next week - that is what the Electoral Commission told us. So, if we are to put it into law, we cannot afford to take the learned Attorney-General’s view of a day before –(Interjections)– I think we can just have a month before polling or before -(Interjections)– yes, six months before polling day –(Interjections)– because it is like now they are going to do it almost eight months before the polling day.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, tell me the number of days you want. 30 days – okay – before 60 days? Okay, I now put the question to 60 days.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRMAN: By giving you more days, you lose nothing. Okay, proceed.

MR TASHOBYA: The last amendment the committee proposes to Section 50 of the Electoral Commission Act is that Section 50 should be amended by inserting a new sub-clause (iii) immediately after sub-clause (ii) to read as follows, “The commission in carrying out the special powers under this section shall inform all political parties or organisations and candidates of such action taken.” The justification is to keep the political parties or organisations and independent candidates informed of what action has been performed by the commission.

MR LUKWAGO: The position is already taken by IPOD as indicated in the document, which was circulated – we really want to have parties playing a role in decisions being taken to extend time not to merely be at the receiving end but to receive information because these are critical matters where decisions should not be taken unilaterally by the Commission. The proposal reads, “Where during the course of an election, it appears to the Commission that a situation has arisen which requires the extension of time for the performance of any act, the Commission may in consultation with the political parties who shall express their consent in writing, extend the time within which the act may be performed.” 

The justification is to require the Commission to consult in writing the political parties before extending the time within which the Commission is empowered to perform certain acts under the law to avoid arbitrariness on the part of the Commission by just making communication.

THE CHAIRMAN: Suppose the parties do not agree but the body that is responsible for conducting elections realises that the situation warrants extending; what would happen?

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Chairman, my understanding of this section is that by the time the Electoral Commission resorts to invoking this position, there is already a crisis. Demanding consent in writing from over 36 political parties is another crisis in an already existing crisis. Suppose some of the parties withhold their consent, what will happen? So, I will go with the position of the chairman of the committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, you go with the position of the chairman of the committee.

MS NAMAYANJA: I will go with the position of the chairman of the committee that the parties be informed of everything other than seeking consent.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we are proposing an amendment to Section 51 –(Interjections)- they are there on page 4. Look at page 4 of the IPOD document, go to (k). 

We are suggesting that the principal Act is amended in Section 51 by substituting for sub-section (1)(L) the following, “The Commission may, in consultation with the Minister, make regulations for the effective performance of the Commission’s functions under this Act and in particular, for the registration of voters and the conduct of public elections.”

The original provision reads as follows, “The Minister may, in consultation with the Commission by statutory instrument, make regulations for the effective performance of the Commission’s functions under this Act and in particular, for the registration of voters and the conduct of public elections.”

The justification here is to remove the power to make regulations under the Act from the Minister and confer it upon the Commission, thus strengthening the independence of the Commission, which is stipulated in Article 62 of the Constitution for the Commission to make its own regulations. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Lukwago. This law is made by Parliament to enable the Commission operate within the law. So, the Commission is not participating in formulating the law; the Commission only - so the Minister -

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, we have seen situations where the Commission makes regulations, which are not supported by laws and we have had a practical problem. 

THE CHAIRMAN: The problem here is that if you read this provision, the regulation, which the Minister makes under this law, is subject to being tendered here for approval.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, I do not see the approval by Parliament and I have the parent law here - 

THE CHAIRMAN: Any regulation made under this section within 14 days after being published in the gazette be read before Parliament and maybe annulled by a Parliament resolution. So, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 3, as amended agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion that we adopt the report of the Committee of the Whole House on the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009”.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

5.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill, 2009” be read for the third time and do pass. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion adopted.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE ELECTORAL COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2010.” 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much and congratulations. (Applause) I must say that I have been impressed by the attendance today and the way you have handled the Bill. Thank you very much. Do likewise tomorrow.

5.38
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Attorney-General. According to the Order Paper, the business which is to follow is the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill. We are all Members of Parliament and so I want to seek your indulgence that since political parties formed the IPOD, encourage the NRM to hold some meetings maybe today or tomorrow so that we do not spend more time on some of these issues that have been agreed upon. We should reach a consensus so that the Electoral Commission can have these on time –(Interjections)- this is because most of the proposed amendments here were extensively discussed. So, when we come here and then disagree, there might be some new developments that I encourage us to reach a consensus on before tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I have nothing useful to add. I concur with you. With this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.39 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, April 22 2010 at 2.30 p.m.) 
