Wednesday 25th April, 2001

Parliament met at 4.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I am sure you have all learnt about the tragic death of one of us, Hon. Gabriel Lukwago, Member for Kooki in Rakai District who died yesterday. I think you have viewed his body and the burial is tomorrow. Because of this, it is necessary maybe to adjust our Order Paper; there is a Member who wants to move a motion in respect to our former Comrade, then we shall see how we proceed.

But, before this is done, hon. Members, I want to repeat what I said yesterday, we have a lot of work pending which we should dispose of within one or two weeks, so that you can get time to go and meet your constituents. Therefore, before this is done, I appeal to you to commit your time to the work of Parliament, so that we can finish the pending work, which include two Bills. One deals with Agriculture and since most of you are representing people engaging in agriculture, I think it is important that before you go back to them, the proper laws dealing with agriculture are in place, so that Modernisation of Agriculture can be fully implemented.

So, I am going to adjust the Order Paper and call upon hon. Mutagamba to say something or to move a motion.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. GABRIEL LUKWAGO

THE MINISTER OF STATE (WATER)(Mrs.Maria. Mutagamba): Mr. Speaker, a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Gabriel Lukwago. 

Be it resolved by the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda duly convened, constituted and sitting in Kampala on this 25th day of April in the year 2001 that:

Whereas Parliament notes with deep sorrow the demise of hon. Gabriel Lukwago, Member of Parliament for Kooki, Rakai District, which occurred on Tuesday the 24th day of April in the year 2001; and 

Whereas the late hon. Gabriel Lukwago has had a distinguished career as a Member of Parliament, an accountant, a dedicated political leader, and a prominent farmer who deserves recognition of this Parliament;

Now therefore, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda; 

Do hereby convey its most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, and the people of Kooki, Rakai and the Buganda community and the entire nation, upon the loss of a distinguished son of Uganda.

Do further register its unbounded admiration and gratitude for the services that he has in the course of his life rendered to the people of this nation. 

 I do beg to move Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Is it second?  Proceed.

MRS. MUTAGAMBA: Mr. Speaker, allow me to extend to you, to the President, to the Government and Members of this august House my sincere condolences and to the entire nation and especially to the bereaved family of the late hon. Gabriel Lukwago. 

We learnt of the demise of the late hon. Gabriel Lukwago last evening after a short intensive attack of high blood pressure, when he was rushed to Mulago Hospital in the morning of yesterday 24th April 2001 and he passed away at around 4.30 p.m. the same day. 

Hon. Gabriel Lukwago came from Rakai District and has been representing Kooki County since 1989.  Since that time when I came in NRC, I learnt the attributes of hon. Lukwago as a quiet, hard working, committed both to Government and the people he served. He has been a very effective representative of the people of Rakai, and especially as far as matters of nation and development of the people were concerned. 

He has been able as a Member of Parliament for Kooki, to put up a number of schools, places of worship and he has also helped or funded orphans both girls and boy. He has helped the poorest of the poor by availing them jobs at his farms and at his various enterprises. 

In fact, the people of Kooki will miss hon. Gabriel Lukwago because he has been a man of the grassroot. He knew who had lost who, needed help; he knew which school needed to be developed; he knew which teacher needed to be assisted or be transferred; he knew which case had been stalled in judicial courts and would help out. 

So, I want to ask Members of this august House to join the family in offering prayers, first of thanks giving for the life of Gabriel Lukwago; all the attributes, all the benefits that the people of Kooki and Uganda have got in the life of Lukwago; and to pray to the Almighty God that his soul rests in eternal peace. We pray that his family maybe comforted and the children may get strength and courage from the deeds of hon. Lukwago, so that they too can carry on their lives and learn from him to be hard working and dedicated to the service of this nation.  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move.

MRS.MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to join the hon. Members to mourn the demise of hon. Gabriel Lukwago, Member of Parliament for Kooki in Rakai District. Mr. Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to let me pay tribute to the good and dedicated work of hon. Gabriel Lukwago whom I refer to as my Brother and a Friend. 

I refer to hon. Gabriel Lukwago as a brother, because we belong to the same totem -the Enkima clan. He has always been a very progressive, kind and hard working person.  He has always been a pillar in the clan and contributed generously to his clan. You may be aware that the Enkima clan has a very significant role in the Buganda Monarchy, and I wish to testify that hon. Gabriel Lukwago has always come to our rescue whenever, we had these roles to perform by contributing significantly to most of the functions we have held. 

I wish to take this opportunity to pay tribute to his works and also extend my condolences to our grandfather Mugema, the clan leaders and of course to His Majesty, the Kabaka of Buganda.  

Hon. Speaker, I want also to testify that hon. Gabriel Lukwago has been a christian, and a strong practising catholic. Allow me to let this House know that hon. Gabriel Lukwago is one of the hon. Members of Parliament who made the ecclesiastic pilgrimage to Rome to celebrate the Holy Jubilee Year 2000/2001. It took place in Italy and it was meant for the Parliamentarians and the Statesmen. It should be noted that hon. Lukwago paid for his air ticket and he met his per diem.  

I think this is a very important testimony regarding his commitment to Christianity. This pilgrimage was very important and there is an indulgecia attached to it. I think I should take this opportunity to pray to God Almighty that He grants him that indulgecia at this time.

I want also to comment on hon. Lukwago's kindness in his faith. He made substantial contributions to the construction of many Churches; specifically, I will mention Kigowa St. Andrews Church, which is very distinct and it is in my constituency. We had the opportunity recently to open it and it is partly hon. Lukwago's efforts, which led it to that Parish or that Church being granted a status of the Parish. We in Nakawa Division and in Kampala at large, we appreciate and will miss his services of his kind heart dearly.  

We, at the Backbench here, will dearly miss hon. Lukwago; as you all know hon. Members, he has been my neighbour; we have always been sitting together. He has effectively represented his constituency. I should mention that though he rarely came on the Floor to speak out, but he has always been coming out to advise particularly on the issues of agriculture. His constituency is basically agricultural in nature, he has always advocated for new methods of farming particularly in his constituency.

I know one time, I travelled with him to Namulonge and we bought the cassava stems for his constituency; and he was able to give me some despite the fact that, in Kampala we do not have many areas where we can plant these stems.  But I think that was a very important testimony to show how he loved agriculture and how committed he was to his Committee. 

He loved his family and his mother; several times he told me about his mother. I want to take this opportunity to extend my dear condolences to the wife, to the children and to all his constituents, upon this tragic loss. May the Almighty God grant Gabriel eternal rest till we meet again.

MR. ANTHONY KANYIKE (Buikwe West, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to hon. Gabriel Lukwago, Member of Parliament for Kooki.  The late Gabriel Lukwago has been a Member of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and actually for the last 2 years, he has been the secretary to that Committee. The Committee has lost a very great pillar to it, because he has been very fundamental and at the centre of everything that has been taking place in that Committee.  

I personally, first knew Gabriel Lukwago in 1966 as a young man when he was working for the Sugar Factory at Lugazi as an accountant. From that time I followed his achievements. knew him when he was chief accountant with the East Mengo Growers Co-operation, where he was being talked about as having done a very good job.  

When I came to Parliament in 1996, I found him a senior Member on the Committee of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. When I took the chair of that Committee, he was of a very significant help to all of us who were new in Parliament at that time, for him who had been a Member was of great guidance to all of us.  Since then, he has been a great pillar; he has been a person who has been there when you needed him. I knew him for such dedication and I knew that when he wanted to do something, he really wanted to do it. We shall miss Gabriel Lukwago a lot. Not only as a Committee but I think also as Parliament, because his contribution has been assisting Parliament a lot.  

I also want to extend my condolences to all those people he has been working with, particularly to the members of his family, his wife and children. I know he has had some young children as well. I pray that the people who are paying tribute to him also think about what kind of support they can give to his young children. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Let me join those who have supported the motion to pay tribute to the late Gabriel Lukwago, whom I have known in two capacities, both as a personal friend we have shared so many views and also as a leader.  

There may be a number of reasons why people vie for political office; one of the commonest of them is political power, and the other, is the calling to serve. I think the late Lukwago belonged to the latter. We were with him in this House in the NRC and in Parliament, and he made tremendous contribution to the governance of this country. He never ever at one time, at least the impression I had from him, ever wanted anything in return for the service he rendered to this country. He was one of the humblest political leaders I have ever met; and by the way, he was a man who had made a personal success of his life and yet, you would not detect; because no matter great he became, he remained a simple man.   

One of the important things I remember about the late Lukwago is the courage he had quietly, to push what he thought about. Hon. Kanyike was talking about the Committee on Agriculture. I never belonged to that Committee, but the late Lukwago spared time to come and say to me, ‘Kagonyera, this is wrong’; and he would speak with force. I believe, he must have influenced a lot of Members on that Committee. 

I have said hon. Lukwago – to me, seemed to be a man not in politics, simply to have political power; all he wanted is to influence governance of this country, and most important of all to influence the maintenance of peace and unity in Uganda. For the many years we were with him in this House, I never saw him at any one time do or say anything that I construed not to be in the interest of this country.

Therefore, one of the tributes we can pay to the late Lukwago is keeping the candle burning regarding the vision he had for this country; that this country must remain at peace, and united, in spite of the political differences we may have. 

You will be surprised Mr. Speaker, because he had actually some very strong differences with leadership, but those did not at any one time stop him from being steadfast in his support, for the Government. 

Therefore, it is right and fitting that, we should recognise the role he played. We should extend our most heartfelt condolences to his family, relatives, friends, colleagues in this House and the nation. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. KEN LUKYAMUZI  (Lubaga South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the late hon. Member Gabriel Lukwago, whom I dearly loved.  I happen to have met the late for the last 20 years; and my mother lives in Rakai where the late equally lived.   

Death as a sociological phenomenon is a very terrible thing. When you lose a person like the late Lukwago, you recall what Shakespeare said about the concept of death. He wanted to encourage those who had lost their dear ones, so that they do not get worried. But it is difficult for one to be convinced that death should not be feared.  

In the words of Shakespeare, he said, “let death come when it wills”. I would be very undemocratic and unfair to tell it to the widow of the late Lukwago and the orphans.

The late Lukwago was a very rare person in terms of commitment to Committee work. He belonged to the Agriculture Committee, which had certain semblances with the Natural Resources Committee, where I have permanently worked; and to say the reality, all of you know that we have been going through very difficult times, especially with reference to the days when we were about to spray the water weed with toxic chemicals.  

On a number of occasions, with the courage of the late Lukwago, he used to silently whisper to me, ‘Lukyamuzi, do not lose courage, stick to your guts’.   I can never forget that courage, even if the late has passed away.  It was because of that courage, that I insisted on discouraging the application of toxic chemicals in wiping out of the water weed, called the water hyacinth. 

I therefore, pay tribute to the late Lukwago for that courage. I would like also to send special condolences to the Committee of Agriculture. He was rare person. There are many occasions when he used to whisper to me that, ‘you know, Ken, I am not feeling well, but we are going to the Western Uganda. I have to travel to Western Uganda because my chairman is expecting me there’.  

It is not common in this place, for people to have that kind of commitment. So, my mother who lives in Rakai, and the people of Rakai, have missed a great, committed son of the soil.  

Finally, the late Lukwago was a man who was never annoyed with criticism; even those of us who occasionally criticised various phenomena in his presence. He would never discourage criticism.  Instead, he would encourage you to say more, so that society can reform. Very few people could stomach the kind of criticism some of us have ventured to whisper out; but Lukwago did, and I commend him for that courage. 

Therefore, to end my contribution to this motion, which I strongly support, the Lukwago I knew was a man of joy, a man of love and a man of dignity. May his Soul rest in eternal peace.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Kiyingi Namusoke): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand here to support the motion; and to pay tribute to the late Gabriel Lukwago, MP for Kooki County, which is in the district of Rakai, which I represent. 

On behalf of the people of Rakai, I wish to extend our condolences to the family, to members of Parliament, and to the colleagues, of this dear colleague who has left us. I got to know hon. Lukwago when we came to Parliament. I found him here as an old Member of Parliament, and somebody easy to work with; and we worked quite well as a team. 

I knew him as somebody who was very persistent on what he would want to pursue, although he was somebody who was not so keen about controversy or being antagonistic. But he was persistent on many of the things that he believed in.  

I knew hon. Lukwago as somebody who did not seek to be praised; and I say this because of the way he worked, in his constituency, as a Member of Parliament for Rakai District. He did so many things for the people, although these were things that, he was not so keen to say out himself. But the people down in Rakai I am sure, they will miss him greatly, because he was so concerned about their plight, and up lifting their standard of living.

Just recently, he came to me, and informed me that in one of the sub-counties, there was a lot of malaria and a lot of children were dying. He told me the steps he had already taken, and we agreed that we were going to pursue this. He had actually gone to Ministry of Health, to acquire the drugs for spraying mosquitoes in the people’s houses and so on. This drug that lasts, we are told six months when you spray in the house, and for six months you are free from mosquitoes; and he had acquired that.  

But these are just a few things that he did for his people down there, without necessarily announcing it. Obviously for the people he meant a lot, and he will be greatly missed.

I wish to say that at moments like this when people die; I think it gives us opportunity to think about ourselves.  To think about our own lives, and what we are in this world for. I believe that hon. Lukwago has done his best, and I want to believe that he did all that he was doing, because he believed that, God put him in this world for a purpose; and that purpose was to serve God as he served the people. 

I am sure the people of Rakai have no regrets for having elected him as their Member of Parliament; and they will greatly miss him.  May his soul rest in peace.

THE MINISTER OF STATE (ENVIRONMENT) (Dr. Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Allow me also to join my colleagues, who have paid tribute to the late hon. Gabriel Lukwago, whom I call a friend and a neighbour.

Indeed, the late hon. Lukwago was a friend. I do not think there was a day that we came at Parliament, and bypassed each other without a greeting. He would all the time refer to me as “owe waffe.” You know somebody with whom he came from the same area. He continued to recognise that Rakai was part of Masaka, although they are two districts; we were people from the same location.

Mr. Speaker, hon. Lukwago’s constituency, touches my own constituency and therefore, we have shared a lot in terms of mobilisation of our people. His area was also instrumental to mine in terms of mobilisation, because often what happens in a constituency that touches yours may have a lot of influence. I have enjoyed support from his people; and the late Lukwago has enjoyed support from my people, who have always called him their leader too.  

Therefore, on behalf of the people of my own constituency, I would like to take this opportunity to extend very sincere condolence to his family, and to the people of Kooki who have lost a leader at a very crucial time, when it is about time to choose a Member of Parliament. His people really had confidence in him. 

During the 1996 presidential elections, I was chairman of the zone that was taking Masaka, Kalangala, Rakai and Sembabule; and hon. Lukwago as a Member from Rakai District, was very instrumental in mobilising the people to get votes for our President. I therefore, say that we have lost someone who of course did not only work in 1996, but has also worked tirelessly during the last election, to ensure that our President is once again re-elected.  

Permit me Mr. Speaker, to end by sending my sincere condolences to the wife, to the children and to the rest of the people within Rakai. I also to extend the same Mr. Speaker to you, and to the hon. Members. I beg to support the motion.

MR. PINTO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am grateful that you have given me the opportunity to say, farewell to a colleague and a friend. I support this motion, as I pay tribute to hon. Gabriel Lukwago. 

I knew hon. Lukwago when he was my student in Modern Secondary School in Masaka, where I was a teacher. This is way back in the 60s and I have known him since.  Lukwago had only changed age, but he has always been the same simple, and a friendly person until the hour of his death.I knew him as a student, and later on, he qualified and went to work in the Co-operative Movement. 

During the days of turmoil when I had gone into exile, Lukwago stayed. When I came back I found Lukwago, and we met again, when he was elected to the National Resistance Council. We worked together in the NRC, and only my colleague hon. Mutagamba and I, are left of that original Rakai team. Because then we had hon. Sengooba with us, and the other colleague who was representing Kabula then who also departed. 

Hon. Lukwago has struggled with life. Those of us who worked closely with him, as I have known him from the days of his youth, and in his working life, Lukwago one can easily say that, he was a man of the people.  Lukwago was a grassroot man; he worked with his people, and he was very close to them until the day of his death.

As a quiet man he worked quietly, but he was effective. Lukwago, the tribute you can give him is that he was a peaceful man. I do not think there are many here who could say that, they picked a quarrel or a disagreement with Lukwago. I think he was a peaceful man, and I pray that he rests in peace.  

I mourn Gabriel; I have lost a friend; I have lost a student; I have lost a colleague, and I have lost one of us. I have all through been a Member on the National Executive Committee of the Members of Rakai, from our days in the NRC up to this day, when I am about to say goodbye to the legislative process of this great Legislative Assembly. 

I join you colleagues in mourning a friend, and sending our bereavement to the family, for a loss of a man of peace, a man of friendship, and a man of the people. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Nsibambi) Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Lukwago was an analytical landlord, who was not parasitic.  He was modest, soft-spoken and very generous.  Let me illustrate this point. One day I was seated here, and a Member of Parliament was fundraising, but I was financially naked. I was eager to help that Member, but I had no money; that is what I mean by being financially naked. 

So, I told the Member that I was keen on the Project but I had run out of money. I was reflecting on what to do next, because the project was a worthy project. Hon. Lukwago came to my rescue, and he gave Shs. 300,000 to that Member of Parliament. 

So, when I say that he was generous, it is not a general statement. It is a concretisable matter, and as many of you have heard the testimony that he built Churches.  There is a testimony that he knew how to harness land.  There are people who inherit land; some bought land, but cannot harness it.  

He was a harnessor of land; and speaking from experience harnessing land is not a simple matter. You need the infrastructure; you need to harness those labourers who suffer from many problems. So, when someone harnesses land, it a worthy tribute of up lifting the countryside.

He was also a political leader, a political leader who was not out spoken.  There are some politicians who have tended to speak indiscriminately in order to capture attention, but they have harmed themselves by yelling out senseless statements. It was not so with hon. Lukwago.  He was thoughtful, and soft-spoken; although he did not try to seek for visibility, he was recognised in his quietness. 

He had strong feelings on a number of issues, and if you sat next to him, he would articulate his position to you.  He did not normally stand to speak out, but he focussed his attention on Committee work. Once again he chose a committee where he would have something to contribute – because as I said, he was a harnessor of land, so he dealt with agricultural matters. The chairperson of that committee dealing with agricultural matters has testified that he made solid statements, and he will be greatly missed. This is the man who has passed away. May we learn from his attributes - Lukwago  weraba -we thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I now think I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Now, I do not know whether we can proceed further. Is the Minister of Agriculture here? Chairperson, do you think we can meaningfully proceed with the report?

THE CHAIRPERSON, THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY & FISHERIES (Mr. Kanyike): Mr. Speaker, apart from what has happened and what we have just said here, there is a service for the late at the Christ the King Church. I think since many of us may not be travelling tomorrow for the funeral, it might be good to attend that service.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is good information, but what do we do?  Do we adjourn to tomorrow afternoon or morning, because as I have said, we have a lot of pending work, which we have to finish by next week. Should we adjourn to tomorrow morning or afternoon? Can I be advised generally?  I just want indication.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are aware that there are pending Businesses to be completed before we adjourn; I would like to propose that we adjourn until tomorrow afternoon, to give Members time to reflect on many issues, and to be able to contribute. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay; but before I adjourn, I want to remind Members of the Committee on Appointments, to turn up for a meeting tomorrow at 10.00 a.m, to consider some appointments, which were made by His Excellency the President. With this we come to the end of today’s Business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26th April 2001 at 2.00 p.m) 

