Tuesday, 27 April 2010

Parliament met at 2.58 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

Administration of Oaths

The Oaths were administered to: 

Dr Odoch Wathum Pascal.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I want to welcome you to the Parliament of Uganda as a Member representing Padyere County. I congratulate you upon the success you scored during the election. However, I would like to say that now that elections are over, you will be representing all the people in your constituency; those who voted for you and those who did not. 

I give you these two instruments: The Rules of Procedure and the Constitution, to which you have sworn to uphold. Please study them and carry out your duties following the procedure and what is contained in this Constitution. 

I understand you were elected on an NRM ticket and that means you will be sitting on the Government side. But I would like to inform you that the other Members on the Opposition are your friends. Please relate with them; they are not your enemies, but colleagues. Share the experience with them and I am sure they will be happy to work with you. I congratulate you. (Applause)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome the new Member and all of you to this sitting. In the Gallery, we have hon. Tiperu, Member of the East African Legislative Assembly; hon. Anthony Butele, a cadre of the ten-point programme; (Applause) we also have Ms Margaret Kiggundu, the RDC of Luwero; and other leaders from Luwero: The Speaker of the Council and the LC V Chairperson. They have come to see how we transact business and exchange views with us. 

Hon. Members, I realise most of us represent rural constituencies and many times, we have been talking about transforming our rural constituencies. 

Last Friday, I was invited to participate in an activity with the people of Kabubbu, a village in Kyadondo North, which is a constituency represented by hon. Sam Njuba and hon. Rosemary Seninde. They were celebrating ten years since they started transforming that rural area. I must say I was amazed and surprised by what I saw there regarding the achievements realized in only ten years. For example, they have been able to build a secondary school, a health centre, and a primary school; to provide safe water; to bring electricity to their area; and to build 120 homes for their people. This is real; I could not believe it; but I also asked myself how I could take it to my constituency.

I am giving you this information, so that Members, especially those representing rural areas, can go and see how these people have been able to achieve what they have achieved. I must also say that it is because the people who have been involved in this are dedicated, although they received some assistance from a UK NGO called Quicken Trust, headed by Mr Jeff and Geraldine Burka. I must thank these people, but please go and see how you can transfer that knowledge to your villages. Thank you very much.

3.11
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apollo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, we welcome the new Member of Parliament for Padyere County, West Nile –(Applause)- and we shall work closely with him to ensure we transform the lives of the people, not only from West Nile, but from throughout Uganda. I thank you. (Applause)

3.12
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I rise on behalf of the Opposition in Parliament to welcome my brother, hon. Dr Pascal Odoch, the MP of Padyere County. (Applause)

For three weeks, all of us were in the playfield and I remember interfacing with colleagues. I am happy to report it was a friendly fight –(Applause)- and at the end of the day, we indeed conceded defeat. That is why I am here to welcome hon. Dr Pascal Odoch.

However, I have the following to say –(Laughter)– it is not easy to win a bi-election in this country because all the big guns of the government are poised on that small area. I can ably say that the whole honourable Deputy Secretary General of NRM, hon. Dorothy Hyuha, who I am afraid has again pitched camp in Mukono, and my friends: hon. Jachan Omach, hon. Simon Ejua, hon. Mavenjina, hon. Tiperu, among others, were all on the ground –(Laughter)– let alone the usage of resources, which were not at our disposal.

But I can assure you –(Interjections)– yes, I was there –(Laughter)– that is why I am saying that I was able to interface with them. But I can assure you, my new brother in the House that 2011 may not be the same, because everybody will be struggling for their own survival in the constituencies. (Laughter)  I am sure that day, you will look for hon. Fred Jachan next door in vain; he will also be in his own trenches in Jonam County, let alone I, who will be in Terego, though with an eye on Padyere. 

Otherwise, you are most welcome. But as the Speaker said, the Members that you see on the opposite side are your brothers and sisters. We are here in a political game. The way you enter the political arena is the same way you enter a football pitch; you enter with high spirits to win, but at the end of the day, when the game is over and the last whistle is blown, you even forget about the kicks -(Laughter)- and you go back home and sit on the same table and dine. 

Equally so, you are welcome. Take us as brothers and sisters, or as opponents but not enemies. The storm is over; we will wait for the next round. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.16
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEMMA, Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I also would like to beg for your indulgence to allow me just a moment to welcome hon. Dr Pascal Odoch. You are most welcome.

Mid last year, I presented here a matter of national importance that touched the re-demarcation of villages in Makindye Division, Kampala. The State Minister of Local Government made an undertaking that he would bring a report, but it looks like he is too busy with other things and is unable to bring the report.

Current discoveries that have been made by our efforts indicate quite clearly that the office of the RDC was overthrown by the Movement Chairperson of Makindye Division in the name of Baker Serwamba. He re-demarcated villages, which we call zones. On learning about this, we reported to the Electoral Commission that there was an exercise going around without the consent of the people. 

The Electoral Commission wrote to hon. Mabikke and myself, informing us that they were not aware of what was going on, and they dissociated themselves from that exercise. In the meantime, as I awaited the report from the minister, these people went around gathering residents and collecting signatures from them, which they later appended, without the consent of the residents, to petitions they wrote, purporting that the residents had agreed to the re-demarcation of the villages.

Yesterday, I was able to discover that the Electoral Commission could have been conniving with this group in Makindye West with the knowledge of the Minister of Local Government - I discovered a list of the newly re-demarcated villages this time being called polling stations. I have brought this evidence with a prayer, Mr Speaker, that you indulge in this matter and call on the relevant committee of Parliament –(Interruptions)

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Kyanjo for giving way. The information I would like to give the House is that what is going on in Makindye Division is similar to what is going on in Kawempe North Constituency. 

It is not only demarcating or making new demarcations for our zones, but they have gone ahead to even try and demarcate constituencies. In Kawempe Division, for example, Movement activists are going around telling our local leaders that we are going to have demarcations for Kawempe Division in as far as constituencies are concerned and yet the Electoral Commission is not aware of it.

Even when it comes to dividing up these zones, the RDCs are the ones who are physically involved in having the zones demarcated. The problem is bigger and I don’t think it is only in Kampala, but also in other areas where the Opposition has a stronghold. 

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your point. So, let the minister concerned, taking a study of Makindye West and even the area now mentioned by the honourable, and give us a report on what is happening.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, -(Mr Migereko rose_)- I will take the information later. Please bear with me hon. Minister. With due respect to your ruling, Mr Speaker, and bearing in mind the fact that the minister I refer to is the minister to whom we have been commonly referring to as “Our Generation” - I have been interacting with him. 

I am sorry to say that I am reluctant to depend on the same minister to go and work out an arrangement that is going to be helpful. I was begging, Mr Speaker, that you authorise a committee of Parliament to invite the minister, the RDC and those in the Electoral Commission to explain this matter, because this is going to start as a matter of rigging elections early in time. 

We have no quarrel with re-demarcation of zones, but we have a quarrel with one organ re-demarcating these zones; this same organ appointing leaders therein, and according to a letter I received from the Electoral Commission regarding registration, cameras are going to be kept by members of these committees in the villages. We are exceedingly uncomfortable over the matter and I think it would be very prudent if this minister was also told to answer in terms that are exactly certain rather than giving him the mandate to go and do the same job where he has not been able to succeed in the past. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Well, my understanding, when you came to see me, was that this statement – you raised this point and the minister was supposed to have given a statement, which he has not given. I am now saying the minister should come here, taking your case and his case and explain what is going on. Depending on what he will say, then I will task the relevant committee to make further investigations.

MR KYANJO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the documents I have brought accompanying the statement I have given to the House. Thank you.

3.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Kyanjo for raising this matter. 

About one and a half months ago, we were invited to a workshop at Imperial Royale Hotel by the Electoral Commission, and the issue was to do with the outcry from the various constituencies in the country regarding the convenience of polling stations in the various parts of our constituencies. 

All of us, members of parliament, were invited to that workshop, and we were informed by the Electoral Commission that polling stations and new polling stations were being generated. The Electoral Commission requested all of us to take keen interest in this exercise so that we could make pertinent input in regard to what was taking place.

Now, this discovery, which hon. Kyanjo is talking about - I do not know whether it is really a discovery because we were informed that this exercise was taking place. Some new polling stations were being created so that voters could have polling stations within areas of their convenience. (Mr Kyanjo rose_) You want to inform me? Fine.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is telling you and the minister concerned will also come – allow him to finish. 

Somebody mentioned the issue of creating constituencies. Constituencies are not created by administrative staff. The law is very clear as to how to review constituencies. Constituencies of course can be created by creating a county because a county is automatically a constituency. But the way other constituencies are created is very clear in the Constitution.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, you are absolutely right and I want to add that the minister responsible for the Electoral Commission will also come here and give a statement with regard to the exercise of putting in place new polling stations in the country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The matter is ended.

3.26
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Mr Speaker, something related to the Electoral Commission regarding –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have directed that the minister concerned comes here within a week and gives us a statement concerning the matter hon. Kyanjo has raised. When the minister makes that statement, we shall have a debate. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. I am sorry to have insisted. I was in the constituency, in Kasilo County, over the weekend with hon. Omolo and hon. Oyet and it was brought to our attention – I just want this issue raised so that the minister takes it up and addresses it or communicates to the Electoral Commission. 

When they did put up adverts for recruitment of election officials to do updates, it was very specific that the sub-county supervisors should be from the area; but what has happened in Kasilo in two sub-counties, Kadungulu sub-county and Bugondo sub-Ccounty, the people who started training yesterday in Soroti are not from Kasilo County or Serere County or Soroti County and not even from Soroti District. They are from another district. They are from Amuria. So, how can these people be able to scrutinise the people of, Kasilo, Kadungulu, and yet they do not come from there?

I tried to raise this matter with the Registrar in Soroti, but he told me that it was beyond him now. But I said how? Even your adverts were very clear and specific. These people will not be able to identify the people who come from Kasilo. So, the people from Kasilo will definitely not allow that to continue. It will be wastage of resources to train the people there. Only two people had applied from Kadungulu sub-county. So, I wanted this to be taken up such that it is addressed early enough to avoid problems in the future, because we shall not allow it.

3.29
MS REBECCA LUKWAGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Luwero): I am rising on an issue of public importance. Before I state it, I would like to remind this august House that recently, the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children hosted a delegation of children from all over Uganda and one of the issues they raised was child sacrifice.

Ugandans are currently in a very tricky position; they are confused after Justice Moses Mukiibi of the High Court acquitted Geoffrey Kato Kajubi on 23 April 2010.

As parents in this country; as legislators who speak for the voiceless; as Members of Parliament; as mothers, most important of all, and fathers of this nation, how do we feel when Kajubi is walking freely in this country? 

Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues, if Kajubi was party to sacrificing our little boy, what do we need to do as legislators? What do we need to do as mothers and fathers of this nation? What do we need to do as people who represent the little ones who never come here on the Floor of Parliament and speak about their issues? 

We recently passed a Bill on Female Genital Mutilation in this Parliament, and we said that even those who aid the mutilation should be penalised. Even if you go and brew beer for the party after mutilation has been done, you are going to be penalised. What about Kajubi, who a number of witnesses said was part of it? I know amongst our beliefs - the Quran says, whoever contributes towards the promotion of a taboo, like transporting beer, you will be penalised.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, there is no doubt that anybody who aids in committing a crime is a principle offender, but I think in this particular case there was no sufficient evidence. I am just explaining what happened. Definitely, if there was sufficient evidence, one would not say he was not at the scene, because he who aids another to commit an offence becomes the principle offender. What happened in this case, according to the judge, is that there was no evidence that would compel the court to require Kajubi to give any evidence. That is all. But the question of aiding somebody to commit an offence makes you a principle offender. 

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my namesake, for raising this matter. I just wanted to guide this House and give information about this matter.

When you critically analyse the evidence and the judgement, you would find the state used the system of plea bargaining. We have a system in law called plea bargaining; where a person who committed an offence is used as a witness. In this particular case, the people who committed murder - there was no evidence adduced that Kajubi was the one who executed the mission. The people who committed the actual murder, the witches, were used as witnesses. The lesson we learn from this, as legislators, is whether we should not amend the law to get out that system of plea bargaining, where people who commit murder can come to court and confess that they committed murder, but it is another person who told them to do it - and that murderer goes scot-free. 

I think that is the line we should look at as legislators. Do we still need this system of plea bargaining, that a person who confesses to murder can be used as a witness and then at the end of the day, there is nobody who is brought to book, and yet an offence was committed? I think that is a lesson we should learn. The Attorney-General should pick it up from there. I thank you.

MS REBECCA LUKWAGO: Thank you very much, my colleague, for the information. I am very sure it is useful to this House. As advocates of children’s rights, I am sure you should pick on that to see that something is done so that Ugandans do not lose confidence in the Judiciary; so that they do not opt to go for mob justice, because such explanations can never be got at the grassroots; they will never understand whatever we are saying at this level. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)


THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there was something which I forgot to raise with you. Because of pressure of work, I request that may be we start sitting in the morning. As I indicated to you, I intend to prorogue Parliament by 12th May. So, in order to clear what we have, maybe we agree to be sitting in the morning for the rest of the days. You think about it. Maybe before we adjourn today we should have decided.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2009

Clause 1

MR LUKWAGO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Before we move to Clause 1, we still have some other amendments. On page 4 of the IPOD document, we are proposing to amend section 22 of the Act to create a new sub-section 1(a) to read as follows: “Notwithstanding sub-section 1(a) the Electoral Commission shall consult a candidate on his or her security detail.” For the benefit of the Members who do not have the parent Act, sub-section 1 of section 22 provides for security, protection and facilitation of candidates. It provides as follows, “The Commission shall ensure that the relevant organs of the state provide during the entire campaign period protection of each candidate,” and (b) “Adequate security at all meetings of candidates.”

THE CHAIRMAN: Excuse me, which section are you trying to amend?

MR LUKWAGO: Section 22, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the heading for section 22?

MR LUKWAGO: It is “Security”, Mr Chairman. 

MR WACHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I thought when we left we were dealing with the proposed amendments under section 19(a); that is the issue of withdrawal or disqualification of candidates. I do not think we finalised that matter.

THE CHAIRMAN: What is the position on disqualification? We are talking about a candidate being disqualified and what happens thereafter and I think there was some dispute over this? What is the position now?

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, after the necessary consultations, we are proposing that section 19(1)(a) excludes the expression “or disqualification” and reads as “…where as a result of withdrawal of other candidates for election, there remains only one candidate, the Returning Officer shall immediately declare the remaining candidate elected unopposed.” This is because, after reading the necessary provisions of the law, particularly those that I cited here – sections 11 and 13 of the Presidential Elections Act; Powers of the Electoral Commission in Articles 61 and 64; and in other circumstances where a person or a candidate ceases to be a candidate, there are sufficient laws in place. So, we thought that they can take care of the withdrawal aspect which is not catered for in the current legislation. 

THE CHAIRMAN: What you are helping us to understand is that after nominations, the Commission has no powers to disqualify a candidate. Is it the position?

MR RUHINDI: The position, Mr Chairman, is that it has the powers, but under these other laws. I cited sections 11 and 13. Section 11; “Factors which may invalidate a nomination: 
A person shall not be regarded as duly nominated and a nomination paper of any person shall be regarded as void if - 
a)	the person’s nomination paper was not signed and seconded in accordance with section 10(1) or section 10(2);
b)	the nomination paper of the person was not accompanied by the list of names of registered voters as required by section 10(1) and 10(3); 
c)	the person has not complied with section 10(6);
d)	the person seeking nomination was not qualified for election under section 4; or 
e)	the person seeking nomination has been duly nominated for election as a Member of Parliament. 

Section 13: Inspection of nomination papers and lodging of complaints: 
 A registered voter may - 
a)	during office hours on the nomination day, at the office of the returning officer or other place determined by the Commission, inspect any nomination paper filed with the returning officer.
b)	After the closure of the nomination time and during such period as may be prescribed, inspect any nomination paper in respect of a candidate at such time and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, and may lodge a complaint with the Returning Officer or the Commission in relation to any nomination in respect of the candidate challenging the qualifications of any person nominated.” 

Then we also have Article 61. It provides for the functions of the Electoral Commission; and one of its functions under Article 61(1)(f) is to hear and determine election complaints arising before and during polling. 

Article 64 is in respect to appeals from decisions of the Commission. 

“Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Electoral Commission in respect of any of the complaints referred to in Article 61(1)(f) of this Constitution may appeal to the High Court.” 

In (4), a decision of the High Court on an appeal under clause 1 or clause 3 of this Article shall be final.

I want to take you back to the Presidential Elections Act. In case there is no appeal and the person has been disqualified or if there is an appeal and the person loses, then you revert to section 18 of the Presidential Elections Act. 

Section 18(5) says, “Where a candidate ceases to be a candidate otherwise than by reason of his or her death after close of nominations and before the closing of polls, no fresh nominations shall be carried out by reason of his or her ceasing to be a candidate.” That means that if you cease to be a candidate through disqualification or through a petition that one loses, there will be no fresh nominations. In fact, if there is only one candidate remaining, then that candidate is of course declared the successful candidate. The reason we are providing for withdrawal is because the withdrawal aspect is not specifically canvassed under the provisions I have read. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore, whether we put disqualification in the present position, we are justified because there are provisions for the Commission to declare or to disqualify although we were happy when you said that you were remaining with withdrawal. But I think it was just leading to another thing that may happen. What will happen if one withdraws and at the same time the Commission disqualifies the second candidate? Doesn’t it declare the other candidate elected unopposed? We were happy when you mentioned it, but when you read sections 11 and 13 and Article 64, you really see that there will be a situation when the two things will happen; one candidate withdraws and another is disqualified, and the consequence is to declare the remaining candidate elected unopposed. This is my view.

But you can say that it is provided for somewhere else. I think the interest was what happens when one remains because the other has withdrawn while the third candidate has been disqualified. Shouldn’t the Commission declare the one remaining elected unopposed?

RUHINDI: With my explanation, if it is included, it is for avoidance of doubt. Otherwise, it is already covered by the existing provisions.

MR EKANYA: The current provision of the Electoral Commission Act and the Constitution allows an appeal up to the level of the High Court. Our amendment was to give opportunity to appeal up to the level of the Supreme Court.

THE CHAIRMAN: You appeal when something wrong has been done. It is not like what I see in the papers; Parliament decides to create a district and then you go to court to challenge it. The Commission must be bold enough to declare their position and if it is wrong, you appeal.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Chairman, with your guidance we can retain disqualification because it is sufficiently covered.

MR KATUNTU: I think there is no time for being vague here. We are enacting a law yet those of us who are enacting it are not sure of what we want. Just imagine what will happen to a judge who will start reading our mind. I think we are setting a dangerous precedent. The learned Attorney General should sit and be clear in his mind, what he wants to bring forward. Such situations bring a lot of chaos in courts. They start making decisions which are absurd; speculating on what the Legislature intended. We cannot afford to do this.

For the last five days we have been looking at this. With all due respect, I do not agree with the interpretation of the learned Attorney General. Where the Legislature intends to give a certain function to an organ, it clearly states so. The provisions the learned Attorney General was reading in the Constitution and in the Presidential Elections Act do not specifically provide for what he said.

My view is, if we are to go by what he had proposed, disqualification is totally out. If the Electoral Commission does not have powers to disqualify a candidate after he has already been nominated, then the question of the Chairman comes; what happens? The Attorney General and the committee need to sit and harmonise this as legal minds such that we do not drag on this debate for another week or so.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we stand over it for sometime so that you people with legal minds can go over it.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, before we do that I would like to give this information which will guide us. When you look at the provisions of sections 11 and 13 of the Presidential Elections Act cited by the learned Attorney General, they create a right for a person to complain against nomination of a particular candidate, but there is no provision which specifically empowers the Electoral Commission to take action. There is a lacuna in the law there; the Commission is not empowered to take a decision to disqualify after a complaint has been made. Under sections 11 and 12 a person has got a right to complain against a candidature of a particular person; but thereafter what happens?

THE CHAIRMAN: If a person has a right to complain and he complains to the Commission, what do you want the Commission to do after they have complained? Keep quiet and say appeal? It has to take a bold decision and pronounce itself. It may be wrong or right. But why don’t I give you time honourable members to consult each other, and come back later, so that we are able to move to other provisions.

MR OKELLO-OKELLO: We are handling a Government Bill; a Bill which came to Parliament through the Cabinet, and the Attorney General has given his advice that the word “disqualification” should be deleted. Now, what Authority do we have to challenge the learned Attorney General? I think we should follow the law and take the advice given by the Attorney General.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okello-Okello, the position is that we have two types of Bills; one private and another one introduced by Government. But once it is brought here, it becomes our property, and that is why even when he wants to withdraw, he has to seek leave for him to withdraw. When he introduces a Bill here, we just do not follow him; we scrutinise the Bill and improve it. You cannot say that because he has given the interpretation, we cannot debate it.

MS ALASO: Mr Chairman, I think you are making important guidance to this House which we genuinely want to appreciate. I am more encouraged to believe that better drafting and formulation would save us. You can imagine a situation where the Electoral Commission disqualifies a candidate and the next morning there is chaos around the city - we do not really want to get there.

We need to be grounded in the legal framework that we are making. I would like to encourage that the Attorney General and the small team of lawyers just work on this thing – I know even we historians need to say something. However, we need to have those legal minds apply themselves onto this law and come up with something better.

THE CHAIRMAN: I suggest that I set up a team of lawyers from both sides to look at this. If it is the Attorney General’s amendments that are causing us a problem, we can delete them and continue. I think the Electoral Commission has powers to disqualify and if it does, it can make a conclusion on the disqualification, especially if there are two candidates only.

I am, therefore, tasking the Chairperson, hon. Tashobya, hon. Nuwagaba, the Attorney General, hon. Urban Tibamanya, hon. Ben Wacha, hon. Katuntu and hon. Lukwago, to go look at this and advise us. Meanwhile let us move to other amendments that are not causing any controversy.

MR LUKWAGO: Mr Chairman, earlier on, I was suggesting an amendment to section 22.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, there are no other amendments to 19? We move to section 22.

MR LUKWAGO: We shall come to that later on. Clause 22(1) reads as follows: “The Commission shall ensure that the relevant organs of the state provide security during the entire campaign period- (a) protection of each candidate; and (b) adequate security at all meetings of candidates.”

 The proposal we are mooting is that we create sub-section (1)(a) to read as follows: “Notwithstanding sub-section (1)(a), the Electoral Commission shall consult a candidate on his or her security detail.” The justification for this is to involve a candidate in the planning of his or her own protection and security.

MR TASHOBYA: The committee examined the proposal as put by the Shadow Attorney-General and we noted that the Electoral Commission has the mandate and the responsibility of protecting the candidates in elections and that if it is to consult, it may do so as an administrative measure but it should not be a legal requirement in the laws. For that reason, we did not take the proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: But suppose the candidate does not want the protection you are giving, or if he has some doubts as to the people you have given him? 

MR TASHOBYA: But the issue is, who is finally responsible? If for example, a candidate proposes people to guard him or her and eventually there are problems, who will take the responsibility?

MR KYANJO: If a candidate opted for no security, naturally he would have to make an undertaking upon which the commission will come and argue that the candidate was disinterested other than forcing security onto him and he gets into trouble. What do you do under such circumstances? And this is a simple thing – we are not asking for a mountain; we are saying consultation is very natural. I beg that you concede on this.

MR KATUNTU: On matters of personal security, it is a practice all over that people are given, say - even ordinarily the state must give you a bodyguard; you can say, I am not comfortable with Sergeant Kabwegyere as my bodyguard. (Laughter) Yes. So, ordinarily, the state or the security organs consult you about your security. I think there is nothing wrong with it. The reason as to why we should put it in the law and not leave it as an administrative measure; assuming that the Electoral Commission does not consult you, because it is not obliged,  and it brings this sergeant around you and you are not comfortable with him; it causes more insecurity again. 


So, I really do not see so much controversy if somebody is providing me security to say, “We are giving you this security detail, and if you are not comfortable, you raise the reason”, and if the state is of the view that is actually the security you need, they say, “Okay we have listened but that notwithstanding, we have a duty to provide you with security and this is the security which is most appropriate.”  I do not see any controversy if the learned Attorney-General, especially if the ministers of defence and security are here; he can consult them because I am sure they know more about these matters of security. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you Mr Chairman. I agree that the practice is that where the concerned person has concerns about a particular officer, I find the duty to protect, he or she is free to consult the security agencies and they will come in, and if she or he has good reasons, of course they will effect the necessary changes. 

However, as we all know not everyone that is going to be entitled to security by becoming a candidate has the necessary competencies, first of all, to assess the security threat. (Interjections) 

I will repeat this for the benefit of my sister. I think some may have that competence and some may not. Now, if you are really not in a position to make an accurate assessment of the security threat against you, you cannot be in a position to determine what kind of protection you need. That is why it is really not necessary to impose this by law because in the normal practice, there is no reason why I would give a candidate like hon. Alice Alaso, when she becomes candidate for President, someone who – (Interjections)– you see. So, I think that we are safer and there is no harm. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe before you conclude, I want to draw your attention, hon. Members, to Article 172 of the Constitution. This deals with appointments of public officers. When you read sub-article 2 for the President: “Except with the consent of the President, no person shall be appointed under this article to act in any office on personal staff of the President.” So, there are situations where the consent of a person concerned is taken care of. You cannot force somebody without his consent, and this is provided for in the Constitution. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I can see the Chairman making the good point in the case of a President – an elected President as opposed to an aspiring -(Laughter)- now I can see the point being made here; that except with the consent of the President, no person shall be appointed to his or her personal staff. This means the personal staff do not include the security of the President –(Interjections)– no, no. 

In this case we are reading what the Chairman gave us. Personal staff are those who work very close to the President and this includes the support staff; and that is for the President. But you can imagine; to impose that requirement would be imposing a duty on the candidate to know the security officers in order for them to make a rational choice. So, really, my appeal to my colleagues is that -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: If you are a lady candidate and you know, for example, that the security operatives who are provided to you –(Interjections)– I am just giving an example – are only men -(Interruptions)- Do you understand me? Only men!  and as a lady, you need someone to handle your bag and arrange your belongings; and they give you only men –(Interjections)- or the other way round -(Laughter)- you are a male candidate and they give you only ladies who inconvenience you. Your wife may not like them and the person may not be on time –(Interjections)- yes, these are serious matters. 

Mr Chairman –(Interjections)- the security of a candidate is very important because some candidates may not have even adequate extra transport to take care of these security people. Some candidates may say that because of the nature of the support I have, my security threat is big, so I need 20 security personnel; yet Ekanya needs five security personnel.

So, this consultation is very necessary. I am ready to facilitate you with more security personnel when you are going to Karamoja. For example, the other day when Dr Col Kiiza Besigye was going to campaign in Karamoja and Acholi, we received intelligence information that Kony rebels were in the area. (Interjections) This was during the last campaigns. So, we had to get in touch with the Electoral Commission and the Army commander to give us extra security. We got a lot of difficulty getting the extra security and we had to cancel so many rallies. That is why it is very important that this is provided for in the law. (Interjections)

MR MWESIGWA-RUKUTANA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This proposal looks so innocent, but on examination, there are problems. If you make it that wide, you are making it mandatory for the Commission to consult and you stop at that with the candidate. If the consultations stall –(Interjections)- and there is total disagreement, what happens?

MR KATUNTU: Let me assist my colleague. You see, if we are envisaging such a situation, we would have said, “with the consent of the candidate”. That would mean that you would need his approval. But what we are providing for is consultation such that the candidate, first of all, is aware of who his security detail is. If he has strong objections, he can even raise it with the Police; if you have given him the Army, he can even raise it with the Minister of Defence; if they are the other people, you can raise it with the hon. Amama Mbabazi -(Laughter)- not the ‘Yellow Brigade’, the other people. (Laughter) 

So, Mr Chairman, I think the word being used in the law is consultation and once the Electoral Commission goes ahead and consults; they discuss and I imagine in good faith. There should not be any problem.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to give my own example. I know as a candidate, you really need the security. Just like me, I need my guide to attend parliamentary proceedings. But the person who should be my guide must be my choice. This is because I cannot trust anybody. So, what I am suggesting is that we provide for the security, but when you are selecting -(Interjection)- they should be within the Police Force of course - you may be given a list of the security guards,  soldiers or Police officers so that you select among them who will guard you so that you are sure of your security. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, do you have anything to say?  Let us hear it.

MR RUHINDI: One thing that I know, given my legal background, is that consultation does not create a binding obligation on the party consulting. The problem is the signals this provision sends to those implementing it and to those it applies to. [MR OKUPA: “Which signals?”] It can easily create an impasse. I think the mission and work of the Police is to maintain law and order. This is ably articulated in Article 212 of the Constitution, which we are all aware of.

So, it is the responsibility of the Police to maintain law and order, not only to ensure that the candidates are safe, but that there is law and order. In my opinion, that is the message that should be sent or should be articulated in this law. In other words, the fact of consultation remains purely administrative.

MS ALASO: I thank you, Mr Chairman. Just as the Attorney-General has said that the issue of consultation has implications on those who implement it. I think the absence of consultation also has serious implications on those who are meant to receive this security. If you impose security on me and I have questions, it will create a crisis of confidence. I will begin to think otherwise and that will take me to the Minister of Security. 

I understand that I need to feel secure; and I also understand that if the minister in charge of security  wants to follow up my behaviour as a presidential candidate wherever I go; he knows better how to do that without necessarily putting this person to follow me left and right. He knows how I can be followed without me knowing that I am being followed. So, why doesn’t the minister, therefore, draw a line between the covert operation and my security? 

I think that the question of consultation borders on matters of programming; access to my residence where I sleep – if you are giving me people whom I am not going to allow in my compound, then why do you give them to me in the first place? And it borders on my acceptance that this is genuine security; if you impose them on me, I might as well forfeit. 

So, what are the provisions in the law, Attorney-General, that you are making in case a candidate says, “I do not want your security.” 	What provisions are you going to use to impose security on them? What, for instance, do you have in place if you have a Police officer, who, for instance, has previously erred, slapped an officer of the party and then you put him on our security detail during the campaigns; do you think we will be excited; how do we relate to them? We need to treat them also with respect? 

Let me give you a scenario. In the last election, the first security details that we were given were fine; we took them on; we were very comfortable with them. Two weeks into the campaigning process, the Electoral Commission withdrew those people. We did not have any explanation.  In the third week we told them, “We do not want, we can take care of ourselves”. So, what is the essence of this? I need to feel secure as a candidate and the state needs to discharge its mandate of ensuring the security of the persons who are in this presidential race. I think that consultation is still a good thing. It might not force the Electoral Commission to take on all the views that the presidential candidates give, but it is a healthy thing. 

MR KUTESA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. When you read the section that we are seeking to amend, it says: “The Commission shall ensure that the relevant organs of the state provide during the entire campaign period protection of each candidate”. 

First of all, it means that the Electoral Commission itself is incapable of determining the level of security; it is the relevant organs of state that are going to determine the threat and, therefore, the level of security. Even if you are consulted, therefore, the Commission is not the one which determines the level of threat or security. It will only cause other organs of state security to do that; and I do not see what we are tearing our shirts about. There is standard practice the world over; this is not the only place with candidates; if you get nominated for president in the United States, the FBI starts protecting you immediately. 

They are partisan states –(Interjections)– hon. Reagan knows very well that America is a partisan state. But having said that, even if the Electoral Commission consulted you, it would only consult you in order to ask another organ of state to protect you. So, if there is any fear that I am going to put someone on you, that decision is going to be determined by the organ of state. So, the Electoral Commission can only ensure – 

Let us look at another example - adequacy and inadequacy. Suppose the Electoral Commission consulted you and you said, “I need two platoons to protect me,” and the Electoral Commission says, “We do not have it and we are not going to provide it and the following day, something happens to you; you will be the first to say, “They did not give me the adequate security I wanted”. 

So, I am saying that we all live here, we are not tourists. There are people who can make unreasonable demands and, therefore, are unable to help in determining the level of security. As hon. Rukutana pointed out, it can go back and forth until you hit a stalemate. So far, adequate security has been provided to all candidates in spite of the fact that at that time, our democracy was even more nasty than it is now. We are growing in the culture of respecting each other, giving and taking. So, I think that we should leave it to be done administratively, rather than imposing an obligation to consult you; because the Commission is not the one going to determine the threat or the level of security. We better leave it as it is.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I want to thank hon. Sam Kutesa. I want to use his own words of, “unreasonable demands”, in the opposite sense that people can also place unreasonable resistance to things that are extremely unharmful. I want to give two examples. When we were close to the 2001 elections, I was invited as the campaign manager of Mr Kibirige Mayanja to be given separate security by hon. Muruli Mukasa. But we had unfriendly exchanges in the past and I thought he was not going to provide quality security for me. So, I declined. And as hon. Alaso said, there is no law that compels me to accept that security.

The second aspect I want to deal with fringes on consciousness and compliance. Everyone who comes to defend the opposition has to bring a book; so that they indicate that they will comply. 

Mr Chairman, you have heard arguments on the Floor of this House to the effect that until now, the Army has not been able to cleanly place individuals throughout the country. You sent a Commission to verify this with the Committee on Defence, but it has failed. Now, when we look at senior ministers standing up to insist that there shouldn’t be consultations, which is a modest thing – really, to consult is a very modest thing; any reasonable person would agree without hesitation. 

So, I beg that we do not put a roadblock over that and we agree to consult each other over this issue including, but not limited to a candidate saying, “I do not what security anyway”. If he makes that undertaking, he can go without that security. So, I beg that we do not exercise a lot of our knowledge of complying with the provisions when the conscience of some Members is unsafe. Let us comply and accept the view that we consult each other during this exercise. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: But hon. Members, we are not moving at all. Since we started we have not made any conclusion on anything!

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Chairman, we are creating our own programme. First, I think every candidate in elections in Uganda is a citizen and, therefore, entitled to security that is given. The moment it appears that one side is safer than another side in this debate, it undermines the very basis of the Constitution. We should, first of all, agree that we must be treated equally. If you doubt that justice can be administered, then the only way out is not to exist. Therefore, I propose, Mr Chairman that we all agree that consultations can take place. But the way consultation is being assumed here is that there is a loser in that consultation. (Interjections) yes; because what is it all about? What is at stake? Let me hear hon. Kyanjo.

MR KYANJO: Mr Chairman, we have attempted all through to be civil in behaviour because of the rules of this House; but when the hon. Kabwegyere stands up to ask distinctively what is at stake, and he says that there is a winner and a a loser - indeed yes; because naturally, some of the things in this country have happened due to history, in a way that some people feel unsafe, and that is why they want to safeguard - this is a law; it does not belong to Kyanjo, it belongs to everybody. Look at the argument by the honourable Kabwegyere, the honourable Rukutana, the honourable Kutesa and the honourable Amama Mbabazi; strangely, all coming from one region. I must be worried. (Interjections) yes; you must know this, that there is something at stake -

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, we are not moving at all. I suggest that the two sides get some representation, and I give you 20 minutes, not only to look at this - because I have seen the list of other proposed amendments for you to study - and we come back after 20 minutes, so that we  are able to move. So, let us adjourn the House and we go for 20 minutes.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009” and stood over the debate for further consultations.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Motion is that we adopt the report of the committee of the whole House on the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2009.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we have already passed the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill; we had moved well on this one too, but it seems we are stuck on this one. I suggest that you take off 30 minutes; get Members from both sides, and you look at the list - because I have seen the list which they have; there are many of them. Look at least at five proposed amendments so that when we return, we shall be able to move faster.

4.33
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Mr Speaker, I do share with you your concerns about the pace at which we are moving, and the need for us to have further consultations. I would like to bring this to the attention of the House, and once again be on record, that this particular provision we are talking about is a provision that was well negotiated in the IPOD meetings in which both sides of the House are party to.

I am so surprised that at this stage, positions which had already been agreed upon, are becoming so contentious. Even if (Interjections) no, it is not a matter of me being away; the document is here; we all have the documents of IPOD. So, why should we be stuck at this stage? Even if we are given a whole day, I do not think we shall make any headway, because this is a position which was already agreed upon. I really seek your guidance on this matter -(Mr Amama Mbabazi rose_)- and the Secretary General of NRM, the super minister is even in the know. He is part of this.

4.35
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, it is my pleasure to welcome back the acting Leader of Opposition, and to inform him that while he was away, this point was covered in this House. For his benefit, I would like to re-state what I said last week, that in IPOD, certain positions were reached, the representation of NRM came back to the party, and NRM being a democratic institution subjected those parts of the proposals that especially hinged on policy, and we accepted some as a party and did not accept others in those proposals, and we sent our team back to make our response. So, it is, therefore, not accurate to say that the proposals which came from IPOD that had not been subjected to consideration by the party are positions of IPOD. As far as we are concerned, certainly they are not.

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, I suggest we suspend the proceedings and we resume at 5.00 p.m. prompt. Business suspended.

(The House was suspended at 4.36 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.59 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we can talk about the other issue. When do we start sitting in the morning? Next week? Because there is a lot of work that we have; for instance, we have dragged on this debate. 

5.02
MR ROBERT SEBUNYA KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let us plan for next week because sessional committees have scheduled meetings with different ministries such that making it this week will disorganise the committee meetings.

THE SPEAKER: When we start, do we sit also on Monday or we maintain Tuesday? Tuesday. Yes honourable.

5.03
MR FRED BUKENI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Mr Speaker, since the sessional committees are sitting and some of them had scheduled work for next week; and since a  decision is going to be made that we meet next week in the morning, let us give them time to adjust. So, maybe on Friday they can bring forward some of the work for next week so that they sit on Friday and those who would not have finished, finish on Monday, so that on Tuesday we can start sitting in the mornings.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we start on Tuesday. 

5.03
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): I have no problem with starting on Monday, but I just wanted you to request the leadership of the sessional committees to postpone getting out of Kampala during this season, because I see many sessional committees still moving out of Kampala, yet we have very critical issues to discuss. I was, for instance, asking the Chairman of the Sessional Committee on Physical Infrastructure why we should go to the East tomorrow when we have this matter. I really want you to ask him to postpone this upcountry monitoring work until we finish up this matter such that we do not leave tomorrow; because we are 20 members on the committee and it is not only the Committee of Physical Infrastructure; there are other committees also. So, we should stay around for these two weeks and we work morning and afternoon.

THE SPEAKER: It seems they are not coming back. Do you think we should leave them to - because my idea was that when they go on to deal with the other issue, they can as well look at other proposed amendments, so that when we return we can move? So, do you think we should extend their consultation?

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, you assigned a team of three lawyers in this House, and as we were progressing, we realised that there were other issues. Can we give them time this afternoon to finish so that tomorrow they would have looked at all the issues?

THE SPEAKER: I think so.

5.05
MR ISHAA OTTO (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): But Mr Speaker, this will be a very bad precedent that we are setting in this House, because whenever issues come before us from the committee, I think it is this House that should be able in its wisdom - 

THE SPEAKER: No; you see, if a few meet, they harmonise the position and it becomes easier. We have confidence in them. So, what I am suggesting is that now that they have not finished, maybe we ask them to look at other proposed amendments as well, so that when we come tomorrow, there will be harmony. Is that okay?

So, Government Chief Whip, please go and advise them. Let them continue but look at other proposed amendments that are likely to be suggested tomorrow so that when we come tomorrow we have harmony and we move. Is that okay?

5.06
THE GOVERNMNET CHIEF WHIP (Mr Daudi Migereko): Mr Speaker, the team that is consulting had requested for an extra ten minutes, but now that you are directing that they look at all other provisions which may require consultation, I can communicate that and maybe that will make it a lot easier for us to move faster tomorrow. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I think so. Okay. So, with this we come to the end of today’s business. House is adjourned to tomorrow starting at 2.30 p.m. prompt.

(The House rose at 5.07 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 April 2010 at 2.30 p.m.) 


