Thursday, 22nd April, 1993

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala).

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE BANK OF UGANDA BILL, 1993

(Debate continues).

MR. OPIO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this important Bill.  Let me start by stating that I support this Bill.  However, there are a few areas on which I would like to make some observations.  I would like to refer to Article 5, which is on functions of the Bank.  The Central Bank has had quite many criticisms labelled against it in the past.  It has been said that the Central Bank has not been free in exercising the role of initiating and guiding the monetary policy of this country.  Instead it has been stated that the politicians have always initiated the policies and when they go wrong they then turn to the Central Bank for advice.  The Minister of Finance in his budget of 1992/93 recognises this criticism and in that budget he informed the House - some of us were not in the House, we read it in the newspaper, that he intended bringing a Bill to this House to amend the existing Bank of Uganda Act and his intention, if I could remember from the newspaper, was to create an autonomous Bank to make the Bank more dynamic, to strengthen the Bank’s regulatory and supervisory functions, to make the regular frame work more imaginative so as to foster the development of other institutions which provide medium term finance institutes.  These were in his own budget and he said he was going to strengthen the debt management of this country.  Now, with these what the Minister stated, I would like to look at some areas of the Bill to see how they relate to what we were promised.

The Bill as it stands, especially under the functions, when we look at that Article, I am of the opinion that the Minister has somehow reduced his radicalism which he expressed when he was making the budget, there the Minister wanted us to have a Bank which will be autonomous, i.e. which could formulate and implement the monetary polities of the Banks.  However, if you look at the functions of the Bill, the Minister has somehow watered this down when you look at (f) his is now asking that it will be the Minister to ask the Bank to provide advice although there is some amendments which came later on, which tries to make the point I am trying to emphasize. The point I am trying to emphasize, Mr. Chairman, is that the Bank of Uganda should be the initiator and the implementer of monetary policies of this country although, of course, politically we would be told that the Minister must have some residual powers -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order.

MR. OPIO:  I would, therefore, in the amendment try to still provoke the Minister so that he include this as a major function even number one to say the function of the Bank of Uganda shall be to formulate and implement the monetary policies of this country other than saying with advice and then under the advice he gives us some clauses which may be difficult to interpret.  I think these are very important functions that I would like to emphasize.

Also, the Minister promised to have a Bill which will make the Bank of Uganda dynamic and which would make the Bank come to grasp with the economic problems of this country.   He has tried very much to provide the areas to make this Bank dynamic.  However, we know that it is easy to make these regulations but I would like to make some comments on the type of manpower that the Minister might be calling upon to implement some of these dynamic recommendations in the Bill.  Although we cannot regulate who to employ and who we will not employ, I would like at this juncture, to remind the Minister that although the laws are dynamic, I do not know whether his people in the Bank of Uganda are going to live up to this dynamism.  There must be some ways of making sure that the staff in the Bank of Uganda are those who can live up to this expectation.  So, I, therefore, request that apart from making the regulations the Minister may have to go in and do more of what he has done in the past to make sure that the Bank is dynamic and capable of achieving what he wants.

The Minister in his Budget Speech referred to his action of creating a management committee called the External Debt Management Committee.  Now, in this Bill, I do not know whether it has been the intention of the Minister not to refer very forcefully on this debt management; may be he is having another Bill or since he tended to have it in the Ministry of Finance it has not made it possible to give more light on the external debt management.  However, I would like to emphasize the fact that debt management is one of the functions of the Bank of Uganda since it is the Bank of the last resort, since it is the Bank of the Bankers and since it is a government Bank, I think it should be having a very big share in the management of debts especially the local ones.  

I would like to refer to the remark by the Deputy Minister of Finance and Economic Planning when he said that 1987, when he intended to make us believe that the local debts is because of the previous accumulations of the debts which he had but I know that in 1987 the reform made it possible to remove two zeros from whatever you hand in the Bank and I would imagine that the 30 percent which was removed from each person was more of a debt and I am wondering whether it is true that we shall get or the people will get their 30 per cent back because we would accept the devaluation but when it comes to taxation we would expect the 30 per cent so may be it is part of the debt which has accumulated and he is finding it difficult to retire.  

On inflation, I would like to say that the Minister is very clear in the Bill on that one, and he has made it possible for the Bill to provide various financial instruments which if used properly can direct the economy of this country.  However, I would like to comment on one of the remarks made that some of these things fall in, inflation may be more or less artificial especially in Tororo District where our civil servants have not been paid since July, I would imagine that if they wanted to buy they would not have money to buy and therefore their purchasing power being down they will not push up the inflation.  So that is an area, which possibly could be referred to, may be as forcing the inflation other than the force of supply and demand reducing inflation. With these few remarks I would like to say that I support the Bill.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF COMMERCE, CO-OPERATIVES AND MARKETING (Mr. R. Kaijuka): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the Bill and I hope I will use this opportunity, to make a few comments in support of my colleague, the hon. Minister of Finance and Planning, on having had to think it appropriate to introduce a new Bank of Uganda Bill, 1993.  It is correct and everybody knows that we had the Bank of Uganda Bill, 1966, and it has been in place.  The obvious question to ask is why should we have to introduce a new Bill and I think it is important that we recognise why it was imperative or necessary that the government introduces a new Bill. And perhaps we shall get a key to the reasoning by a number of points I would like to underscore as being the new elements to justify introduction of a new Bank of Uganda Bill.

Question one, is a question of having adequate capitalization for the Central Bank.  It is extremely important that if you are going to have a dynamic, strong Central Bank supervising other financing institutions it is imperative that it is adequately capitalised and the new Bill does exactly that.  You will notice in Clause 15 for example when the Minister address the question of capital and reserve, he is saying on 15 that the authorised capital of the Bank shall be 30 billion, that is the authorised capital and that the paid up capital as a minimum quantum should be 20 billion and he does not stop there, I am just underscoring the new elements, he is saying the Bank of Uganda should also establish a general reserve fund and whenever at the end of the year the operations of Bank of Uganda end up making net profits, that net profit should be added on to the general reserve fund and I think Member should note the point that it is not automatic that whatever money the Bank of Uganda makes at the end of a financial year that they would have to automatically transfer that to the consolidated fund.  Because he has introduced an element which you will note in Clause 17 (3) on page 11, that the Board may determine that the whole of the net profit of the Bank be paid into the Consolidated Fund it, that is the condition I am emphasizing, and that if at the end of the financial year the amount of money in the general reserve fund is twice or more than the amount of the paid up capital.  

So, if the minimum of the paid up capital is 20 billion, for example, and you have a nil amount in the general reserve fund, it presupposes that you will have nothing to transfer to the consolidated Fund or assuming that you have adequate funds in the general reserve fund that mount must be doubted before you can transfer any funds to the Consolidated Fund. 

So, this question of having adequate capitalization of the Central Bank is extremely important because in many ways I admire what the Central Bank has done so far because with very limited resources they have been able to play, in my judgement, a commendable job under very difficult circumstances especially when they do not have adequate funds.  The second point I would like Members to address in this Bill is the question of autonomy.  And I think the previous speaker underscored the point.  The Minister of Finance promised to the House that the new legislation would give more authority to the Bank of Uganda in matters, for example, monetary policies but what type of autonomy are we talking about here and I want to remind Members that for those who are familiar with central banks elsewhere, I want to call your attention to Dutch Bundesberg, that is the Central Bank of Germany for example, their autonomy is extreme.  I am just mentioning the extreme position of legislation, that it is the Bundesberg in Germany not only formulate monetary policies it does so independent of what happens in government and at times it has been a cause for conflicts between the Governor of the Bundesberg and the - now the Ministry of Finance in Germany.   

On the other hand, you have the Federal Reserve Bank of United States, for example.  That is yet another Central Bank.  They also have a Federal Reserve System with the head who has this degree of autonomy. The American system is slightly milder than the Germany system.  It provides for co-ordination of whatever monetary policy formulation that is envisaged under that policy.  So, what are we having here in the case of Uganda and I thought it was important to highlight what we are really having is a middle course where you clearly recognise that your Central Bank is the professional body in matter of monetary policies and it incumbents upon that body to give that professional advice irrespective of what you think if you are in government.  

So, the Bill states that - if you note under Clause 33 (3) as amended by the Minister, the Government shall seek advice from the Bank on monetary policy and it shall be the duty of the Bank to formulate such monetary policies and advise the government accordingly.  Now, in the old Bank of Uganda Act it was not mandatory on the part of the Central Bank to make this submission.  What is happening in this Bill is that as soon as we pass this Bill the Bank of Uganda will be expected mandatorily by law to render this professional advice the way they see things and not to leave these matters in the hands of the government and I think this is a new introduction.  It does not mean that they will behave in a irresponsible manner, they are part and parcel of this society, they are part and parcel of our problems, so their professional advice is supposed to guide any government of the day and I think that is the most important part about this Bill and I think we should support it in that spirit.  Anybody who advocates the extreme autonomy, the autonomy in the sense of the Bundesberg is, I think, being unrealistic because it is extremely important that government policies are co-ordinate with that kind of professional advice. It is independent and nobody doubts that but in terms of formulating the government of the day must be held responsible at the end of the day.  That is the whole point and that is the reasoning behind this mandatory clause.

MR. SIBO: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I think I would like to inform the Minister that the idea behind requiring the Central Bank to be fully independent of government is the fact that these, particularly these developing countries, the developing African governments are often interfering with the Bank for purposes of their political programmes and nothing more.  If indeed we did not have messes that we have in our economies in African Governments perhaps, the Minister’s proposal would be understood but the fact that all these African governments in particular and I would perhaps say developing countries that you have all these interferences and making the economies impossible to operate, that is why perhaps it would require that we should go to the extreme position that the Minister is propounding.  Thank you.

MR. KAIJUKA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thank the hon. Member for his information but I just wanted to make one comment, i.e. that whoever is the governor of the day certainly would be, I hope a Ugandan and not a foreigner and is bound to be a reflection of our society and whether or not he has political views I leave it to hon. Sibo and Members to interpret. (Interjection)

MR. KANYOMOZI: On a point of information.

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MR. KAIJUKA: Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, let me really move on to the related issue of a new element that is in this Bill.  Hitherto it is government or Ministers of Finance that have been held largely responsible for mismanaging inflation and debt financing policies but the new element in this Bill again is to introducing the mandatory element on the part of the Bank of Uganda to say from now on if you are a Governor, you are duty bound to limit your advances to the government. In other word this is not just going to be automatic that you print money when you are short of money.  It is mandatory for you as a Governor to be firm in terms of this new Bill for you to say in terms of this Bill you are not supposed to exceed, for example, 18 per cent of the current revenue and therefore, you are not expected to move.  Now, hitherto I think Ministers of Finance made this kind of decision and they were held responsible and the most important part of this bill is that it has gone out of its way to even elaborate what course of action a governor should take.  So, the government wants to ignore his professional advice and so I can see it is going be very difficult in the future starting with my Colleagues hon. Mayanja Nkangi.  For any Minister of Finance to have his freehand in terms of deficit financing, as far as I am concerned, this is a very welcome provision.  The next point I wanted to point out, is that this bill is emphasizing the fact that Bank of Uganda from now on should concentrate on its professional role.  Apart from the usual professional roles of being a government’s bank and so on, this bill is saying, for goodness sake, get on with the role that you are supposed to do.  Do not begin engaging into financing crop finance.  

A few years back, I witnessed a situation that I had never heard of before.  It could only take place in Uganda where a Central Bank embarked on massive coffee crop finance and it landed that institution into some problems that they had never recovered from and so I am very please, Mr. Chairman that we are coming up with a clearly defined role and there is no room for deviation.  Even when you want to deviate, they are restricting Bank of Uganda role into development financing and even then, it is limited as spelt out in the new provision. Since time is running out, I will end by emphasizing this point, that that point is made in paragraph 32 and it says: the bank shall maintain a reserve of external assets of at least equal to four weeks import requirements of the country consisting of any or all of these foreign exchange reserves.  Now, what is the implication of this? 

The implication is that for example, today, our import bill is about a billion dollars a year. If you are going to manage as Governor of the Bank, this bill is saying, you should at any one time make sure you have four weeks worth of foreign exchange reserves.  At that level, it is estimated at about 80 million dollars at the present moment.  Now, in my judgement - and this is the point I am ending with.  It makes a lot of common sense to write this here but I can assure you, if tomorrow our economy did not live up to foreign exchange inflows, the Governor would have the biggest difficulty and therefore, the whole process of management of our economy; you can talk in terms of stabilisation policies, in terms of inflation, in terms of foreign exchange rates and so on. At the end of the day, it is the ability of Government to be able to have foreign exchange inflows and essentially, this must be from our exports. 

I will end by emphasizing the fact that today we are able to write this and live with it because we are able to tap a number of multi-national resources from friendly countries and multi-national institutions but from what we read around us, from our neighbouring countries, I can assure your, when your economy is dependent on this foreign exchange inflow from friends, from international organisations, it is no basis for having a stable economy. The answer today as we pass this bill, is for us to resolve within the next five, eight years to reverse our economy so that our exports can earn enough foreign exchange as to maintain a stable currency and ensure adequate reserves of foreign exchange.  I support the Bill. 

MR. A. SIBO (Nominated Member): I rise to support the Bill and in supporting the Bill, I would like to make the following observations, and I specifically wish to appeal to this House to give the necessary independence that the Bank of Uganda has to have if it has got to carry out its functions.  The Minister has told us that the purpose of the Bill is to make the Central Bank more independent.  This is, I think, a case of too little, too late. The little independence, which the Bank of Uganda had under the present law disappeared with the end of the first Governor’s contract.  Since then, the law has remained on paper. It is not so much the content of the law that matter but the political willingness in the capacity to implement the law.  The independence of the Bank of Uganda has very much depended on the politics of the day. During the UPC, we heard that letters of credit were being opened in the President’s Office.  

We heard sometimes that invoices were being approved in the State House.  Even today during NRM Government, it has often been difficult for the Central Bank to run its show.  Of course we have heard of certain wishes of printing of money and releasing it to the public in circulation and thereby making it difficult for the Central Bank to stabilise our monetary policies.  Indeed, if it was not the tough arm twisting of IMF and the World Bank, the current monetary stability and the revolutionary reduction of inflation we have had from 26 to 9 per cent within a matter of six months for instance, this would have been impossible.  This, therefore, requires high degree of discipline on the part of government.  It is to be noted that the independence that the Minister is purporting to be giving to the Bank of Uganda is I think being hopelessly polluted by clauses like 32 (2) and 49 of the Bill.  I wish to invite the Minister in fact to delete these provisions. As long as the Minister has powers to direct the Bank to provide services to government or to do any other thing in financial and monetary policies, that independence is non-existent.  Even the powers of appointment, are too polluted to be accepted. I wish particularly to refer you, Mr. Chairman, to certain provisions of the Bill.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, while appreciating the hon. Member’s fears about the interference of the Minister in terms of management of the Central Bank under section 32 and 49, I wish to observe that you could have a situation where also the Central Bank Governor on monetary policy management, we could land the country into problems. Therefore, I think on section 49 (2) while trying to establish that interference, it has also created another safe-guard in 49 (3) that while the governor should comply with the directive, however, the Minister will, in 15 days, present that directive to Parliament so that there is some greater consensus and understanding, so that that directive does not become counter-productive.

MR. SIBO:  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the information.

MR. BARIGYE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Allow me to give additional information that, while one appreciates the need for a measure of independence on the part of Bank of Uganda, in this Bill, if I read it correctly, there is no provision at all for the removal of the Governor.  Should he become absolutely impossible or work against the national interest - and I think in a country such as ours, where we are shaping new institutions and new ethics, it is very important to move gradually towards independence because even the Judiciary, which is the institution where we all recognise the greatest need for independence, there is a provision whereby judges can be removed. But in this case I am not aware of the provision whereby the Governor of the bank once appointed can ever be removed until his term expires.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.

MR. SIBO: I appreciate also that information but I imagine that hon. Member would probably have proposed an amendment in the Bill.  If he does not - if it is not provided for, then I suppose we shall - the usual principle that he who has power to appoint has power to disappoint.

I wish to refer you to some provisions of the Bill - of this provisions of this pollution if independence within the Bill.  Take for instance, Clause 8, which is the appointment authority.  Now the appointing authority here is the Minister and while, the Governor, the Deputy Governor, and the Secretary to the Treasury are appointments by the President.  The first two are appointments on the advise of the Cabinet and of course the initiator is the Minister.  Therefore, you have, in fact all I would say, all the whole board is really appointed by the Minister and it is for this reason that I have an occasion to propose an amendment in this Clause.

Secondly, another notorious one I think really is Clause 32 I think - 33 Subsection (2). ‘The bank shall render services to government as maybe, determined by the Minister.’ This is an open cheques, and you cannot say that the Minister, the bank shall provide services as directed by the Minister.  This is an open cheque and obviously this cannot be accepted.  Then the other one, another notorious one is a provision in which the Minister makes regulations to determine the salaries of everybody.  Now really, this is a very simple question.  I believe this is a matter for the board - even in simple other institutions, other companies, the board makes these rules.  It should not go to the Minister. He should not bother with himself with these simple things.  It only goes to show that it is an effort to try and control the bank. 

My second point, I would like now wish to turn to the relationship in the Treasury and Central Bank. This relationship must be carefully examined.  It also comes back to talking about the independence of the Central Bank.  The treasury is the spender of the money.  As long as the spender of the money is allowed to have a say in the amount to be available for spending, we have a serious problem.  The government spends and the Minister would like us to have him to decide on when he directs the incomes flowing into the economy.  The decline in the value of the currency is usually proportionate to the extent of the borrowing from the Central Bank and that is the cause of inflation.

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up please.

MR. SIBO: Yes, I am winding up Mr. Chairman.  That is why the monetary stability of any country depends on the government’s amount of control over the Central Bank.  The less the control the greater is the stability of the monetary policy.  Indeed, the investment potential of any country will in turn depend on the independence of the Central Bank.  The less the control the greater is the stability of the monetary policy.  Indeed, the investment potential of any country will in turn depend on the independence of the Central Bank.  I wish to end by coming back to what the Minister of Industry, Commerce, Cooperatives and Marketing has referred to in the independence of the Central Bank.  In some countries, he has mentioned the Federal Republic of Germany.  The independence of the Central Bank is enshrined in the Constitution.  Maybe we do not have to go as far as enshrining that independence in our constitution here but I think when we give the Central Bank that independence, let us stick to it and let us make sure that that independence remains with the Central Bank. Thank you very much.

MRS. MUGARURA (Women Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support this Bill and to thank the Minister for Finance and the former Minister for Finance for showing good performance that has resulted in the present economic growth. They have demonstrated that the Ministry can work comfortably with the board and parastatal. There is a good working relationship between the Ministry and the Bank of Uganda due to the openness, accountability and transparency, which is an obvious factor of management now, a feature that was missing in the past. 

So, the better performance in the economy and good relationship existing between the two, shows that other parastatals also can work so that we avoid unnecessary conflicts which we are seeing in other institutions.  To start on the Bill, I would like to comment on article No. 4.  In this article it states that, ‘the seal of the Bank shall be authenticated by the signatures of the Governor and the Secretary to the Bank’. 

Yesterday, some hon. Members; hon. Rwakakooko was asking about the fate of the Secretary and in article 29, it says that: there shall be executive directors who shall be appointed by the board to carry on supervisory functions over a number of departments as may be determined by the board. It has been necessary in order to continue improving the economy of this State to merge the former 15 departments of the Central Bank into 6 and under this arrangement, it has been found necessary by the board to merge the post of the Secretary to the Bank with the Executive Director - Administration. This decision was - we came to that decision because of the following reasons.  I am trying to make it clear to the Members because it was not clear.  We find that in most parastatals where there is conflict, the chairman of the parastatal is different from the managing director and sometimes the secretary to the board is different from the administrator in that institution.  

In the Central Bank, we have found that when the secretary of the Board is in charge of implementing the policies for the Board and if the departments have been merged and this secretary became the Executive Director in charge of administration, the Board found it necessary that to keep the same harmony, this Executive Director administration acts at the sametime as the secretary to the Board and it is a good working relationship.  So, I would like to appeal to the Minister to include it in this law.  I would like to comment on Article 30, part 11.  This Article talks about the external reserve of the Bank and it says that the Bank shall maintain a reserve of the Bank and it says that the Bank shall maintain a reserve of external assets at least equal to four weeks import requirement of the country consisting of any of the following and, I would like to talk about (a) gold coin or gold buying. You remember during the last Budget speech, the Minister had put a tax of 5 per cent as loyalty tax on gold transactions; and you remember that during this last financial year, the Government got a lot of proceeds from gold sales, which, in some cases act as a reserve asset for the Bank; because of the flows that were coming in and the percentage of good gold was falling, the bank found it necessary to import super equipment to detect all these problems.  And during that time, the time elapsed of about five months; the bank lost the market to private businessmen.  It has been found necessary in order to re-activate the business - it has been found necessary to lay off this loyalty 5 per cent tax on gold transactions.  And we are asking the Minister to have this effected because it is very important for the bank to join the business and compete favourably with other companies, this taxation of 5 per cent should be laid off.  

There is a need to improve the information system within the other banking institutions so that this unnecessary delay of cheques, which are deposited with other banks, can be shortened.  With these few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call up the Mover to wind up please.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would like to express my gratitude to hon. members for the support they have given to this Bill, for the very constructive debate that we have just witnessed.  I should try and reply in general.  First of all, the issue of the bank to be required to have its books audited within three months of the end of its financial year was raised by hon. Nkalubo.  His question was, what happens if the Auditor General cannot audit the books during that time?  My answer is that sometimes legislatures make this sort of law and the intention really is to keep the bank on its toes.  As you know, there has been times when the bank has not had its books audited for very, very long time, we are putting this Clause to impose a duty on that bank to ensure that on its part, it must do everything - be ready to ensure that the books are audited.  If, however, there is a good reason not that to happen, for instance, when the Auditor General cannot audit the books during that time, then it will not be the problem of the bank; it will be the problem of auditing.  So, we have - we should keep that Clause there to ensure that the bank at least does its duty.

Then, there is the issue of repetitiveness that has been raised for Clause 14 and Clause 51.  I would like to say that Clause 14 only talks about conditions of service of Members; and stops there. Clause 51, however, 51 (a) repeats in a sense, Clause 14, however, it goes far beyond that; so Clause 51 is really put there, unlike 14, to define the scope of by-laws and since by-laws are also mentioned under Section 14 in Clause 14.  This is why it is put here again.

Now, there is a question of the Board’s responsibility for management, in Clause 11 and 8.  This issue was raised that the Board should be left to be responsible only for policy and the management accepted from the Board as a determined policy.  I would like to say that if we look at Clause 8, the Chief Manager of that Bank - the two Chief Mangers of the bank, Governor and his deputy are themselves, part of the Board; and, therefore, here, we have got a fusion of responsibility, a fusion of policy making and also, general supervision for the management of the bank.  We, therefore, had this separated, then, it would have been proper for us to say, let the Board determine policy and leave the management do theirs, but here in this case of this bank, the management really is also part of the Board and the two go together.  And then, an issue was raised of Secretary of the Board.  I would like to say that, we are under Committee State and I intend to move a small Amendment to Clause 4; so that instead of the word their bank, if hon. Members will notice, there is the word there, bank under Clause 4; I shall put Board so that Secretary, to become secretary to the Board.

Now, an issue again has been made of Clause 5, (k); and I understand that hon. Manzi Tumubweine want to move an Amendment at Committee Stage, but he did not advert to this in his principle speech.  So, I think I better say something about it.  He is saying that the words where appropriate should be deleted.  he is saying we must give it general primary duty of the Central Bank for finance development in this country.  We had a long time to think about this in Cabinet and we came to the view that the Central Bank should not as a matter of course, keep on pumping funds into the economy as the Commercial Bank would do.  Because, if we allowed it to do general development financing, it may be very different from a Commercial Bank.  It will be very difficult for the Central Bank, therefore, to control the money supply and therefore, generally to control the economy. So this is why I say where appropriate, it should be able to intervene for purposes of developing an economy instead of development financing. But generally, however, it must not be the role of ..... to do so.

Now, Clause 24 (ii), some people may sound funny of coins - saying, coins are no longer necessary, I am not so sure; because if we look at 24, 24 (a), for instance.  This Clause reads like this, ‘coins issued by the bank if not tampered with, shall be legal tender for payments up to an amount not exceeding Shs.1,000/= for instance.  Now, a coin which is worth Shs.900/=, surely, you really cannot say that coin is useless.  It is legal tender.  What I am saying is this that, coins, the value of the coins depends on the issue to determine how much it is going to be.  One of these days, they might issue gold coins, and I shall see hon. Members, I think, scrambling for them. 

Now, then there is the issue of delay in clearing cheques. I have been told by the authority of the bank that the official clearing days are three days.  But that in some cases, for reasons of security, some commercial banks, delay the clearing up to seven days.  Reason, the underlying dishonesty, I am sorry to say, of some of our people.  Fraud, dishonesty, whatever, so the banks try and delay the payment of cheques for the reason; but generally, for the Bank of Uganda itself, it is three days.  However, for also in cases of UCB, for up country cheques, anything up to about 12 to 14 days is possible. I think it is because of distances rather than any other reason.  

However, generally, seven days for the Commercial Banks.  Now, this inflation, we are trying to deflate by refusing to pay our debts.  The hon. Deputy Minister for Finance, did speak on this yesterday and I just want to add that, under this current Budget, we budgeted for 32 billion shillings to be paid on a verified date and will be paid in cheque.  We have already paid out in cash Shs.15 billion to our creditors and Shs.17 billion in poor notes which is still got to run until maturity; and as soon as these run, they will also be cashed.  And, therefore, we are not doing very badly.  

Now, Clause 10, hon. Members, do try and look at Clause 10. Clause 10, letter (b). Here, are the qualifications for Directors.  A shareholder in any financial institution supervised by the bank.  I must say that we also in Cabinet, have all along been thinking about this that we came decidedly against having such people qualify to be directors.  You just imagine and I hate to mention some particular banks, but this is an open secret.  Supposing someone had been a bank director in Teefe Bank, would it have been very easy for such a person, maybe one to two or more of them to take the decision we took; or that the bank took? This is very difficult.  Some people are saying, let us have these people to clear their interests, but I am saying, why to bother?  How many Directors do you want here? About six or eight. From about 17 million people, we can get enough people who have not connection who have not - we do not want to get these people’s interests, you see; pulling them into opposite directions.  If someone has got some interests in the bank, let us just choose other people.  There are very many of them and I think they are competent. 

Now, the bank’s control over financial institutions.  It has been suggested this controls rather lax, you know some Members have said that but does the Central Bank pounce so speak on these banks as soon as they show any sort of signs of weaknesses? I will say that as a general rule, the Central Bank must lubricate the monetary system.  It must lubricate the financial system, and it must support the financial system as a general rule; that is its primary function.  It must not choke it; and therefore, it tends to encourage the banks, it ends to warm the banks, it tends, to help them, until of course, such time as it thinks it is just proper to call off this sort of tendering.  We, therefore, thought the Central Bank has been, I think right in not being too hard; because if it was too hard, it would become so hard, I want to tell you, that the financial system as I speak now, would have collapsed.  We must, therefore, be more careful how the central views of the Commercial Bank are treated by the Central Bank.  Then hon. Opio, I think it was him, who said that the debt management - that the public debt must be managed by the bank.  Well, maybe so, but the bank itself does not think so.  The reason is quite clear.  We incurred the debt, we pay the debt, we must therefore, keep our fingers on the pulse and therefore, we are taking over that responsibility.

Then, there is the question of customers’ Deposit Insurance scheme.  This is a very important factor, which I think we have to finish.  I will not tell you what will happen if Teefe, for instance, could not in the end rise up to its feet and be able to live.  But this is not an important aspect and the bank has already thought about it and the bank thought it is better to have a Clause of this nature, not under this one, but under the Bill which this House is going to debate - The Financial Institutions Bill.  It is ensuring customers deposit is fundamental if you are going really, first of all, to aviate the possible losses by the customers, should a bank really get in problems and also if you are going to create increased term confidence in the banking system.  Can the Governor be removed? Hon. John Barigye asked that question and I am glad my notice has gone to say not Learned Friend but this is just a technical term. The hon. Sibo, who I know is not a lawyer, but he really gave the right answer.  The general of this country is, that if you have got authority to appoint, you have authority also to fire.  

Now, I am about to finish, this general report. Let me get to the really tough one. The real tough one, is this one. It has been expressed very forcefully by hon. Opio, by hon. Sibo, okay, particularly those two: and hon. Sibo said the bank must be the initiator and implementer of monetary policy; and hon. Sibo says, ah, politicians, these politicians, they are going to make up the economy.  My first chance is that I have known Central Bankers, governors, have strong political views and I have known these people trying also, to manage the economy in such a way, as to suit their political views and this Government has taken the view that we cannot let the independence of the executives, so to speak, people not accountable to any one at all, to be able to have the final say on monetary policy.  This point, you see many Clauses mentioning with the approval of the Minister, why does this happen? The reason is this that this is the only body where we expect the country to hold Ministers responsible to it, through its elected representatives.  If you are going to have a Board Chairman, in our elect of the Board of some governor appointed somehow and you give him this power completely to initiate monetary policy, completely determine monetary policy, whatever the direction of it, whatever the circumstances in the economy - impossible.  We must come here, through the Minister for Finance and be questioned by you - by this Parliament.  By those representatives of the people  -(Applause)- must come here and give a hand and make sure that, this is the situation.  

So, we said, whatever the reasons, no and an emphatic no.  Incidentally, I want to say this that, the British in their wisdom I think since 1946, they have not changed this.  And that is Section 4 of the Bank of Uganda Act, goes further than what we have provided here.  It says something like this, ‘the Treasury may, after consulting the governor of the Bank of England, issue directives or directions in the public interest.  How do you define public interest? Terrible! Difficult word, but it is there.  And even recently, after this problem in the EEC - the monetary system, the new governor of the Bank of England was told under certain terms - you are seeking sort of independence, and I am indebted to hon. Kaijuka or that of federal system forget it.  What are we saying? We are saying; that we are here operating a different political system.  If, for instance, we had the American System, if we had systems of hearings and committees whatever then we can call in the Governor to come before Parliament and appear before these committees and say why did you do this and so - that is different.  Here however, we operate a system of the parliamentary executive.  In other words, the executing Parliament.  And here some Minister must be responsible for policy.  This is why we are saying monetary policy is just one of the other policies.  Defence Policy, Monetary Policy, Social policy; whatever, it must come to this House and be debated.  This is why we thought it is better to provide what we provide.  Now, Section 49; in Section 49, we said if a Minister should give such directive he must come here before you, so that he can examine the importance, the significance, the rightness of such directive.  Now you see this is the softening really from the British level which simply says, the Minister can give the Governor a directive in the public interest and that is the end of the matter.  And they will be able to run for sometime, and I think their economy is strong most times.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE BANK OF UGANDA BILL, 1993

(Clause 1, agreed to).

(Clause 2, agreed to).

(Clause 3, agreed to).

Clause 4

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move a small Amendment to Clause 4(1) so that the word “Bank” which appears there at the end reads “Board” and the Secretary to the Board.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Clause 5(k), I wish to propose that the words ‘where appropriate’, be deleted.  The purpose of this deletion is that the Central Bank in a third world country, in the developing country should participate at all times in economic growth and development programmes.  It does not necessary have to finance them, and it does not necessary have to participate financially, but should monitor and follow closely the growth and development programmes of the economy and should be able to advise and organise such other programmes that lead to and encourage and enhance development.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KASAIJA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  With respect to my Colleague hon. Manzi you see when we say appropriate, we are not in effect refusing the Bank of Uganda to participate in any economic growth or development programmes.  We are just saying that there are some projects or activities where the Bank of Uganda may not necessarily be required to come in.  For example, there are some projects with NGOs that you need just maybe to go and talk to the Minister or to the Secretary to the Treasury, but the Bank of Uganda may not necessarily be required to participate.  So, I would just request that my Colleague does retract, I think let us say, this Amendment so that the remains because I think this one there is no convincing somebody who is reading where appropriate do that you come in appropriately, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, I also, with due respect to my Colleague.  I think the operating word is in the opening of paragraph two (2), where I am not a lawyer - but where it says without prejudice to generate of the Sub-section, ‘the Bank shall’.  So, it leaves a room to the bank even with the word appropriate being applied.  I do not see any quarrel with it since you have qualified it is the opening paragraph under sub-section 2 of 5.  So, I would think that the Bill as it stands is adequate.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Well, Sir, I am sorry. I am disappointed, and I feel I have to oppose this.  Already said so before, if by participating by the bank participating, he means understands monitoring. What is going on?  Then I do not have much quarrel but it seems to me that it is on the printery.  The bank only has the time or the personnel later on expertise to the on monitoring the development, economic growth programmes.  The Ministry of Planning Economic Development Ministry of Finance and some other Ministries have got this capacity not the bank.
I understand the word to participate in development programme, it means to participate either in financing them or implementing them.  And I cannot see the Central Bank in this.  It won’t implement them when they do not have the people.

Secondly, it you let this be a matter of course, the Central Bank financing development programmes, each time the Central Bank injects funds in the economy.  It is creating additional funds, and it is creating money.  It will be very difficult the same Central Bank to check itself to be able also to ensure stability of the economy.  So, I oppose this Amendment.  

(Question put and negatived).

MR. WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Under 5(2) (k), Mr. Chairman, I would like the word after approval by the legislature to be included -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: 5(2)(k).

MR. WANENDEYA: Correct me, Mr. Chairman.  All that I need to be added is the word as approved by the legislature.  The reason for including that, is that if you take for instance, the pick-ups were given to the Members it might have not been in any of the procedures of government, but if a programme or if an activity is in the best interest of the country, then it could come before this august House and therefore, the measure could be approved, and therefore, the Minister would be given more responsibility, Mr. Chairman, thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, all credible development programmes must be approved by this legislature.  So, I oppose it.

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 5 as amended and agreed to).

(Clause 6 agreed to).

(Clause 7)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like the word at the end of Clause 7 decide as the board may decide to say approve by resolution.  This gives more credibility and it is included somewhere in the Bill with the words “approve” rather than decide.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, the manner of deciding is not the material.  So, I oppose this Amendment.

(Question on Amendment put and negatived).

(Clause 7, agreed to).

Clause 8

MR. SIBO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I propose that we amend Clause 8 by deleting the words shall be appointed by the Minister in 8(2).  Now, the reason for this - by replacing the Minister with President on advance of the Cabinet.  The reason for this, is that a Central Bank is a very, very important institution and it should be slightly differently treated from other parastatal organisations.  We know directors in other organisations are appointed by the Minister.

Secondly, I believe as we said that the Central Bank should have certain amount of independence I agree with the Minister that it should be independent but not so independent.  You know sometime back when the Central Bank was being opened, the President said, I create you to be independent, but not so independent.  And those is why I agree with the Minister, but let us give it a certain amount of independence.  And the Ministers influence in the appointment will be exercise in the cabinet.  I am aware that in appointing the board, Ministers do in fact a cabinet.  But I think, I would like to have this one specifically inserted as a requirement by the law.  Mr. Chairman, thank you.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, with due respect to hon. Sibo, I beg to oppose this Amendment.  for just two reasons, one, it has been a feeling of this House to increasing the reduced number of officials who were appointed by the President as a principal. (Applause)

Secondly, the Minister is more available to this Parliament than the President.  Therefore, I think the Minister easier held responsible for the activities of the Directors he appointed for legislature than the day we gave the President to account for their activities.  For these two reasons, I oppose the Amendment.

MR. KANYOMOZI: I also oppose the Amendment because of accountability. If the bank misbehaves or the Directors of the Bank misbehave, you can imagine us having to calla whole president to come and do accounting for the behaviour of the Directors. (Applause)  In fact, since the reporting procedure will be for the bank to report through the Minister responsible for finance, it would be improper for that Minister who is accountable for us, to have no say of those people who are holding that responsibility that he will have delegated to them. It is very difficult, if Directors were appointed by the President for the Minister of Finance to control them because he will not be the appointing authority.  Even to use hon. Sibo’s concept, the one who hires is the one who fires. Then I can see a problem in terms of accountability, and therefore, I would rather have the Minister who comes here regularly be responsible for the Board and accountable for the action they take.  I therefore, think that the hon. Member should accept the position of the present Bill.      

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 9

MR. WAMUSI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I am proposing a simple Amendment to Clause 9, by removing the word “all” and replacing it with the word ‘and’. The reason why I am saying this, that as a Clause stands, it means one qualifies to be a director but just being a Uganda citizen, that is all. And alternative one can have qualifications and be a Director without being a Uganda citizen.  So, I think we need to get the Uganda citizen Director.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: No, Sir, this is not economics.  No, I tell you why I say, no, because someone might be here say a resident, resident permit, permanent resident, who however is not a citizen but who has got capacity to serve in the Bank. So, if you say that and that, this able people be excluded.  This is why we are leaving this one or, so that people who are not citizens but otherwise capable of serving can be, you know, should be allowed to serve.

(Question put and agreed).

(Clause 9 as amended agreed to).

(Clause 10)

DR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to move, Mr. Chairman, that Clause 10 be amended so that sub-Clause 1(b) is deleted.  That is a Clause that states that, ‘a shareholder of any financial institution supervised by the bank.’ It is my opinion that this Clause is very, very restrictive and also prohibits Ugandans being encouraged to invest as shareholders in financial institutions.  Because it means that we must forever look for someone who has never invested in a financial institution. 

I would be persuaded by the arguments of the Minister if he had said that director in financial institution is prohibited.  But a shareholder, that is really touching so many people and encouraging so many from investing in banks and financial institutions.  The law has hitherto them that if you have an interest in some subject which is going to be discussed as in this case, you will disclose your interest.  And that to me is very sufficient.  People who will be appointed on the Board of the Central Bank will be men of proven integrity, and they are not likely to confuse their interest with that of the Bank.

Secondly, Sir, I think that - in the example which the hon. Minister gave of Teefe Bank, there could be regulations within the bank to say that where a man or rather a member of the Board has shares in an institution. Whose activities the bank is questioning, then he should withdraw from the proceedings when that matter is to be considered.  That would be sufficient safeguard. I, therefore, move that this Clause be deleted from the Clause, I be to move, Sir.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, there is even a further complication. Because even if you do not have shares in financial institution, you may have shares in another institution since we are going now opening capital ownership, and that institution might be the one which has an interest in the financial institution.  Then you are indirectly also, a beneficiary of that institution, unless we say shareholders will never be Directors in the Bank.  Because even restricting it to shareholders, it does not hold.  

So, I would like the Minister to be persuaded by the argument that we delete that Clause and we allow people to declare the interest when they come on the Board, and when the issues affecting those institutions are being discussed, they withdraw.  (Applause) That will do the ting. 

 MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I accept that, Sir. (Laughter)

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 10 as amended agreed to).

(Clause 11, agreed to).

(Clause 12, agreed to).

(Clause 13, agreed to).

(Clause 14, agreed to).

Clause 15

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I propose that at the end of Clause 15 sub-Section 2, Mr. Chairman, we should add the phrase, “to ensure adequacy to the operations of the bank”, as a way of making it quite redundant for Clause 15 (2)(5), Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Clause 15 sub-Section 2, isn’t it?

MR. WANENDEYA: Correct, Mr. Chairman.  Because it would make it quite clear and sub-Section 5 is almost saying the same thing.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, if we accept the Amendment, we read as follows: “The authorised capital has been increased by the resolution of the legislature to ensure adequacy to the operations of the bank” as I said before the operations of the bank; and I really think that this is obvious, it is superfluous and I think it is -(inaudible)- and it is unnecessary roughly to expand beyond legislature.  So, I oppose the Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 15, as amended agreed to).

Clause 16

MR. NDEGE: Clause 16, gives the Board unlimited power so I am persuading the Minister to add that after from time to time, but not below mandatory statutory reserve fund levels.  I did not have the time to talk to the Minister; there is usually a mandatory - statutory reserve level when you make a profit for any company. So, this - if we leave it as it is, the Board may decide not to transfer anything to the reserve fund.  What I am trying to say is that, it should not follow below that level 16.  But the general fund of the bank that shall be determined by the Board from time to time.  I am saying that, we add that it should not be below normal statutory reserve fund regulations.  Because there is a normal statutory reserve mandatory that if a company makes a million dollars, 20 per cent of that must go to a reserve fund, and this is what I am trying to employ.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The point is that the reserve fund of a bank is increased or decreased depending on the economic activity of the country.  And, therefore, when hon. Ndege thinks of the minimum statutory requirement, I have yet to know how much it is in any country - as to the percentage, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you supporting the Amendment or not?

MR. WANENDEYA: I am opposing in brief, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. KAIJUKA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am also opposing the Amendment because I think my hon. Friend will appreciate that apart from the statutory Reserve Ratios, the Cash liquidity ratios that are maintainable, financial institutions with Bank of Uganda, for example.  What we are talking about, when you talk of normal legal requirements, they are now being spelt out afresh. In other words, there are no others other than what we are talking about here, and other than the General Reserve Hand that you read Section 16 with Section 17 and then you will understand the New Legal Requirements as per new Bank of Uganda Act.  In other words, I think you were confused by assuming that the normal, what we call, ‘below normal Statutory Requirements’ they are now spelt out.  You read Section 16 and 17 and you will be able appreciate it will be superfluous or unnecessary to make the Amendment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Clause 16 as amended and negatived).

MR. WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would propose that under Clause 16, after the end of the sentence line two, ‘from time to time,’ I would add the words: ‘after approval by the Minister.’ The reason over here, is that the Bank itself just in case the Directors and officials maybe against Government Policy, then it would give the Minister some kind of guiding hand whereby he has got to approve, but he is not going to stand in the Banks.  So, I hope the Minister will accept this because it puts Government Policy into good perspective.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to oppose the Amendment for the simple reason that we are trying to give some decree of independence and autonomy within the Bank irrespective of the politics.  In other words, the government that has appointed the Governor and the Board may go off and another Government comes and the Board and Governor continues without the Government trying to use their offices to inflate the economy for their own political ends.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, the research of distrust of Ministers that I do not know how we can govern this country.  But I want to oppose the Amendment although it was possibly in the favour of Ministers, to this reason that general reserve fund is instituted for the purposes of helping the economic entity to have sound economic basis - financial basis.  So, you can see that under 17 (3), it reads: ‘The Board may determine that the whole of the net profit of the Bank be paid into the consolidated fund if at the end of the Financial Year the amount of the money in the General Reserve Fund is twice or more than the amount -(Inaudible)- in that capital.’ The reason here is that, once the Bank wants it,  is financially okay. Then after certain level, it says; ‘okay, now we can pay the money into the consolidated fund.’ In other words, the fund is there for them to ensure that they are financially sound.  With that reason let them decide themselves what the proper level for the Bank to be in the financial sound rather than for the Minister himself says - because the Minister might say, ‘I want the money - the Consolidated Fund for my budget.’  Naturally, so I support the Amendment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Clause 16 as amended and negatived).

Clause 17

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that Clause 17 (4) be amended by deleting ‘after consultation with the Minister’ as was appearing in the first line of the sub-section.

The reason is that I do not see the Minister who is the borrower accepting that money should be deducted from the profits that the Bank would be paying to the Consolidated Fund.  Secondly, since the Minister will not be in any case, expecting this money to assist his Budget, he should not be a party to the decision as to whether the Bank should deduct this money - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Sibo, we are on Clause 17(4) but I do not see it in your Amendment; in your Amendment it is not included.

MR. SIBO:  No, my Amendment - there is misprint, it is put  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not here, hon. Sibo, please.

MR. SIBO: It is misprinted, Mr. Chairman.  It is put 14 (4). It should be 17 (4). So, as I was saying, the Minister should really not be a party to whether the Bank should deduct what the Government owes it when it is paying this money to the Consolidated Fund.  We should accept this I think, with ease.

THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE: Mr. Chairman, I am accepting this.  You see, the distinction here is between entitlements unclaimed.  If you know this section says, the bank may, after consultation, the Minister will retain from money payable into; and if the money is payable into the Consolidated Fund then the Treasury is entitled to that money.  Then we read on under this section any amount of money at the Board may determine in satisfaction or reduction of any amount of money due to the Bank from the Government. It would have said, the first part is entitlement as of right, the other one is a claim; and a claim as you know, might be denied.  And I think there is really room here for negotiation for consultation.  So, I think it should left as it is.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 18

MR. SENDAULA: Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Mover under this unity of currency whether the cents are ignored altogether or done away with because according to him, in 18 (1), the unity of currencies are being the shilling and I think the shilling is divided in unities of cents.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  A shilling is a unity a cent is a fraction of that unity.  So, our unity is a shilling; and sub-division of that unity is a different matter.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 19 agreed to).

(Clause 20 agreed to).

(Clause 21 agreed to).

(Clause 22 agreed to).

(Clause 23 agreed to).

(Clause 24 agreed to).

(Clause 25 agreed to).

(Clause 26 agreed to).

(Clause 27 agreed to).

MR. WANENDEYA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that we cross out the word ‘Cabinet’ in the third line and the words, ‘Board after short-listing three names sent to the Minister as per interview results in answer to an advertisement’. We have been going away from the idea of just getting people to be appointed but rather that they should be interviewed first and that there should be an advertisement in the newspapers.  So, what would happen in this case is that the Board will receive applications and this has been done with Uganda Airlines and some other Parastatals whereby invitations are invited and Board short-lists and interviews candidates after which the names are sent to the responsible Minister and then the responsible Minister would later on sent those three names out of the lot to the President.  Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move.

MR. KARUHANGA: I rise to support the Amendment.  I think it is high time that we got people to do the jobs they want to do.  In this proposal the man who is appointed does not want to do the job.  He hears on the radio that Lt. Brig. Kyaligonza has been made Governor.  I think the person should be interested in the job and the so interest, he must make a move towards that interest and prove that he is interested by applying for the job.  And the job should be advertised so that all Ugandans have an equal opportunity if they are so interested to stand and be counted for this job if they are interested in it; by making an application to become Governor of the Bank if the position is vacant.  After that the Board or maybe the Minister - I do not know who is going to receive this in Amendment by hon. Wanendeya.  I do not mind if it is even the Minister for Finance who receives these applications, interviews with his team, short-lists, takes cabinet an then the appointment is made.

MR. ASIKU:  Mr. Chairman, I also stand to support the Amendment. This is a simple theory.  There has been a lot of complaints to appointments - to some posts - where there is no competition no chance for other Ugandans.  A man responsible if he favours you - that is upon to one - could easily be his relative where his partisan is very common.  To give all Ugandan equal chance, let them compete for the post that exists and that is the honest system that this House stands for approval.  I very strongly support the Motion.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I rise to oppose the Amendment.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to differentiate a Central Bank from an ordinary commercial bank.  The Law we are passing here is not ordinary law in the sense that we are dealing with a Central Bank that one may call the Bank of all banks. Therefore, it is so strategic in the economic financial development of the country; and in fact, the office of the Government in some countries is so strengthened that the Governor of the Central Bank attends Cabinet meetings.  It is a very strategic political appointment and, therefore, why I do accept that for the Managing Director of UCB and of Uganda Development Bank, of all these others, you can compete in the ordinary sense but for the position of a Central Bank Governor, this is most unusual.  If I can just give you examples of the American Reserve Bank in the British situation or Indian situation, which is very close to us and it is the President; it is the Head of State or the Executive whose advice we normally get from the Cabinet who does the appointment.  I think what we are mixing issues here. It is a situation in which the Governor or the Central Bank is supposed to be appointed by the Chief Executive of the country but may go through some form of vetting by a Parliament.  I think this is what is taken care of in the proposed Constitutional Assembly where, for certain political appointments, the President has to be assisted by a certain Body. So, let us not mix the two where the Governor of the Central Bank may be nominated or appointed unvetted by another political organisation.  This question of people being going for interview and so on, can apply for an ordinary commercial bank; not for the Central Bank, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Governor of the Central Bank is the most important appointment in the financial and economic amendment of the country.  If any Government is to succeed, it needs the assistance of that Central Bank Governor.  It is, therefore, important that that Governor is appointed after taking into considerations not only the economic and financial ability, he has but also the commitment that he has - not only country that even into the Government – ‘to call a spade a spade.’  Otherwise, if he mismanages the monitory system, the whole Government can even fall.  It is, therefore, important that this position be left to the President to appoint after consulting his Cabinet and maybe vetted by the Legislature if need be, but he should be a type of person that will help the Government move monitorially in order to contain the economic situation.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I do not even think that there will much better than to hon. Members to just oppose this Amendment.  You see someone is really going to look after the Reserved Funds of the whole country.  You have to look into integrity - the capacity - the commitment.  You just like saying, “let us have the post of commander of army be applied for.” It is difficult.  So, you do not want to simply say, ‘I like that job, it is falling vacant, it be the Governor’ It will not do.  You must oppose this Amendment.

(Clause 28 as amended negatived).

Clause 28

MR. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I propose an Amendment in Clause 28, Sub-section (ii), (iii), by simply saying that that Clause should be deleted.  My reasons there, Sir, that the President already has powers to appoint any Ugandan or anyone to be the Governor or Deputy Governor and this closes him to be restrictive. Secondly, even on Legal grounds it is very bad drafting because the qualification -(Interruption)

(Clause 28 as amended and agreed to).

(Clause 28 agreed to).

Clause 29

MR. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move that Clause 29 be amended and sub-section (iii) of that Clause be deleted.  That sub-section, states that, ‘while making appointment’, and sub-section (i) and (ii) of the Board shall ensure that a good number of Ugandans are appointed in both categories.  I think this is very clumsy because, Sir, all Ugandans and this House assumes that the appointments of these people will be of Ugandans and Uganda citizens. This Clause seems to imply that we give government power to appoint non-Ugandans and I do not think that such should be put in he Law even if today there is necessity for appointing non-Ugandans, we are negotiating for the future and in future we hope only Ugandans will fulfill these positions and therefore, it will be bad law to legislate the transition of period.  So, I move, Sir, that this Clause be deleted. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I have a little, Sir, because of what he has just said.  He accepts that using transition period, there is maybe a need for non-Ugandans to be appointed in that Bank; and he knows it - he accepts it.  He does not tell us for how long this transition is going to last.  If, therefore, he accepts this Amendment, it means, even during that time - period of need cannot be called upon the uses of this - of those people; and therefore -(interruption)

MR. KANYEIHAMBA: Point of Clarification. Mr. Chairman, if we look at the provisions of this Bill, with the exception of the Governor, Deputy Governor and the Board of Directors there is no probation against engaging expatriates; and the present Law does not stop us from engaging them administratively.  So, really there is no need to legislate for them.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: No, I have nothing. I will leave.  I have accepted.  (Laughter) 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 29 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 30 agreed to).

(Clause 31 agreed to).

Clause 32

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to move that in Clause 32 where it says, ‘The Bank, advise the President whenever the target could reserve’ Clause 32(ii) is likely to be violated. They report to the President; I wish this report could be to the Minister so that the Minister takes it up in camera and the President, rather than them by-passing the Minister and report to the President.  Mr. Chairman. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Concede, Sir. (Laughter)

(Clause 32 as amended and agreed to).


(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 33

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an Amendment to this Clause to the effect that the whole of the present 33 (iii) goes, and is replaced by the following - (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Clause 33, please.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Clause 33(iii) as it stands that it should be deleted and replaced by the following:  The Government shall seek advice from the Bank on monetary policy and shall be the duty of the Bank to formulate such monetary policy and advise Government accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 33, sub-section (iii) be amended as proposed by the Mover.

(Clause 33(iii) as amended agreed to).

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 34 agreed to).

(Clause 35 agreed to).

Clause 36

MR. WANENDEYA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Clause 36 should include the words ‘other Financial Institutions’ under where it states that, ‘the Bank may participate’ in the development of financing through the re-financing ‘and then it goes on 36 (a):’ the refinancing facilities to commercial banks and that is where it just ends.  It should be only commercial banks.  I am thinking of Insurance Companies whereby people can apply for Loans, for say, homes or building other social services so that it should not be restricted to only commercial banks.  So, building society should be included; Urban Authorities if need be, but Mr. Chairman, I am thinking of financial institution.  Thank you.

MR. MAYENGO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While I would like to agree with hon. Wanendeya in principle.  I am wondering why he does not simply say, ‘the financing facilities to financial institutions’ which then will include everything.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  When we look at the interpretation given, the word, ‘Bank’ in his interpretation refers to Bank of Uganda.  So, the word, ‘Bank’ -(Interjection)- Yes, I think, it should be financial institutions and not commercial banks.  Once we use the definition for the word, ‘Bank’ refers to Bank of Uganda.  So, I think, it could be only, ‘financial institution’, it would be better.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to propose that Amendment because of the fact that we already know that the next Bill on Financial Institutions is going to include all Institutions under supervision of the Central Bank and therefore, will be part and parcel of the whole Financial system while not what it has been before; and therefore, Financial Institution will be covered in one group.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the Amendment.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  Given that the hon. Wanendeya has accepted the word, ‘Financial Institutions’ I think it is in the interest of the Central Bank and in the interest of this country that that financing activity covers the variety including, now in this case, because they come under Development Bank and all the others.  So, if it is Financial Institutions, we are better covered and the Minister I am sure hint the Central Bank in supervising these Institutions anyway.  They are within the reach of the Central Bank to supervise and it will know where our money will be going.  So, I think the Minister should concede.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I cannot concede. The reason is this; a Central Bank is not in the business for financing activities generally speaking.  A Central Bank is a Bank of the last resort where commercial banks can go and discuss a paper, and get some solution in financing.  So, when we say that where appropriate the Central Bank may also participate in development financing where insurgency situation which are not really very usual.  If you are going to expand the activities of this financing - to include building society; to include insurance companies; to include fighting institution, is going to make the work of the Central Bank much more difficulty.  It will not be able to reunify into all these.  These are reasons for financial institutions to be able to monitor and function.  This is why you are limiting these relationships the commercial system to the commercial banks rather than all the other Financial Institutions. 

MR. LUBEGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  A careful reading of Clause 36 will indicate or so, that the word ‘may’ is being used, there is no mandatory obligation on the part of the Bank to finance.  The word, ‘may’ I think, caters for the fears that the Minister may have and I consider myself the proposal that we use financial institutions rather than commercial banks. (Applause) 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, if the hon. Member is using the word, ‘may’ to mean that the Bank did not have to do it.  Then I must say, that has not to be changed at all.  I would like in fact to be thankful to the hon. Deputy Minister here.  I want to refer to Clause 38.  I think, Clause 38 comes nearest to what you really want to have effected.

Cooperation with Financial Institutions. I think, this really, covers what the Mover of the Amendment has in mind.  It does not. Then when I oppose, it is up to you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 36 be amended as proposed by hon. Wanendeya.

(Clause 36 as amended and agreed to).

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 37 agreed to).

Clause 38

MR. MAYENGO: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move a small amendment to Clause 38.  The Clause seeks to ensure that the Bank cooperates with Financial Institutions to promote four things.  One of those is to be to insure high standards of conduct.  It does not say how the Bank may ensure its high standard of conduct.  I want to suggest that we add a sub-section (e) which says, ‘to vet all Directors of Financial Institutions before advising the Minister grant or not to grant operating licenses. I have been cautioned a little bit by those who know what exactly is in the coming Bill on Financial Institutions.  However, they are not saying that it is wrong to vet Directors.  They are only saying that it is already mentioned in the Bill that has not been passed yet.  As a matter of precaution, we are looking at this one here; and we want to ensure that this is done here.  The reasons are so well known.  The Bank itself is complaining that fifty per cent of all the money in country is under mattresses.  Why is it that people have doubts about banks? They do have doubts in the banks because some of the banks have directors who are questionable.  Imagine for a simple reason, that a man working with Bank of Uganda, maybe thrown out or expelled because of not having done well, but having done the other way round.  He is then hired as a Chief Accountant for the Co-operative Bank after a little while. People really that if he continues as Chief Accountant of the Co-operative Bank, it will definitely go down and he is expelled accordingly.   Then he becomes a Director of a private bank. What reliability can we assume that private bank to have?  Mr. Chairman, I propose that the Central Bank vets the Directors and that although it might be talked in the coming Bill, we include it in this one as well.  

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I stand to support this additional inclusion in the Bill.  For two reasons: The local citizens who are involved in the Financial Industry are well known and some of them have the records and they could have acquired these monies through a certain record.  I think it is very important for the Central Bank with that to protect Ugandans against those fellows.  Two, foreigners who are being invited to come and invest here some of them have made their reputation very well known outside and it is very important that their reputation or nationality is taken care of by the Central Bank if it is going to be a supervising Bank.  Let it supervise from the beginning not when it is too late.  I so a film of a certain former Ugandan, maybe, now current Ugandan, who was running Financial Institution in London and all over the place; and his Empire collapsed like a pack of cords and the reasons behind the collapse were because he had not vetted. I have seen with my own eyes a bank in my village - a building society called ‘Equator Building Society’ which wipes our peasants. Now, if those things are not looked at early, we stand a very big risk.  Why should we at this time allow our people to be a playing field?  Let the bank take responsibility, grant a license and then take responsibility for it.  So that when I put my money in a bank and I come then they say we have closed the bank. We are only keeping deposits then not withdrawals like it is happening in Teefe, then I go to the Central Bank.

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I just want to inform hon. Karuhanga, who is a good guy as a lawyer when we make these laws how it will sound that the same provisions governed by the same Institution are talking about the same thing.  For example, without doubting hon. Mayengo’s fears that maybe next week may not arrive to have the Financial Bill.  It will say if Members approve that, ‘Factors to be considered when granting a license for Financial Institutions. The Central Bank shall, in considering an Application for a license under Section 5 of this Statute required to be satisfied to (i). The Financial condition and history of the Applicants (ii) The nature of the business of the Applicants. (iii) The competence and integrity of the proposed management. (iv) The adequacy of the applicant’s capital structure, earning prospects, Business plans, financial plans, (v) The convenience and needs of the community to be served whether public interest will be served by the granting of the license’.  

So, I am saying these two Bills are concerning Central Bank.  Before these people even get the license - because now the Amendment of hon. Mayengo proposes that already Institutions exist and in collaborating with that Institutions one of the responsibilities is to scrutinise their Directors.  However, this provision says that even before that Institution comes into being, this must be done.  So, I think the Financial Institutions make sufficient provision for fears of hon. Mayengo since the two laws concern the same Institution. (Applause)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to plead with the hon. Mover to withdraw this Amendment in the interests of the economy; Economy of legislation.  We consolidate legislation sometimes.  You find the Clause in this one, and then you have another Clause in the next coming one.  I should think that if this is going to be done, next week into such an extent that as it is being read here, why do you want also this thing to appear in another Bill.  If, however, you feel so pessimistic like some men have buttons in their trousers, they have buckles, then, of course, I will accept it but I think it is not really necessary. (Applause)

(Clause 38, as amended agreed to).

(Clause 39 agreed).

(Clause 40, agreed).

(Clause 41 agreed).

(Clause 42 agreed).

(Clause 43 agreed).

Clause 44

MR. T. WAMUSI: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move a small Amendment on Clause 44 by deleting the words ‘or an Auditor appointed by him to act on his behalf so that it becomes mandatory for Auditor General to audit the accounts of Central Bank.’ The reason why I am saying so, is that recently we had cases where some Boards have had adverse reports from their Auditors - outside Auditors and instead of accepting the Audit report, they have flown them back requesting them to reconsider so that reports can come which are more favourable.  The second point is that some time back when the present Auditor General was Secretary to Treasury, and therefore, Member of the Board of Bank of Uganda, he did convince the Board to have Auditor General audit the books but as soon as the Auditor General had gone to audit the books of the Bank of Uganda, and there had started to come about some poor accountability, the Board stopped the Auditor General to go ahead because the present Act empowers the Board to appoint their own Auditors and went ahead and appointed their Auditors to audit the books; which means they were trying to cover something up.  So, I am proposing that we should leave the Auditor General mandatory to audit Bank of Uganda because he also audits the Ministries of government who get funds from Bank of Uganda.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I would accept it, Sir, except that the hon. Minister would know that sometimes the Auditor General is so busy really and he has got to sum out some of his work.

(Clause 44, as amended and agreed to).

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 45

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, the ‘may’ is not obligatory, unless I am told otherwise.  So, I would like it amended so that it becomes ‘shall.’ The reason is that it then becomes more mandatory.  That is in sub-section one of the Bill, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, hon. Wanendeya’s Amendment is wrong and I think he has not read the section properly.  It reads, Clause 45(1); ‘The Bank shall’ the word ‘may’ is circumstantial but it is mandatory.

(Clause 45 agreed).

(Clause 46 agreed).

(Clause 47 agreed).

(Clause 48 agreed).

Clause 49

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an Amendment to Clause 49 as it stands to ‘remove the present 49(2) which reads: ‘The Minister may, with the approval of Cabinet and after consultation with the Governor issue directions to the Bank as he may consider to be necessary in the public interest.’ I am removing that because it is strong and I want to alter it down a bit and I want to replace it by the following or with the following: ‘If after consultation with the governor, the Minister is of the opinion that the policies being pursued by the Bank are not adequate for or conducive to the achievement of the functions of the bank, the Minister may, with the approval of the cabinet by directive, in writing determine the specific policy to be adopted by the bank.  The bank shall there upon give effect such policy while the directive remains in force; and then also to add 49(3) to qualify the other one: for any directive issued, under sub-section (2), hereof ‘The Minister cause to be laid before the Legislature within 15 sitting days after he has issued such directive to the bank a copy of such directive’ Sir, I beg to move.

MR. E. KARUHANGA:  I stand to support the Minister and to thank him for making this Amendment that was as in the whole Bill.  However, I think, there is some mistake in 49 (3) where he has added sub-section (2) and ignored sub-section (1). So, I think the reading should really be ‘for any directive issued under this section 49’ because if he does not do that, and he only leaves himself to what he has amended (20 and (3) and leaves (1) standing, he defeats the entire purpose. Therefore, the question is for the whole section 49.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I accept.

(Clause 49 as amended agreed to).

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 50, agreed to).

Clause 51

MR. SIBO:  I would like to propose an Amendment to Clause 51 by deleting the approval of the Minister.  I consider that the terms and conditions of service for the staff really is the responsibility of the Board and the Minister should not get involved and I think the Minister should not have difficult in this.  

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to oppose the Amendment. (Applause)  Because the bye-law, the Minister is responsible for this House and if you look in the other Legislations we have passed normally the Minister is supposed to change by an instrument which we have not give to him.  So, I think, it is important that the approval of the Minister in this Bill is effected.

(Clause 51 agreed to).

Clause 52

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I propose that we add Sub-section (3) to Clause 52, and the proposal is that Inter-bank’ letters of credit are not confirmed within 30 days from the opening date.  The reason is that -(Interjection) Yes, they say that Mr. Matthias Ngobi opened a letter of credit in Uganda Commercial Bank and it took him more than six months to get the letter confirmed and the reason is that the Central Bank in the United States sat on confirming that letter credit for sometime.  This is a loophole within the banking system.  If somebody wants to use your money he may not pay the money quickly and, therefore, everyday that passes -(Interruption) 

MR. KAFUMBE MUKASA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Wanendeya not to labour this problem. Bank of Uganda no longer has a responsibility to buy letters of credit.  If a Commercial Bank goes and buys dollars from the Central Bank, that bank establishes a letter of credit with its corresponding bank.  Formerly, the dollars used to belong to Bank of Uganda, so there were delays.  Now, if a Commercial Bank buys the dollars, it is their money; so it is between them and their customers.  They can handle this matter; we do not have to bring it to the law governing the Central Bank.

MR. WANENDEYA: Mr. Chairman, while the situation has been somewhat changed, the whole position remains whereby a customer or a Commercial Bank maybe, punished because his letter of credit is not confirmed in time.  So, if this is included in the law -(Interruption)

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I oppose the Amendment. (Applause)  This section deals with offenses.

(Clause 52 as amended, negatived).

(Clause 52 agreed to).

Clause 53

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  I want here to introduce the Board also power to initiate changes. The present 53 only gives the Minister after consulting the Governor to make regulations for the better carrying out into effect of the provision of this Statute.  However, Sir, I would like to introduce another fact; that is to say - the board itself may also of its own Motion initiate change. So, it should read: ‘The Board or Minister may after consultation with the other party make regulations generally for the better carrying into effect the provisions of this statute.’  I beg to move, Sir.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the Minister’s Amendment but I think that the wording - the English is not correct.  To say; ‘the other party’ leaves the matter very vague.  So, it should be ‘having consulted each other’ because people consulting are the Minister and the Board; but when you say; ‘other party’ it introduces in some thing third which is not there.  So, I hope that the Minister would accept my oral Amendment that instead of saying the ‘other party’, it should be ‘each other’.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to caution the Minister that this Amendment is very bad because it does not finally rest power with anybody and there is likely to be inbuilt a conflict whereby the Board issues, the Minister issues and there is a contradiction.  In the first one, the Minister had the overall power; consultation means that you consult but you have no final power.  The Board may consult the Minister; the Minister has the final say or the Minister may consult the Board, and the Board has the final say.  In this case, you are saying they consult each other and when there is a conflict, nobody has the final say.  That way, this Amendment is not better than the first one that was already there.  I, therefore, reject. 

MR. KABUGO:  I do not think the Minister should labour on making this Amendment because if he was properly advised, and revisited his standing instruction that goes back to 1968; you will find that all that he is trying to look for now, is already provided in those by-laws which operate in the Bank of Uganda.  It is a new law but at the same time there are there to guide them.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Since, under this Clause what is sought is the consultation with the bank as the authority.  I think the Minister who is the Mover is a lawyer; we want to accept that the Minister may, after consultation with the bank; because the authority rests between the bank and the Ministry, so that he can have the powers for making subsidiary regulations which is sought here.  So, it should be consultation with the bank; so that we do exactly - the law will be clear as an authority and the law ought to be clear rather than ‘mandigism.’

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I have not quite followed what the hon. Obwangor wants me to do; whether he wants me to keep the present section but instead of ‘Governor’ put ‘Bank’. So, you want me to keep the present one, replace Governor with Board or Bank?  If this is the feeling of the - it is a general feeling of the hon. Members, I shall concede with that.  I will just try to be a bit more democratic and because sometimes the Minister might be busy, might not have detected the need to make a regulation, then I see the Board itself initiating the need to make some regulation.  This is why I am putting the Board there as well.  If you leave it for the Minister then at all times, the only initiator of any change in the administration.  So, this is why I want to introduce also the Board because the Board may itself be able to see the need for a change. 

THE CHAIRMAN: So, what is the Amendment now?

 MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Then I withdraw my Amendment, then leave the present section but cross out ‘Governor ‘and replace it by ‘Board’.

(Clause 53 as amended agreed to).

(Clause 54, agreed to).

THE SCHEDULE

(The Schedule agreed to).

THE TITLE

(The Title agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. J. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
REPORT STAGE

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. J. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, the Bank of Uganda Bill, 1993 and passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION
FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. J. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the report that the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, The Bank of Uganda Bill, 1993, be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Bill read a Third Time and passed).

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting. We adjourn until Tuesday next week at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 27th April, 1993). 

