Tuesday 24th April, 2001

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called in order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you observe from the Order Paper, we have a lot of Business still pending for us; at the same time we must not shut our eyes to the obvious, that very soon you will be involved in activities that are relevant to you and to the future of this House and the country as a whole. 

Therefore, very soon it will be necessary to have a break, so that you can go and concentrate on some of these activities. But, with this kind of business, which we still have pending and as you may notice even today we are going to have a Bill laid for the First Time, which pre-supposes that we shall have to deal with it before we expire some time in July. 

It is necessary I think that, for at least this week and maybe next week, we commit ourselves to dealing with the pending work of Parliament, so that maybe next week we see what to do with the future activities.  So, please I am appealing to those present, those who are not here to at least attend Parliament and the other day so that you can facilitate the Chair to decide, when you can have a break to do on and concentrate on those activities. I thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recall that when we laid the body of the late Akii Bua here, hon. Mondo Kagonyera moved and it was highly applauded that each Member of Parliament should contribute Shs. 100,000 to assist the family of the deceased and in memory of his commendable performance which elevated the name of Uganda. 

I do not know, the stories going round now is that, these children are suffering seriously and all over the place they are saying that, Members of Parliament promised and supplied air. Mr. Speaker, I am trying to find out from you whether that motion moved by hon. Kagonyera was transformed into action and we actually did contribute towards that fund.  The other person, who could assist us seriously to clarify on this matter, is hon. Abura Kene who is in charge of the Akii Bua fund. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think to seem also to vaguely remember that something of that kind was said, only that you have just raised this matter I have not been able to check with Hansard to find out what exactly we said whether it was a motion, or an observation. But, certainly it is a noble thing to do something of that kind; but I do not know, since Prof. Mondo Kagonyera is here, I think he may assist us to recollect and then see how we proceed. I know the problem is that this time, may be, it may be a problem, but we can find the solution.

THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Mondo Kagonyera): Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I want to thank hon. Okulo Epak for reviving this very important undertaking by this House, through a voluntary resolution of this House. As Members will recall the late Akii Bua, is the first and last Ugandan to get a Golden Medal in the Olympics –(Interjection)- yes, since then we have not had another one; and he also set a world record at the Munich Olympics.  

Beyond that the late Akii Bua, conducted himself in an extremely honourable manner under the most difficult conditions, he was living in this country.  Therefore, it is absolutely right of this House to honour him as the country had already done; there is already a road named after him. Now, we have tried very hard to get Members to meet their obligations and I am glad to say, that quite a number of them did actually meet their obligations. I do suspect that money should be on an account; I think in Barclays Bank.  

I was consulting a member of your staff, Mr. Speaker, about some one who was actually doing the receiving and banking of that money on an account. I think with time we shall find out where the account is and how much money is on that account. But Mr. Speaker, I would like to express a bit of disappointment about the response we got from the Members; when we passed the resolution we were very enthusiastic, we even had tried with hon. Salaamu Musumba to get Members to pay their money in tranches that seemed also not to work. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think it is our noble obligation as Members of Parliament to decide whether, we shall respect a decision we made or not.  I can only remember by name the First Deputy Prime Minister hon. Kategaya, I know he paid and I know one other person and that is hon. Mondo Kagonyera.  It is bit of time, really I cannot remember the other names, but we shall be able to establish how many have paid and how much.  But I would like to appeal to Members really to honour this great Uganda; I know it is a bit difficult a time; but I think it is not too difficult for us to honour this obligation. I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the purpose of asking hon. Kagonyera to make clarification was to see the legal status of what was done on that day; and from him now I understand it was a resolution. Now, what do we do with this resolution that has not been called out, I think that should be our debate; but he says it was a resolution, it has not been fulfilled. What do we do in this time we have before we go away?

MR. ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Indeed I remember that such a resolution was passed and that Members were at that time very enthusiastic about the whole idea of assisting the late Akii Bua’s family; but I think may be, you know the way things are - may be some people were not reminded, although some may not have seen the notices about which we are told just now. 

I would suggest that, we could resolve here now that from our next pay Shs.100, 000, be deducted from each Member’s pay, who has not paid. Unless there is an objection, Members who object will send their names that they object; but those who agree will keep quiet and the money will be deducted from their next payment.

THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Brig. Moses Ali): Mr. Speaker, I want to agree with the last proposal. Indeed most of us come here and grieve; we cry, lament, even one time when our colleague from Jinja, the late engineer Daudi died, we lamented. I think it is better we agree here, that at the end of this month, let us pay this Shs.100, 000 from the source so that even if you are not present, it is for the good purpose because tomorrow we are going to be there in the same place. Surely, you would like to be treated the same way. So, since you are still in position to treat others who have gone, may be I say, let us agree and then we go ahead.  Shs. 100,000, is not too much. Thank you.

MR. KUTESA:  Mr. Speaker, I think I was not present when this resolution or agreement was reached. But I am of the view that, it may probably have been reached in the heat of passion and that a more sustainable way of honouring our national heroes, ought to have been considered rather than base it on mere volunteerism. I think really it should have been more of the State and the Government of Uganda to honour the man who brought such credit to our nation.  

But it is possible that really, in the heat of passion when you have just lost someone, people may say we shall do this. I have seen it at many funerals in this country; everybody says we shall come and look after the bereaved family, the widow, the children and it ends with that burial. So, I think while I urge that people make their contributions on voluntary basis, we could actually suggest a more sustainable way of honouring people of such stature in our country, rather than depending on wills of people. 

By the way, I do not think Parliament can order me to pay my money. It is only court of law that could. So, there is an element of volunteerism, but this parliament can bind Government by a resolution to honour their people more consistently. I suggest that, while we must encourage people to pay in their contribution on a voluntary basis, this House should consider in a less excited manner, how to honour these people who have brought great honour to our country.  But this business of oh! We are now rushing because our Parliament is about to end, to put in some money - that is not really a great honour.  A road is about the name of Akii Bua; it is not about his family.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, but hon. Kutesa you see, it was to remind us of what we undertook to do. This is the issue before us; as to your suggestion, that is also a very good one, but at the same time as you realise, we cannot do it, because this will mean committing Government financially.  If this move has to be done, which is noble, and if it is brought here, I know we are likely to support it. This has to be started by the executive itself.  

Here in Parliament, we are talking as brothers and sisters; we undertook this, we are getting ashamed because we are not fulfilling what we undertook to do.  So, I think let us address this issue as to what we committed ourselves to. At the same time, I call upon Government to take a permanent way of dealing with such situation; because Government is permanent, whereas Members of Parliament are not permanent where they are; they are there for a term, that is it. 

So, really here I gather that it seems it is the consensus of Members that definitely, we should fulfil our obligation. As to how to do it, hon. Ongom has said, let us authorise the deduction of Shs.100, 000 may be we could stagger it. That is another way, but we undertook - and people have heard us. It will be a shame for us now to say, now we had it - we cannot. No, I think let us move on that line.

MR. AKIKA:  Mr. Speaker, I may not propose any solution, but may I say that when we passed the resolution to that effect here, it was in good faith, and we did not know the situation that would befall us in financial terms.  Since Akii Bua died, Members have been under serious financial stress, you know that very well, Mr. Speaker.  Members have been getting cheques of Shs. 60,000 a month, because of the deductions of motor vehicles. Now, from where can you recover Shs.100,000 per Member?  If I am getting Shs. 11,000? One time hon. Mao got here Shs.3,000. Now, where do you get the balance and how do you feed throughout the month?  

Then two, I think some of these things are now back firing; it shows the extent to which this Parliament is taken seriously or not taken seriously. How many resolutions of Parliament have we passed here and have never been implemented?  We passed here a resolution on Motor Vehicle Schemes, up to today, the Prime Minister the other day just wrote a line, which I have failed to understand. We have failed to implement that, we are expiring, any time we are going away without implementing that resolution; moreover, that is where we had expectations if that matter had been addressed. We had expected to get money from where we would have been able to raise about Shs.28, 000,000million, to donate to the late Akii Bua's family.  

I think if we are to honour this resolution, let us honour all other resolutions before we go away from this Parliament. Then finally, I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you not think that, really we should separate the accounts because this is something, which we committed ourselves to do?  I agree you may have financial problems, but can we not - I mean as Ladies and Gentlemen, should we really show that we have failed to do something which we undertook maybe 2 or 3 years ago?  

Why do you not find a solution that will not cause us a lot of problems, but at the same time fulfil our obligation? That is the suggestion of hon. Ongom. He said let us have a deduction, but somebody could say let us stagger it or let us, but at least show that we can abide with what we have promised to do.  

LT. COL. MUDOOLA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think for clarity, could we really have that resolution produced, because some people think that it was a suggestion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us not go back to that. We agreed it was a resolution; what we are trying to find is a solution to this one. I think is a consensus that we did it, maybe what we failed to do is how this money should be recovered; we never authorised the Clerk to recover it.  But now we are fine; how do we meet this obligation?

MR. ERESU: Mr. Speaker, I would like to be clarified over one simple issue with regard to the subject on the Floor.  Since I came to Parliament last year, several of our Members have passed away; some of them their bodies were brought here, but some their bodies were not brought here to lie in Parliament.

I do not know whether, for example, I have in mind the late hon. Ofory; motion about his death was not even moved in this House and for several others; for example the late Kirenga and so on and yet, these people had been contributing significantly to the politics of this country and good governance. They were also active Members of this Parliament. How do we go about this subject before we expire, Mr. Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, but honestly, this is a specific subject and it was brought before this House. Are you trying to tie it with the other issues?  I think let us address the issue of Akii Bua and then maybe we can follow up other matters. To forget the resolution we did with Akii Bua, I think will not be fair in my view. So, let us really find a solution.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA:  Mr. Speaker, I pray that the House does not spend unnecessarily too much time on this issue. We have only been reminded of a voluntary decision we made in this House and we have been told by hon. Kutesa, that only the courts of law can force him to part with his money and that is accepted.  Therefore, I think it is not fair of Members to look for excuses at all, if I must be brutally frank to them. We made the decision voluntarily here, those who think it was in the heat of passion, so be it! But those who think that they consciously agreed with the proposal I made, they are just being humbly reminded to meet the obligation they made for a very justifiable cause.

Mr. Speaker. I pray to the House through, you that we do not waste any more time on this; hon. Salaamu Musumba and I, with her permission, we shall revive the subject again and maybe we will put up a list, because we had drawn a list asking Members to sign. Those who feel freely under no obligation, to contribute to this noble cause, let them do it, but those who do not feel so, I think they should have their freedom not to. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do we leave it here? 

MR.MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities): Thank you Mr. Speaker. According to the information given by hon. Okulo Epak to the House, the family of the late Akii Bua is desperate. The measure hon. Mondo Kagonyera is putting forward is going to take a long time to realise the money. It is necessary according to that information and what I have heard that something must be done immediately, if we really honour this man, to rescue his family from distress. There is no immediate, possible source of rescue other than Government and yet, we as Parliament cannot cause Government to spend money to rescue the family of late Akii Bua.   

The only thing we can do at this time as parliament, having realised the gravity of this matter, is to call upon Government to take immediate measures and actually rescue the family of this fallen hero, because it not likely that Members will contribute this money quickly enough for the family to be helped, for the children to be educated, to be fed, to be clothed and probably properly housed. The only way is really to call upon the goodness of Government to attend to this matter as soon as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we commit ourselves to paying half, not the full amount, but say half of it? Could that not solve the –(Interruption).

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Speaker, the point I am making is this; whether it is half or one third or one tenth, it is going to take a long time to get this money and attend to the family of this hero, if people believe that he was a hero. Therefore, the only way is actually Government to come in.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, the information I want to give my hon. colleague is that, following the good advice from the other Members, that Government can, when it so wishes find some money for an essential expenditure. This matter of a national honour can be taken up by the Right Hon. Prime Minister through his office of Disaster Preparedness. The image of this nation is going to disaster, if really the welfare of the children of a national hero cannot be upheld. So, for the honour of this nation, the Right Hon. Prime Minister can find some rescue funds as a more permanent solution is looked for.

MR. MWANDHA: So, Mr. Speaker, to wind up, the only possible way is for Government to come in.  The reminder hon. Kagonyera is giving Members is coming too late and it is not likely to provide the money this hero needs. I think Government must believe that Akii Bua was a hero and if they so believe, they must take action, which is befitting to honouring a hero.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean, for you, you are moving that we abandon what we promised. Is that what you are saying?

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is this; while we try to recover this money from Members and as one Member said, there is no legal basis for him to pay the money, those who are willing will pay, others may not be able to pay. We do not know how many people could fail; therefore, we cannot wait. So, in order to rescue the family Government must come in and come in now. Thank you.

MR. WACHA  (Oyam North, Apac): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I want to make a distinction between our voluntary commitment to making some small contribution to the welfare of the family and what Government should really do in this respect. I am assuming that when we leave here, hon. Kagonyera and hon. Abura Kene will pass their list round. Those who wish to contribute will indicate and the money will be got from source.  But there is one matter, which was raised here during that debate which seems to have escaped our mind and that is the issue of the house. 

I seem to remember that Government made a commitment that the house in which the family is leaving now, will be handed over to the family. I see today in the newspapers that the issue of the house has never been resolved and no mention is made by Government as to why it has never been resolved. I think while we are making a temporary Amendment for the welfare of the family, we should look forward, we should look further ahead and see where this family is going to stay and whether this house is going to be handed over to them or not; and if it is not going to be handed over to them, could the Government explain to us, why it cannot be done.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is an important matter, which deserves prompt attention. But as appointed out, we must also consider other people who are in the same plight who have made a contribution. My recommendation would be that we follow a two-pronged approach; one, those who are still able to honour the pledge should do so from today within a framework of five days. And I want to ask hon. Kagonyera to get the list and prompt hon. Members to honour their pledges. Those who still have the capacity and the commitment to do so are encouraged to pay.

The second one is that, the Minister in charge of the Presidency is hereby requested to pickup this matter.  Because as you know, any financial matter under Article 93 of our Constitution must be moved by Government, if it makes a charge on the consolidated fund or any other public fund.  And when he does so, he should interface with the Ministry of Finance and come up with a paper, which we shall consider. I am also requesting him to take up any pledge, which the State made so that it is honoured promptly. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Should we take this as the consensus that we take hon. Kagonyera –(Interruption).

MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker, I would have wanted the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to be more specific in respect to the house.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You want answer about the residential house?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I deliberately avoided to deal with a matter where my memory maybe hazy.  That is why I directed or requested the Minister in charge of the Presidency to pick up this matter, because my memory is hazy; and when you are dealing with financial matters you must be abreast of issues and we must avoid promising air. That is yet another matter which must be picked up promptly.

MR. OBIGA KANIA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. I beg your indulgence if we have taken a position in this matter.  But I would have proposed that we go back to the records of the Hansard of that debate, and see whether we passed a resolution or the nature of that recommendation.  If we did pass a resolution, in my view it will be wrong to come and deviate from it; because a resolution of this House is a statement of honour, is a statement on which we want to depend and fulfil it. 

So, I would have suggested that if we could give the Minister as the Prime Minister has said, today and tomorrow morning and come out with a text of the position as it was taken here; so that we debate or we resolve this matter tomorrow. We would do better honour to this House than deviate from our own resolution, simply because somehow we are incapacitated. I think that will be wrong and we will be setting a very dangerous precedent for any resolution of this House.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we have dealt with this issue. We have agreed that there is a resolution. The problem is; I think we did not say, let the Clerk deduct from our money. Now, if we have to make that one; that will be another resolution.  So, it does not really make it different, because if Members are not committed, even if we produce the resolution that we made it, they may not. 

So, why do we not proceed as the Prime Minister has suggested, that hon. Kagonyera and hon. Member for Moroto and hon. Salaam Musumba take up this matter, get a list, see those who are still committed, who are willing to pay, how they want to pay and then proceed with that; and then the Government takes up with its other position?  Why do we not end there?  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you Mr. Speaker. I am taking the Floor to brief hon. Members of Parliament on the situation of malaria in the country.  Mr. Speaker, malaria makes a very high contribution to the burden of disease in our country. 95 percent of our country experiences malaria attacks all the year around.  This disease accounts for between 25 and 40 percent of all patients we see in the healthy units; 20 percent of the people admitted are admitted because of malaria; and nine to 14 percent of people who die in healthy units die because of malaria.

Uganda in addition experiences frequent epidemics of malaria mainly in the districts of Bundibugyo, Bushenyi, Kabale, Kabarole, Kasese, Kisoro, Mbarara, Ntungamo, Rakai and Rukungiri.  The costs of malaria hon. Members to this country are very high and I would simply put them as follows:

Our information indicates that, on the average every Ugandan gets six bouts of malaria a year and each bout lasts between four and nine days. We have also found that between 33 and 54 percent of absenteeism either in school or at work is attributed to malaria.  Research has also indicated that, the poor people in this country spend up to about 10 percent of their low income in struggling to treat malaria. 

Further, we have found that 35,000 children below the age of five years die because of malaria; and in total the country loses in a year about 70,000 people.  It is also an established fact that, we lose about 1.3 percent GDP because of the economic cost of malaria on the country.  

The Government has therefore, stepped up efforts to fight this disease. In summary some of the measures being undertaken include the following:

A malaria control unit was established in the Ministry of Health and in connection to the unit, operational structures are being established down up to the village. An inter-agency co-ordination committee involving donors, NGOs and other Ministries has also been established. We have earmarked the regional referral hospitals to act as regional co-ordination centres for the purpose of controlling malaria in this country.

In addition, hon. Members, each district now has a focal person to guide the fight against malaria. At the village level, we are working with the councils and communities, training people whom we are calling community owned resource persons, who will be the first contact in the fight against malaria. These community owned resource persons will among other things, distribute anti-malarias as necessary.

The mothers of the children are also receiving training on how to recognise and treat malaria; where malaria is thought to be very severe they will quickly seek help at the nearest health unit. To further help the mothers and the community resource persons, anti-malarias are now going to be packaged according to age, so that mothers do not have to cut tablets in order to get the appropriate dosage, which is a very difficult act. We are also training shopkeepers in the villages on how to dispense anti-malarias. 

Besides the case treatment, Mr. Speaker, we also have to pay attention to Vector Control, which is a major aspect of malaria control activities; and as far as Vector Control is concerned the following actions are being undertaken.  

One; popularising of insecticide treated nets and other materials.  

Two; we are carrying out selective in door spraying of anti-mosquito chemicals particularly in epidemic prone areas in this country.  

Three; we are carrying out a high profile campaign to improve cleanliness around homes and also for destruction of mosquito breeding sites. 

Four; in carrying out impact assessment for projects, we shall look for compliance with malarial control activities. We shall also, give consideration to aerial sprays against mosquitoes in selected areas, because we are also cautious that if we over-spray the country, we could cause other environmental effects.

In fighting this disease we face three main constraints.  Constraint number one is that our population has low access to health units; as we all know, in many places people are 20, 30 or even 80 kilometres from the nearest health unit.  And as a consequence, we have found that 83 per cent of the cases of malaria are actually managed by the people themselves in the villages, but of course inappropriately because they do not have either the knowledge or the right drugs and hence the high mortality and morbidity attributable to this disease.

The second constraint is the high resistance of malaria parasites against some of the anti-malarias, particularly chroloquine. Our studies show that resistance against chroloquine now ranges from 6 up to 46 per cent.  In other words, for every 100 people you give chroloquine in some areas 6 will not respond.  In other areas up to 46 or about half of the people will not respond because of the resistance.

The third constraint is of course the inadequate resources to fight this disease and other conditions.  

In the short run the problems of access to appropriate treatment is being handled by the training of the mothers and community resource persons. This is going to be further strengthened by retraining all health workers through the programme of continuing medical education.  At a more specialised level Uganda has up to 15 experts in area of malaria management.  

The malaria treatment guidelines, following the discovery of this high resistance are also being changed. The first line of treatment will no longer use chroloquine alone. Chroloquine will now be combined with Fansidar as the first drug to be given to those thought to be having malaria. 

The only exception are those areas of the country where resistance against malaria is still low; areas like Kisoro, Kabale, Bushenyi, the areas I outlined as being epidemic prone. Treatment guidelines have been developed and are being distributed to the appropriate persons.

Mr. Speaker, the country has established eight sites scattered all over, to keep tracking the sensitivity of the drugs against malaria, so that if we discover resistance again then we should change in good time.

In regard to the resources to fight malaria, the Government Budget will provide more money for this purpose; the Government is also in touch with the donor community who are already providing some assistance both technical and financial.

Mr. Speaker, as hon. Members of Parliament are aware malaria is indeed a world-wide public health problem.  Malaria kills at least 1 million people each year, most of them in Africa. The Heads of States in Africa have shown concern about this matter, accordingly last year in April a summit was held in Abuja in Nigeria on this subject.

On the wider scale on the world scene in 1998 the World Health Assembly commissioned the Movement to fight malaria.  This Movement has been code-named, “roll back malaria”.

The Africa Heads of States summit in Nigeria therefore, was part of the partnership to roll back malaria.  Other high level meetings on this subject have been held by 8 richest countries in the world and also by the European Community Parliament.

During the African Heads of States Summit that I have referred to strongly, resolutions were made which are meant to support the implementation of roll back malaria initiative. I will just give some highlights of these resolutions.

The set of resolutions set targets so that we do not just say, we are fighting malaria but showing no progress.  The Heads of States said, by the year 2005 at least 60 percent of the people suffering from malaria should receive treatment within 24 hours of the on set of illness.

The second target was that, at least 60 per cent of those most at risk of malaria particularly pregnant women and children under 5 years, will be sleeping under insecticide treated mosquito nets. 

The other target was that, at least 60 percent of pregnant women should be given presumptive treatment against malaria in the course of their pregnancy.

The last target, Mr. Speaker, was that by the year 2010 the level of deaths and illness should have been reduced by at least 50 percent.

Finally, the Heads of States declared April the 25th as Africa Malaria Day to be commemorated annually.  Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow April the 25th we shall join other countries to commemorate the African Malaria Day. The venue will be in Bushenyi.

The theme for this year is “Roll Back Malaria and Roll in Development”. This is a very appropriate title because it recognises the effect of malaria on the family, the community, the national economy and subsequently development.

On this important day, the Minister of Health will demonstrate some of the available technologies for controlling Malaria. We shall launch the sale of Mosquito Insecticide Impregnated Mosquito Nets, which are going to be sold on a wide scale to the people in the country.

We shall also demonstrate a technology where we spray houses inside with a chemical, which has a very powerful action against mosquitoes, and you remain protected for a period of at least six months if the spraying has been done very well. The Government of Uganda on this occasion will officially launch the Roll Back Malaria Initiative and mark the start of its implementation.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, I take this opportunity to invite all hon. Members to join the fight against Malaria.  I thank you Mr. Speaker and hon. Members for listening to me.

DR. NYEKO: Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to know from the Minister; indeed Malaria is a very serious problem, which may not be very easy to control, but we could reduce the incidence of Malaria if we are serious.  

In 1997, Mr. Minister you may recall that the Ministry put an advertisement inviting Non Governmental Organisations plus some other private sectors, who were interested in the areas of Malaria Control, Water and Sanitation, School Health Projects, Reproduction Health and others. Then when these NGOs responded, they were short-listed and in 1998 the Ministry conducted a two-month interview. You were renting premises of the Entebbe Botanical Gardens Hotel where you were bringing NGOs from upcountry to undertake this ambitious project and the funding was from World Bank.  

Then after you did the interviews, you gave out Contract Forms to over 2000 NGOs in Equatorial Hotel in July 1998 and these people signed the Contract Forms. You had given them different amounts of money so that they undertake Malaria Control using the Impregnated Bed Nets plus other areas like Water and Sanitation and the School Health Projects. Then those Contract Forms were never seen. Later on, you wrote letters to the affected NGOs that you were reducing the amount by something like 90 per cent. Even the 10 per cent, which you pledged to give – (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, - (Interruption).

DR. NYEKO: No, I think it is important Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yeah, I know it is important but do you not think that this kind of question should be a formal question, that the Minister would receive and then get the details and be able to answer you?  Because what I really anticipate in this kind of situation - you know question just for purpose of clarifying what the Minister has said; but that one is a very important question which I think if you frame it, we shall ensure that we deliver it to the Minister and the Minister can really give you an adequate researched answer; but any way finish it.

DR. NYEKO: Thank you Mr. Speaker. The Minister gave a very elaborate plan on Malaria Control and I thought this kind of plan started in 1997; and if they were to implement what I am saying now, may be at this stage, the Minister would be reporting how much work they have done in area of Malaria Control. So, what I wanted to find out from the Minister is, is it not possible that what you are presenting now would be in line with what you did in 1998?  Thank you.

MRS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like to commend the Ministry for the efforts it is putting in to fight Malaria; but I would like a few clarifications arising from the Minister’s statement.  

The Minister clearly points out as the first constraint, the population’s lack of access to Health units. But I do not know what the Ministry’s policy is towards this because as I was mobilising in my Constituency, I found members – the Wanainchi writing proposals and trying to put up health centres or dispensaries. Somewhere they were stopped by the District Medical Department. When I went to find out, I was shocked to be told that part of the district is over saturated with dispensaries; yet there are several parishes, which do not have dispensaries. For this particular case people have to walk up to eight miles to reach some Health Units.  So, I would like some clarification.

I do not know if you have considered the effect of abolishing cost sharing in hospitals and dispensaries towards Malaria Control; I was told when people go to dispensaries these days, they are just looked at and they are not attended to. The main thing they are quoting is that, cost sharing was abolished so we do not have the means to attend to. I tell you in Masindi people are dying of malaria and we are helpless and I do not know how the Ministry could come in at least to bridge the gap left by the abolition of the Cost-sharing.

Hon. Minister, you said you are trying to spray houses; you are trying to give treated nets to people; I do not know if you have considered the side effects from these materials? You have only talked about the environmental aspect, but some people are allergic to some of these drugs. So, I do not know if you have had at least a study or a survey and you are fully satisfied that may be a few will be affected and may be do not matter and you go ahead to implement this policy?

On the Referral Hospitals, I have raised this in a different forum, but I will raise it again. You said that the Referral Hospitals will be used in this fight against malaria but hon. Minister, through you Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote example of Hoima Referral Hospital. If you go there at night, you will find babies, children dying without a single nurse on duty. Government put a ban on recruitment and there is no staff in Referral Hospitals; like Hoima, let alone it serves as a district hospital for Hoima District.  

So, I do not know what plans you have to equip these hospitals, so that they are able to effectively handle the malaria cases as you plan in your Ministry. Thank you very much.

MS. BABIHUGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I have two points for clarification from the hon. Minister.  Recently I read that there is going to be a policy of the Ministry of Agriculture to have valley dams in each parish. How have you harmonised with the Ministry regarding the fact that, there is an outbreak of malaria and that this policy is going to escalate the incidence.  

Secondly, you have talked about measures to curb malaria regarding spraying and nets. The most vulnerable people are the poor of the poorest. What is the affordability level for these methods? Are they going to be freely given out or there are going to be a cost?  And if so, is the cost going to be affordable to the poorest of the poor, who are the most vulnerable in this out-break?  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. AWORI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have been following with interest the declaration of concern by the hon. Minister on a matter pertaining to the menace of malaria.  

Mr. Speaker, about five years ago, a famous Peruvian Doctor came up with anti-malarial vaccine.  It was put on trial in a number of countries and it was successful.  However, the matter rose on the distribution of the vaccine and acceptability of the vaccine in WHO member countries, which I believe Uganda is a member. 

I would like to know from the hon. Minister whether he has established that this anti-malarial vaccine is available on the market, because the person who came up with this particular vaccine meant - to repeat my hon. colleague - for the poorest of the poor.  But big pharmaceutical companies (multinational companies) thought they were going to lose out a lot of money, if this vaccine was put on the markets, because the Peruvian Doctor wanted it to be distributed freely through WHO Agencies on markets. I want to know whether the Government of Uganda, through the hon. Minister of Health is aware of this development.

The second aspect of it – I have noted again - hearing what the Minister is saying about a number of deaths in this country as a result of malaria.  Definitely, it doubles or exactly more than double of the deaths through bullets wounds.  People have been killed through rebellion, UPDF and other rebel activities. My concern is, we are spending so little according to what the Minister has told us on health, especially, preventative and yet were spending literally ten dollars per death in the last 15 years.  How much is he spending in preventing malaria per capita basis in this Country, especially, the statistics he has given in comparison to the amount of money, we are spending in killing people or stopping of killing others?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean the Minister of Health should be in position to answer that question?

MR. AWORI: The Minister of Health should know, as a Member of Cabinet, how much money goes to Defence and how much money goes to Health; and as a Member of the Cabinet, he should know how many people UPDF has killed and how much it has cost.

Finally, Mr. Speaker, could the hon. Minister of Health tell us, whether there has been an increase or a decrease in cerebral malaria cases, or whether the two are related?

Last, but not least, in terms of vector control, could the hon. Minister help me to elaborate on a matter of vector control in my district of Busia?  There is no evidence at all of vector control.  If I am wrong, hon. Minister of Health, please tell me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this was a statement under rule 37, but now it is turning up into questions.  

MR. ILUKORI: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I acknowledge the murmur behind me, because the Members are saying, “Somebody from Karamoja has been given the opportunity”.  Karamoja is part of this Country, and I therefore, proceed to seek this clarification. 

Mr. Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is as to whether the Ministry of Health, has apart from combating malaria in the open countryside, secured the treatment institutions such that those who suffer from malaria and are taken to health units will remain free from mosquito bites. I say this because the hospital in Kabong is persistently invaded by mosquitoes. Can that institution, and other health units be made mosquito free, so that when the Ministry takes vector control measures, we are sure that where the patients are taken, they will be safe?  Could I be clarified on this? 

MR. BAKU: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the Government’s concern over malaria. In Moyo when I toured the hospital, I found that the most crowded Ward is the children’s Ward, and the primary disease they suffer from is malaria.  In Moyo, we also have a situation where most employees (civil servants) in the district are not paid salaries. Last time before the presidential elections, I think it was about 10 months that salaries were not paid for civil servants including Medical Workers. Therefore, they are not rendering the services they are supposed to do. 

This morning I had reports that the Medical Workers in Moyo district have gone on strike over non-payment of their salaries. I am expecting a woman whose foetus has died in her womb to be transported from Moyo to Kampala for treatment or for the foetus to be induced out of the womb because in Moyo the medical services have come to a stand, due to the strike the medical workers are engaged in because of non-payment of salaries.  May I know from the Minister whether he is aware of this grave situation in Moyo district, if not, now that I have brought it to his attention what does he intend to do?

MR. PINTO: Thank you very Mr. Speaker. Regarding vector control, in Rakai as you may know there is an extensive swamp, water bodies, rivers, lakes and forest. I think for one to reach these areas, you possibly need to consider the aerial spraying because this is where they breed. You have extensive swamp running from Uganda into Tanzania and the tributaries of Lake Victoria, if you went into Koki, Kachera surrounding swamps you could not reach physically. Is the Minister thinking of an extensive vector control in this way?  

Secondly, is the Minister aware that apart from the normal or the usual anopheles mosquito we have been used to that carries malaria, there are various new breeds that have come?  Particularly in Rakai, there are black ones with spots on their legs, they bite you and that sting swells. You will find a baby fully covered with stings the same to adults. Does this mosquito cause malaria or is this the resistant malaria that we hear of?  

Just to add to what was asked about cost sharing, really in my district there are no drugs anymore and as I speak now I have been informed that Mulago is over flowing with malaria patients without drugs. In ward 4, the open spaces are occupied by patients who are not receiving treatment because of the massive malaria problem and lack of medicine.  As an emergency if even at the centre here in such an urban area there is such a problem, what do you expect to be elsewhere countrywide? 

Finally, he has informed us about this medicine cocktail of mixing or combining chloroquine with fansidar.  You know that largely we are dealing with self-medication through the FM; I am wondering whether there will not be new resistance due to this type of self-medication?  What are the measures resulting from research does the Ministry consider, should malaria develop into rampant resistance. You see malaria is now up to 40 percent resistant to chloroquine. Now, if we introduce this cocktail and it also fails because the breeding grounds are very many, what shall we do? 

Lastly, is there any research in our herbs, because most of the people could not even afford chloroquine or fansidar, although the messages are reaching them on the FM for self-medication, could the Minister assist me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us end this.  Could the Minister answer please?

THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr. C. Kiyonga): Thank you Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank colleagues for the comments made in support of the statement we have just issued.  Mr. Speaker if I begin with the question of what we did in 1997/98, where we wanted to involve NGOs in this fight and then our subsequent failure. First, I would like to apologise to those Members who were involved in this initiative, who are connected to one NGO or another and had come forward to assist in this fight.

This failure was due to - we had expected funding from the World Bank. After we had processed everything with their knowledge when we went to the books to do the accounting, we realised that we did not have the money to run that particular programme as at that time. I would like to assure hon. Members that this fight is real against malaria. We have prepared very well and we do not expect to meet the same level of failure as we did in 1997 and 1998.  

The next series of questions were asked by hon. Kabakumba from Masindi. First, the issue of poor access which I outlined myself and I have said that in the short run we are going to overcome this by creating capacity in the villages themselves, so that they can better treat malaria.  Training the mothers and issuing them with anti malaria drugs in the right doses, training people we are calling 'community owned resource persons', so that close to every home we are going to have some one who will play a role in treatment of malaria. 

In the long run, what we have said in the health sector strategic plan is what will improve access i.e. that we should have health units at least every parish in the Sub County and in the constituency.  And with more resources becoming available we will go down to the village and have a facility in the long run. But these units must be sited appropriately and they must also be programmed, because it is not just the health unit, we must also be ready to supply the man-power, we must be ready to supply the drugs and other supplies. 

Now, I cannot guess precisely why this particular initiative in Masindi was stopped. Because in general wherever we find the community enthusiastic to do something, we want to support them.  But it is possible that within the same area there were other initiatives, which were already being supported and because of constraints perhaps all of them could not be supported at this particular stage. We shall take interest and investigate this matter and come back to hon. Kabakumba.

The issue of abolition of user charges or cost sharing, hon. colleagues will recall particularly Members of the social committee that every year in and out this has always been debated and we had failed to reach a consensus at the committee level. This matter was also discussed for a long period within Cabinet.  The dilemma was, we knew that some people were not coming to the health units, they were sick but not coming. Why because they could not afford 500, 1000 or even 200 shillings.  We did not know how many they were, but we knew they were there. On the other hand, we also knew that when they come we would need more staff, more drugs and we will need more supplies.  

I am glad to say that by announcing this new policy there is no more speculation, it has been established that those people have been there, dying in the homes. The preliminary information we have is that the increment ranges from 20 percent to 100 percent, the people who came to the health units following the scraping of the user charges. Of course this has left us the challenge of ensuring that the staff and supplies are there. 

Already we took some steps in the current financial year, we had put in some money up to one billion; most of this has been disbursed to the districts to buy supplementary drugs and in this coming financial year we have gone along away discussing with the Ministry of Finance. We have gauged the gap as around 12.5 billion in order to meet the gap that has been created by this new policy.  

It is my expectation, Mr. Speaker, that in the interest of the people we represent, all of us Members of Parliament we will support that this 12 billion be availed; because we would be the most uncomfortable to say we continue with user charges when we know that the people in the villages will not come for treatment, will die there of malaria and other conditions.

Now, the issue of side effects to this technology- (Interruption). 

MS BABIHUGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the hon. Minister for that explanation. But in this country and specifically in the district of Rukungiri and Soroti there was the BAMACO initiative supported by a World Health Organisation, which used the principle of counter-part funding through user charges. Could the hon. Minister explain to this House how that project is going to progress. Thank you Mr. Speaker.

DR. C. KIYONGA: Mr. Speaker, the BAMACO initiative really is not different from user charges, because as the hon. Member has stated, there is an element of sharing. You have some nucleus fund and the people who come to use the facility have to pay something. So, it is the same principle that even where you have the BAMACO initiative the system may be more efficient, but for sure there are people in the villages who cannot come and access these facilities. Therefore, as far as we are concerned, even the BAMACO initiative should not be ongoing except in private facilities of the NGOs and private practitioners.  

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there are always side effects to most drugs if not all; you take chloroquine you may get itching but itching Vs you dying of malaria, we say the itching will pass and you take the chloroquine. Most of these materials that we put in the population on the market, we do so after thorough research. So, I would like to assure Parliament that the nets and the chemicals that we are going to spray may have some limited side effects but the benefits do out weigh the negatives. Where the side effects are detected, then appropriate measures will be taken to make sure they do not unduly disturb the people.

Referral hospitals yes, I agree hon. Kabakumba that in most of them we have shortage of staff, but I am glad to announce that the Government has removed the ban on recruitment for referral hospitals; and you may have seen in the press advertisements for recruiting more health workers. The justification for earmarking referral hospitals as co-ordinating centres is because this is where we have the rare resource of specialists in this the form of physicians and paediatricians. They are going to play the role of co-ordinating the programmes in the districts served by that referral hospital.  To re-train people, to make sure that things are going on well and Hoima definitely, has physicians of the quality that will be able to assist us with these functions.

Valley dams, yes, I did say in my statement that projects - in evaluating them for possible impact on the environment. We are going to make sure that they are also compliant with malaria control measures. A valley dam by itself yes, will attract mosquitoes but there is technology to make sure that those mosquitoes are destroyed so that the valley dam can still serve its function and we do not increase the transmission of malaria.

Yes, affordability particularly of these nets. Our policy is to subsidise as much as possible and in some cases if we get enough money will go to zero. Government already removed the tax on the nets that was a measure of subsidisation; and we are expecting once we get the support we have requested for particularly from the donor community, that we may either give these nets at very low cost to mothers and children under 5 years or in some cases even give them free. What we will do will depend on the resources we will have at a given point.

Hon. Awori has once again raised the issue of the vaccine which he raised before, I want to remind him that I did state firmly that as of now we did not have a vaccine which had been proven as a efficacious and effective against malaria.  However, a lot of efforts are going on and a lot of money is being given by donors to support researchers, because the market for this vaccine is going to be affected by poor environments like ours; and the researchers have to be encouraged in some way to work harder to get us the vaccine. Now, there are arrangements should the vaccine be available, donors will assist poor countries to access that technology. 

Yes, the cases of cerebral malaria have gone up particularly in areas like Kisoro, Kabale, Bushenyi, highlands in Kasese and other areas where the temperatures used to be very low and therefore, the mosquitoes could not survive at those levels.  So, as long as you remained in those areas you did not see any malaria.  Now with warming, and other interferences with the environment, Kabale, Kisoro and other areas are now badly hit by epidemics and very severe forms of malaria including cerebral malaria.  Therefore, we have to fight hard and control this transmitting vector even in those areas.

Yes, my colleague Samson from Kotido; we also in this programme would like to make sure that health units have materials, which are impregnated with insecticides, so that not only the staff but also the patients are protected.  

Hon. Baku from Moyo; this is the first time I hear about the strike in Moyo hospital; we shall follow up this matter and ensure that our people there are not unduly disadvantaged.

BRIG. MOSES ALI: Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the Minister and the House that the issue of the strike as a result of non payment of the salary arrears, has been going on for sometime. Last time the President was in the district, it was raised and he directed that Finance should handle. So, when I came back knowing that I was the most senior official around when the President was directing, I thought it was my duty to follow this directive; until this morning actually I was on the neck of the Ministry of Finance officials.

The arrangement to pay the salary arrears has gone very, very far if only the officials of the hospital in Moyo were aware, they would not have gone on strike. Perhaps I am now asking them to stand down, because arrangement is in offing. I tried to inform the Minister who I tried to ring but I could not get him in the office.  Thank you.    

Dr.C. KIYONGA:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Moses Ali for that clarification.  
Turning to the issues raised by hon. Pinto; it is true not only Rakai but many parts of the country have swamps, forests and warm climate that is what encourages transmission of malaria in our environment. But wide scale spraying is discouraged mainly because of the fear of environmental effects.  So, we are not about to go to every swamp and river to spray in order to kill the mosquitoes; that is what I said that as far as aerial spraying is concerned, we will have to be selective.  For example, if I take the case of small lakes in Kisoro, whenever there are heavy rains, clearly you see that they are teaming with mosquitoes and that would be a candidate for limited spraying in order to control a possible epidemic.  

So, our control will be mainly spraying in the houses, environmental sanitation and also popularising the use of insecticide impregnated materials.  The type of mosquito that my colleague has raised, it is not possible for me to answer now what type of mosquito that is.  But the parasite, which causes the malaria, is falciparum plasmodium. The mosquito merely conveys the parasite. It is not the mosquito itself directly that is responsible for the malaria. It is true that due to upsurge of so many people coming to health units, in many places we have run out of drugs but as I have said, we are making arrangements to ensure that adequate supplies will reach the health units.  

The issue of self medication. That is what we are addressing by training the mother, training the community resource person and also availing the drugs in the appropriate dosage for each age. That is how we are dealing with issue of incorrect self medication.  Self medication is not bad by itself provided you are doing the right thing.  Yes, resistance will develop.  I cannot promise that no more resistance will develop. That is why we have these sentinel sites, all over the country so that we will be tracking the sensitivity of the parasites to the drugs and immediately we see that resistance has developed against a particular mode of treatment, we shall change. 

Fortunately, we still have other drugs in reserve and also as part of the Roll Back Malaria movement world-wide.  The private sector is being encouraged to research and find new tools against malaria. 

Finally Mr. Speaker, we are co-operating with people who work in the herbs; tomorrow in Bushenyi they are also going to have a stall. In addition, we help them through the Chemotherapentic Lab in Wandegeya and also through the medical school, to see whether the herbs they are using have useful active in gradients against malaria.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES BILL, 2001

THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Dr. Kisamba.Mugerwa):  Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, "The National Agricultural Advisory Services Bill, 2001", be read for the First Time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This Bill is being read for the First Time. The chairperson is here of the appropriate committee. How soon do you think you can deal with this Bill? Otherwise, I am committing it to the appropriate committee, but can we have an idea as to how soon you can.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr.A Kanyike): Mr. Speaker, according to the size of this Bill and since we have been working on it together with the Ministry, it could be ready within a week’s time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am asking this question; if it is within a week’s time that means one week. Anyway it is committed to the appropriate committee. We shall decide what to do after a report is presented.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 39, OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO ABOLISH PERSONAL GRADUATED TAX

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a motion in the name of hon. Okulo Epak. But I do not see the Minister of Local Government.  Should we have a debate in absence of the Minister?  You think it will be helpful?  I do not know what the Prime Minister wants to advise.  

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo. Nsibambi): Thank you Mr. Speaker. It is a pity that the Ministry of Local Government is not represented and yet they should have been here.  Since we have a Minister of State for Finance and we are primarily dealing with financial matters, I think we can start the debate.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PLANNING AND INVESTMENT (MR.Gabriel.Opio): Mr. Speaker, it is not our way of disagreeing on the Floor, but we have specifically got a portfolio for this graduated tax. You know the money from graduated tax does not go to the Consolidated Fund. So, actually the Minister of Finance does not hold it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But maybe let us hear from the mover.  What do you think really?  We have a problem.

MR. PINTO: Mr. Speaker, I think the Prime Minister has really taken charge. In his authority, he can assign and he has rightly assigned the Minister of State for Finance to listen in and take action. This is not the first time that Ministers from different Ministries take on duties of other Ministries when assigned. So, I think the Minister of State for Finance must submit and humbly submit. So, we can proceed with the business of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Okulo Epak, could you come?

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): I beg to move a motion for the resolution of Parliament to abolish personal graduated tax.  Considering the inequities and cruelties associated with the administration of personal graduated tax;
Noting that, personal graduated tax is basically a regressive tax and levied without any rational economic objectives to achieve; 
Further noting that, while the nuisance and cost of administering the personal graduated tax continually increases, its contribution to the overall recurrent and development budgets of local authorities is no more than 10 percent and imminently decreases thereby presenting false hopes;
Aware that, the policy of decentralisation has transferred responsibility for the delivery of most services to local authorities which must be accompanied by transfer of commensurate resources too; 
Whereas, Clause 1 of article 191 of the Constitution empowers Local Governments to levy, charge, collect and appropriate fees and taxes in accordance with any law enacted by Parliament by virtue of article 152 of the Constitution; 
Whereas, Clause 2 of article 191 of the Constitution lists personal graduated tax among the fees and taxes to be levied, charged, collected and appropriated under Clause 1 of article 191;  
Whereas, subsection 1 of section 1 of the Local Governments Act, 1997 permits Local Governments to levy, charge and collect, amongst others fees and taxes and personal graduated tax; and 
Whereas, part 11 of the Schedule V of the Local Governments Act, 1997 establishes the powers, procedure and penalties to levy, charge and collect personal graduated tax.  
Parliament having studied and debated the policy requirements of abolishing graduated tax, now, therefore, resolves as follows: 

    1. Local Governments should explore, expand and intensify their efforts to levy, charge, collect and appropriate other sources of taxes and fees in particular on properties or rents and rates, royalties, stamp duties, cess, fees on services, registration and licensing, market dues, charges on undeveloped urban land and other forms of indirect taxation including sales tax.  

    2. That for the purpose of rents, charges on undeveloped land, rates and property taxes, all central settlements or trading centres of 100 household and above shall be gazetted as urban areas within which the Rating Act shall apply and for which the Rating Act should be amended accordingly. 

    3. Government will continue to assess Pay As You Earn, but it will be collected and appropriated within the area of jurisdiction of the sub-county and urban councils where the payee is currently employed.

 NB: There is a slight Amendment on number 4, please listen carefully.

    4. The Ministry of Finance is requested to implement these decisions and in particular for each financial year, to prepare a composite Budget incorporating the policy and budgetary proposals for all sectors, statutory bodies and Local Governments to be paid out of the consolidated fund. 

    5. The Ministry of Local Government is directed to cause Amendment of subsection 1, section 1 and part 11 of schedule V of the Local Governments Act, 1977 in order to implement the decision pertaining to this resolution with effect from the financial year 2001/2002. 

I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Seconded. 

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF ECONOMIC MONITORING OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr. Kweronda Ruhemba): Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When you abolish Local Government tax, you are actually in effect saying that all those obligations, which Local Government tax was meeting, should be taken over by the Central Government. Actually, you are raising tax – you are proposing to raise tax of the Central Government. That being so, is the motion competent?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are saying that this motion is making a charge in its present form on a Consolidated Fund, in that you are ordering money to be used from Consolidated Fund to support the functions and services of Local Governments. Well, I think, hon. Members this clarification apparently is based on article 93 of the Constitution, which says that, “Parliament shall not, unless the bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of Government, proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following:- the imposition of taxes, alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction; or the imposition of a charge on the consolidated fund…”  

I think that is what it is saying; whereas the motion for abolition of graduated tax could be competent in that you are just abolishing a tax, I think, the motion has now proceeded to suggest how you fill the hole that will be left by the removal of the tax. That is calling upon the Minister of Finance to bring in other monies to deal with that one. However, the suggestion is that this is contravening article 93, which is a Constitutional provision.  

Maybe, before I decide on this, I would ask the mover to say something about this observation or clarification from the hon. Minister. 

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, when you talk of abolishing personal graduated tax, the first question that everybody asks is, what is the alternative! The spirit of this motion, the thrust of it – leaves all the other dressings. It is the abolition of personal graduated tax that this motion is seeking to do. The rest of the operative paragraphs are suggesting ways out. 

If the suggested ways out, which will definitely appear in the debate somewhere in my statement of defending the motion, become an impediment on this motion – if anybody thinks that they are more fundamental than the motion itself, that the graduated tax be abolished, I am prepared to delete all those operative paragraphs, which implicate charges on the Consolidated Fund; i.e. I would suggest that we stop –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, hon. Member, the observation was made and I am supposed to make a ruling on it. I drew your attention to the Constitutional provision. I would suggest that instead of going with this debate, that a constitutional hurdle has been raised here before you have proceeded making you presentation justifying your motion. I would think that, maybe, we adjourn this debate for you to get sufficient time, to go and study your motion and see that it complies with the Constitution provisions, and bring it again.

I am supposed to make a ruling whether this motion is competent in view of the constitutional provisions. But because you should be given opportunity to present your motion especially since it appears the spirit was just abolition of the graduated tax but you ventured into another sphere of trying to raise funds, I think let us give you an opportunity to go and study your motion so that you come and deal with it.  

I think, hon. Members, this is the convenient time to adjourn. The House is adjourned until 2.30 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 4.38 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25th April, 2001 at 2.30 p.m.)

