Tuesday, 30 April 2002

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

MR JOHN ERESU: Mr Speaker, when Parliament started early this year after the Christmas recess, you rightly advised me to raise the question of cancellation of examination results of some primary schools. It was supposed to be answered by the Minister in charge of that sector.  

I complied, and I submitted my question for oral answer by the Minister. I was duly informed that the answer to my question would be provided by the 19th of February. It did not work out because when I was put on the Order Paper, we agreed that we give it one week.  That week has elapsed.  

Recently, I read in the press, and I heard from the electronic media, that the President directed, when he was at his farm in Kisozi, that a supplementary examination be set to take care of those pupils in primary schools whose results were cancelled as a result of examination malpractice.  

May I now be guided as to whether the President has acted on behalf of the Minister in providing an answer to my question? If that is the case, should we now take it that it is when the President acts on a particular matter that the Ministers will also act? I beg to be guided, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the Minister of Education is not here, and the Leader of Government Business is also not here. So, I do not know who can give that guidance.

THE MINSTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Felix Okot Ogong): Mr Speaker, I understand clearly that the Committee on Social Services invited the Minister. This matter was discussed in the committee and the Minister, together with the committee, agreed on a certain position. As for the question asked by the honourable Member, the Minister is ready to answer it, provided it is put on the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: We shall try to see whether this can be done on Thursday.

MR AGGREY AWORI:  Mr Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance on a matter of privileges for Members of Parliament.  

I have been told that to use the VIP lounge at the airport, we need to have permission from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. I assumed that Members of Parliament who generally at the beginning of the session sit and elect the number three person in the country should be accorded certain privileges, including unlimited access to the VIP lounge! In case my access to the VIP lounge is inhibited, where do I resort?

THE SPEAKER: Just alert them that you will be using it and then they will know you are coming.  Isn’t that the practice? Anyway, the Minister in charge of Foreign Affairs is not here. I do not know who can answer for him.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker that is the problem of ambushing the Executive. Although we try to be versatile, we always want to give you a well researched answer. 

Under the circumstances, I want to request the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs to liaise with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and hon. Aggrey Awori, who hates a dull moment, will get an appropriate answer. I thank you. The answer will be given within two weeks from today because I always want a timeframe.

MR EMMANUEL DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business. Just this week, members of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs appeared before a committee of Parliament. The members from the security organisations did assure the committee of Parliament that Eng. Kazibwe is still a very important person in this country -(Interruption).

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Dombo, we are dealing with the issue of Members of Parliament using the VIP lounge at Entebbe International Airport. Hon. Aggrey Awori wanted to know whether they are not supposed to use it. But as far as I know, Members of Parliament are entitled. If you are going to travel, it is a question of alerting those people that you will be using this and the other. Anyway, let us wait for the answer. So, that issue is not really connected - (Laughter)


DR OKULO EPAK:  Mr Speaker, some time back, we got a list of order of precedence. It rates Members of Parliament way down, almost at No. 23.  In fact, we are just above RDCs for that matter. And I have been seeking for an opportunity to find out who compiles this order of precedence. What is our input in the compiling of that order of precedence?  

Honestly, Parliament, the next most important organ of Government, and the Members of Parliament are rated 23rd is unbelievable! I do not know how it was done, but I think this matter should be reviewed. We cannot be 23rd -(Interruption)

MR ALEX ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, I want to put the record right.  Members of Parliament, according to what Dr Okulo Epak is referring to, were rated No.17 out of 32. Last on that list are the RDCs. The LC V chairmen are No. 31. That is the position. We are not next to the RDCs and the LC Vs. Thank you.

DR OKULO EPAK: I thank hon. Onzima for that information, and I think he is right. But still we are 17th -(Laughter). Anyway, whatever number it is, it has been read out and I have not understood the criterion used. I hope I will not antagonize anybody by saying that for instance so and so is rated above Members of Parliament. I however think that the matter would require your intervention so that we are accorded the right position in this order of precedence. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Point taken. I was not aware of that list, but the matter will be taken up.

MR LUKYAMUZI: MR Speaker, on a different note, through me, the people of Lubaga South whom I represent would like your guidance on this. For quite some time, this Parliament has been expecting to receive a report on a bill on political parties and political organisations. From time to time, the Executive keeps telling us that it is coming, but it is endlessly coming!

Today’s Monitor reported that, “the Political Parties and the Political Organisations Bill shall be discussed today.” When I look at the Order Paper, it does not feature anywhere. So through me, the people of Lubaga South would like to know in specific terms why it is not here. Many of them have been looking forward to receiving this report. They would like to know when it is coming so that they can make themselves ready and even bring in their input.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is the position. I have just received a copy of the report from the committee. Therefore, as far as the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is concerned, it has completed its work. It is up to us to put it on the Order Paper. I saw the Monitor too, and you know I even told visitors to Parliament that, “the Political Organisations Bill will be coming next week, or it will be coming the other week.”  But because of other bills that we had, it could not be debated.

Even the committee was not ready with the report then. But now that I have a copy of the report, and I imagine each member has got a copy of it too, definitely the Political Organisations Bill will be considered before we prorogue. 

Today we have another bill, which has been with us for quite some time. We want to finish it. And as you know, tomorrow is a public holiday. I do not want to start on this very important bill and then have a break just like that. So I am sure we shall start with this Political Organisations Bill next week, on Monday afternoon. I will be asking you to come here on Monday so that we sit on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday afternoon and definitely finish this bill. So the definite date is Monday 6 May 2002.

MR DOMBO: MR Speaker, I want to thank you for your guidance, which you did give me, because the issue I was raising was not directly related to Members of Parliament. I however feel that the issue is one of public importance and I really will seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business about it. 

Like I was saying, a delegation from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs appeared before a committee of Parliament and it assured the committee that the family of the Vice President is well protected and provided for. To echo this, when the engineer had some problems some time ago, because it was reflecting on the image of Government and the image on the family of the Vice President, the President himself came in to rescue him. The President is a very important person in this country, and he cleared the debts on the engineer’s behalf!

Yet just yesterday as I was reading the newspapers, I saw the media was saying, “engineer Kazibwe has been struck off the VIP list.” I wanted to seek clarification on this so that in my interactions with Engineer Kazibwe or any other member of the public, I should specifically know what position they hold. Because if the committee is told one thing, the President acts differently, and the media reports quoting officers of Government differently, then we need clarification. What exactly is the position, MR Speaker, I wish to seek clarification from the Leader of Government Business on the issue. I thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, MR Speaker. I would like to inform my honourable colleague that in Great Britain, when the Crown Prince Charles separated from his late wife, she still maintained her status and rank in the royalty. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, this clarification was directed to you. Are you in position to answer, Rt. hon. Prime Minister?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, MR Speaker. I want to reiterate the view that this question should be put to the sector minister, who will answer in accordance with proper procedure. That is a matter for the Minister of Public Service to answer. I do not want to hazard an answer; it is not proper. (Laughter). 

You know, rules go on changing. As a former Minister of Public Service, of course I would be able to say a lot about it, but it is not proper that I should do the work of the sector minister. I, as a technocratic premier, already have a lot of work and I want to concentrate on matters that will promote public interest.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think this ends this business.

MR AWORI: MR Speaker, my clarification has nothing to do with Engineer Kazibwe. I am seeking clarification from the Rt. hon. Prime Minister on a matter of ministers promising to answer our questions and then do not. We have questions outstanding; for the last three months that they have not been able to answer, and then he comes to the Floor and says, “give me another question. I will answer it later.”  How do we know what is going to happen between now and the time he comes back to the Floor? 

I am seeking your support, MR Speaker, you as my chairman. We must take some measures against these ministers who do not want to answer our questions. What can we do?

MR MWANDHA: MR Speaker, you may recall that we did agree that all the questions that are pending should be circulated to the members so that we know which minister is refusing to answer which question. I believe the publication will show the time when the question was put to the Clerk, so that we know for how long the question has been waiting.

We also agreed that in the case of a minister failing to come here to answer a question, we should come up with a motion of disapproval against him. Personally, I have several questions, which have not come up at all. Immediately we pass the rules, I want to give notice that I will be coming up with motions in respect of those particular ministers, so that this House can express their displeasure about their conduct. In the mean time, we must have the list of all the questions put to the Clerk to Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I think let us leave this matter. We will definitely list all the questions so far filed with the Clerk and sent to the ministers. As to what you will do, that is up to you to decide. But I think you will get the list by next week.

THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been to your office this afternoon and I have already suggested to you to avail us all the outstanding oral questions. If there are 60 or 100, we can set aside two or three days to answer them and we have a clean slate. The capacity of answering those questions is an indicator of performance. I am really very concerned about this question.  

However, I would like to make a plea to the honourable Members of Parliament that there are some cases where they can get answers easily by asking us. Sometimes, of course, an oral question has a political dimension. So where you can, it might be better for you to get that answer and you communicate to your constituency. But where you decide that is it is in your interest to have it answered publicly, we shall get hold of all the questions and you will soon discover that part of the problem is that we have a large agenda. But we are willing to spend Saturdays and Sundays and we go up to 1 .00 a.m. to answer all the questions so that this matter will not bother us any more. I am ready, I am ready, I am ready. (Laughter).

CONSIDERATION OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Ben Wacha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we adjourned, we were going to start on Appendix C, which is the Code of Conduct for Members of Parliament. You asked Members to peruse the Code, and if they had certain suggestions, to come back and make them on the Floor. I am hoping that they have done so, and if they have no other proposals, I suggest that they become part of our rules.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Annex C to the rules stand part of the rules.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, we have also proposed Appendix D which are the rules of television coverage of Parliamentary Proceedings. The background to these rules is that the Parliamentary Commission is about to establish its own Press Unit. We have imported a number of machinery and some of which include machines for televising occasions. It is proposed that when this unit comes into place, it also be empowered to telecast proceedings of Parliament. It is not possible for us to give them a blanket permission to telecast. They have to go by certain rules of coverage of Parliament being used in other Parliaments.  

The object of Appendix D is, therefore, to set down in details what the unit can and what it cannot do and the penalty for doing what it cannot do. There was a misconception that televising the proceedings of Parliament was going to be open to any television station in the country. That is not so. We are going to establish our own unit. The unit will be under the Commission; it will be punished by the Commission if it contravenes this rule. It may, of course, as it is provided for in the rules, give out certain parts of their telecast on payment of certain fees. That is the purpose of Appendix D.

THE SPEAKER: We have appreciated the policy behind this particular -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I am seeking clarification on that particular item. In other words, what we were going to be sending out – oh! Sorry, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I have said that the policy behind this particular Annex D has been explained. Is there any objection or I put the question? Let us hear from hon. Aggrey.

MR AWORI: I was just seeking clarification from the chairperson of the Committee. Does it mean that by the time we send out the signal for anybody to pick, we would have done our own editing in the House?

MR WACHA: Mr Speaker, I was hoping that Members would have by now internalised the details of Appendix D. Everything is detailed there; what it can and cannot do, what the unit should and should not do. 

For example, it is provided in the appendix that if a Member is not speaking, he should not be focused up on. The focus should be on a person who is speaking and a general view of the House. For example – (Interruption)- No, this is important because we do not want this television coverage to be used to undermine the dignity of the House and of Members. If, for example, a Member is whispering to somebody, it is not really part of the proceedings of the House.

THE SPEAKER: I remember in the Constituent Assembly, there was a Member who was just contemplating, he closed his eyes and somebody moved a point of order whether he was in order, and he answered and said that he was just contemplating. So, if they focus on you, it can be used against you sometimes in your local politics. 

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I think that the whole purpose of having the Parliament televised is to enable the public who are not able to come to the gallery everyday to know what is going on. If the public is free to come to the gallery, and they are free to have their vision on each one of us as we are here, whether individually or in a general way, I do not see why that fact is not a public fact. 

We are here to debate and le5gislate in an honourable way. That is why we have all these rules that guide us. I would find it very limiting, and possibly it could be victimising the unit if we put restrictions that are not going to make them not to present the facts as they are. I think I would oppose that restriction to the unit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do you really think you need more time to internalise? 

LT COL KATIRIMA (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. By way of handling this area, would it not be procedurally correct to proceed to the appendix under discussion so that we move paragraph by paragraph, and where there is debate we debate, if there is no debate we pass it? Because, if you look at Appendix D, which is talking about coverage of our proceedings by television, it is something that goes over about six pages, and some of these areas are not controversial. We would just pass them, and if we came to an area which needed debate, then we would zero on that one.  We seek for your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  But normally we have not been dealing with appendixes in that way.  I think it is better that you internalise the various provisions of the appendix, so that if you have a question, then you say I want an amendment on this one. It appears Members have not had time to internalise the appendixes, and I do not want to rush you in passing something that may be detrimental. So, if you think you need more time, what we can do is we can stand it over and then maybe we consider them next week.

MR AWORI: But, Mr Speaker, procedurally this particular item is not really for the outside; this an editorial procedure for whoever is controlling it, just like the Editor of the Hansard.  We do not tell him what to do; he knows. The Commission will be the one to tell the Editor of Parliamentary TV how to handle it.  The outside people will be picking up the signal, which is already refined to exclude all these other details that the Chairman is mentioning.  

So really, schedule (c) or (d) is superfluous for us to put in the Rules of Procedure; that is for the editorial staff of the TV, because we said only one signal and that the Editor of the Parliamentary TV controls four or five cameras, he would know which camera to pick!  Mr Speaker, I am speaking as a former Editor of TV – (Laughter)- I know these things.

THE SPEAKER:  Okay.

MR OTTO ODONGA (Aruu County, Pader):  Mr Speaker, I wanted to raise some concerns before the Committee Chairman would come to comment.  First of all, I feel in my own opinion it would be the greatest mistake to try to have the coverage of Parliament conducted.  I would imagine that making a speech under duress and influence would greatly undermine the personal contributions of a person.  I am foreseeing a future where we shall make contributions to the satisfaction of the Press.  I am seeing a situation where we are putting the coverage ahead of the country’s needs.  

Mr Speaker, it might appear very interesting to hear that such arguments exist, but I would say that what the appendix is trying to avoid by giving restrictions shows the overall danger of having such coverage broadcasted in a manner it should be.  So I am suggesting that the Chairman of the Committee rather guides the House on how formal and original the discussions in the House would be conducted other than having it done.  Because I am seeing the Parliament becoming a theatre in such a manner that the recordings would become almost like we are in a theatre.  

Mr Speaker, I would beg to ask the Chairman of the Committee to give an insight into the areas we are trying to curb which you feel is not good for public consumption, and yet the reality of what is happening in the House would be a different situation from what you want to market in the public. All in all, is it not propaganda?  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  So now hon. Members, it appears there is a policy issue here involved which you have to decide on and those are details.  Do you think we should have a debate on this policy matter now?

DR OKULO EPAK:  What policy aspect are we discussing; to have television coverage or not?  Okay, then the detail really is a regulation, which has already been provided for in the schedule.  If that is the case, my contribution, sir, is that we should have a television coverage provided as an in-house arrangement as proposed by the committee, not open to other external media.  

The second thing which I think the rules are covering, is whether it should be live as we proceed or it should be relayed by our team which covers the House.  I would go for the latter, because honestly, I think that is Mr Odongo’s fear that some people will now simply want to appear to be talking so that they are seen, but you know that is not possible because we cannot all speak everyday.  

You have the prerogative for your eyes to catch somebody before that somebody speaks, and it would be ridiculous for any Member to stand here simply to be covered by the camera, and in any case, since it is a relay, I think the Television editor would take care of that kind of idiosyncrasy, and then we have really what is meaningful coverage and conveyance to the public.  I support the policy that the House should be covered, and that it should be relayed by our television office after it has been edited appropriately.  I thank you.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara):  Mr Speaker, I thank you.  I also support the filming of the House but we have to be aware that different people will use what we film for different purposes.  For instance, who is likely to be the target audience of this: the ordinary people, maybe the people we represent, those who have access to television, intelligence organisations, media and all sorts of people?  So, I think what will happen is that as a result of the broadcasting, attendance in the House will improve; that is one.  

Secondly, the behaviour in this House will also improve; that is what happened in the House of Commons when broadcasting was introduced. The behaviour in the House obviously changes because that is expected.  Now, as for the editing, I think it makes a bit of sense because even the Hansard is edited, but with Hansard you say, “I did not say this, you change it”.  Now with the other one, I don’t know whether you are going to go to the public and say, “I was not sleeping or I was thinking deeply” or something like that!   
What I suspect is that they will record everything verbatim as it happens, focusing mainly on the speaker but occasionally spanning the whole House. Things like quorum will be visible.  

So, I think it is very historical, it is very good for our country and also for our democracy because then this is the accountability; we have nothing to hide.  So, we should see how it goes, and then if there is abuse, then we can amend the rules.  But as a general rule, I think we should be as open as possible, and put as few restrictions as possible.  But I support the broadcasting.  I thank you.

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, we seem to be focusing on one aspect of electronic media. I assume in the Rules of Procedure, we should really cover both areas of electronic media, that is TV and radio. But when it comes to broadcast, the two are slightly different because for Radio live coverage, you cannot edit. The way we talk, that is how it comes out and that is how the public will hear it. But when it comes to TV, there is an editor here, just as it is now.  These four cameras are controlled somewhere, and what you see on the screen out there is an output by that person who is controlling the cameras.  So, I do not see why we are worried about all these things.  

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether we need the rules for radio and then the rules for TV, but my assumption was that the policy decision should be electronic coverage of Parliament.

MR WAKIKONA: I do not know why we should waste a lot of time on the matter of just being seen on TV. I suggest that that money should be used to put TV in Manjiya County, because as we speak now, most parts of Uganda are not covered by UTV.  The TV you are talking about will only benefit people around Kampala and maybe Jinja. These WBS and UTV are not covering the whole country.  So, I suggest we concentrate on repairing the TV and covering the whole country with UTV and the rest before we even think of coverage here. I hear it costs money to cover people in Parliament.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR WACHA: Sir, what we are talking about is not TV; we are saying we have bought cameras for television coverage. These cameras are specific for this House.  Unfortunately, we cannot transfer them to Manjiya. They are already bought for this House, and either we use them or we leave them to rot.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I cannot see the value of televising Parliamentary proceedings if the TV channels are not going to use what has been televised. It is not good televising the proceedings and keeping all the videotapes in the archives of Parliament. I see a situation whereby parliamentary proceedings would be televised daily, and every television station will come to the Clerk to Parliament to buy for their use a programme. 

So really, this is what we are talking about and, therefore, Mr Speaker, the manner in which televising is going to be done as proposed by the Chairman, to me it is questionable. Because he is saying the TVs will focus only on the person speaking in Parliament at that material time, and generally the House.  

Now, although the televising must be done in such a way that you do not get incriminated or nothing negative is transmitted against a particular Member of Parliament, if you have not been seen for a day, people will say, “look, there was a very important debate on a particular issue, you Mwandha, you never stood up to debate this thing.  What happened?” You see? So, whatever the case may be, people will be interested in the contributions of their Members of Parliament.  

So really, we must debate this knowing very well that whatever is recorded, whatever is televised will inevitably end up on the airwaves and is not simply for purposes of record. I think this is the way we should understand it.  I can see this as an income-generating project for Parliament, because I am sure that every station would want to buy a tape every day.

MRS TUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I support this Rule of Procedure of having cameras in here so that the people of Uganda get to know what is going on in the House. And even those who are “contemplating” I think should be seen by the whole population that they “contemplate” in Parliament. We come here to debate on issues affecting our country, so everybody who has access to television must know what is going on.  

I would also like to request the Ministry of Information - if this is going to be televised on all the TV Stations in Uganda - to make sure that Jinja also gets access to UTV.  We do not know what is going on in Government, we do not hear about Government policies; we should be able to know what is going on!  So please, get UTV working in Jinja!

I would also like to appeal to the same ministry that it is not only television that is going to help us to know what is going on, but also the radios. Jinja has been cut off from all other radios that are operating in Kampala; we only have two stations in Jinja.  We would like to hear what CBS is talking about; we would like to know what Simba is talking about, and all the other stations.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have to decide on the policy.  If the policy is not supported, then we do not waste time on the rules. So, I put the question on policy

(Question put and negatived.)

REV BAKALUBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just seeking clarification. Maybe some of us have not really understood.  I thought we were supporting coverage to be done in the House.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Apparently there are some few fears here and there, but it does not mean we cannot re-visit this matter. Think about it; but the decision we have made today is that you do not want to be covered.

MR BEN WACHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That means in effect that the last rule that we have considered, that is 195, has been rejected.

Appendix E deals with the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, and election of members of the East African Legislative Assembly.  Mr Speaker, this was already considered and passed by the House when we were dealing with the bill.

THE SPEAKER: So we are just adopting it within the rules.

MR WACHA: We are just adopting it within the rules. Appendix F deals with the procedure of submitting reports to Parliament by Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. This is also for adoption, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to Appendix F.
         
(Question put and agreed to)

MR WACHA: Sir, there were some small matters which were stood over. Rules 81, removal of the President; 82, procedure for removal of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker; and 84, procedure for vote of censure against Ministers were stood over for purposes of re-drafting certain sub rules. The House mandated Dr Okulo Epak and hon. Isaac Musumba to do the drafting. They have done it, and I am satisfied.

The proposed formulation of 81 (3), according to the gentlemen, reads as follows: 
“A Member who is desirous of moving a motion for the removal of the President shall obtain signatures of at least one third of the Members, signifying support for the proposed motion” 

They also proposed that we delete sub rules (4), (5), (6), (8) and (9) as had been proposed by the Committee, and we substitute therein a new sub rule (4) to read as follows:
“The Member shall notify the Speaker in writing of his or her intention to move a motion citing the grounds for the proposed motion, and giving supporting particulars.  The notification shall be accompanied by the signatures of at least one third of the Members.”  

They also proposed that what is provided for as sub rule (7) becomes sub rule (5), and insert a new sub rule (6) to read as follows:

(a)  within three days inform the House about the intention, the grounds and supporting particulars of the proposed motion; and
 
(b) for the purpose of the notice for a resolution based on the grounds under paragraphs (a) and (b) of sub rule (2), the Speaker, within 24 hours of receipt of the notice and accompanying particulars, shall forward the same to the President and forward a copy thereof to the Chief Justice.”  

Their reasoning is that this should conform to procedure in (3) prescribed by the Constitution and to lay responsibility for collecting signatures and peddling the motion with its petitioner, and also to signify the importance and confidentiality in handling the process. I support their re-structuring, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question to the rule.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR WACHA: In Rule 83, they propose that we amend sub rule (1) by harmonising paragraphs (c) and (d) as follows: “The motion shall be tabled in Parliament within seven days and the House shall refer the motion to the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to investigate and report its findings to Parliament for debate.”  

They proposed that we delete (d) and amend (e), which now should state: “The Speaker or the Deputy Speaker may appear in person and be assisted by a lawyer or any other person when the committee is investigating his or her removal.”  

They proposed that we delete sub rule (2).

LT GEN. ELLY TUMWINE: Mr Speaker is it in order for us to provide new rules when they are already provided in the Constitution? Article 107 provides for the removal of the President and it details how it should be done. Is it in order for us to make new rules when the Constitution is very clear on it?

THE SPEAKER: Well, if the provisions in the Constitution are mandatory, we have to first check. Maybe these rules are in addition to those mentioned in the Constitution; I do not know.  But we cannot definitely ignore the mandatory provisions in the Constitution by substituting them with our rules.

LT GEN. TUMWINE: Mr Speaker, Article 107(2) says: “For the purpose of removal of the President under paragraph (a) or (b) of clause (1) of this article, a notice in writing signed by not less than one-third of all the Members of Parliament shall be submitted to the Speaker…” 

That is mandatory in that case, and we are just repeating the same thing. I see other rules that are not consistent with the Constitution, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Which amendment is inconsistent with the Constitution? Is it that one? 

MR WACHA: Sorry, I am finding a little difficulty in following him. What is he saying?  Is he saying that we cannot make rules when there are rules in the Constitution or we cannot make rules that are inconsistent to those which apply in the Constitution?  I do not know what he is saying.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I said you can never make rules, which are inconsistent with the Constitution, but apparently he is saying that we are just repeating what is in the Constitution.

MR WACHA: That is exactly so, because this House cannot proceed under provisions of the Constitution, it can only proceed with the provisions of its own rules.

So whether it is provided for in the Constitution or provided for in any other law, we still have to reduce it to our Rules of Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: But they are not inconsistent; it is just to help us to implement what is in the Constitution.  

MR WACHA: No, if the general looked carefully, he would have seen that we are actually repeating what appears in the Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: About the other rules for the removal of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, you have heard submissions. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: This is a re-drafting of rule 84, which is for the censure of ministers. The small ad hoc committee proposes that we replace “clerk” with the words “Speaker or Deputy Speaker”.

And we have a new sub-rule (2), which says: “The Member shall obtain signatures of not less than one-third of Members signifying support for the proposed motion.” 

And a new sub-rule (3), which states: “After at least one-third of Members have appended their signatures in support of the motion, the Member shall, within ten working days of giving the initial notice to the Speaker or Deputy Speaker, submit the same together with the grounds and supporting particulars to the Speaker or Deputy Speaker.” 

Here I suggest that we remove the words “Deputy Speaker” wherever it appears. This is because the word “Speaker” is defined as including Deputy Speaker.

Then the present sub-rule (7) becomes sub-rule (4), and we delete (2), (3), (4), (5) and (6) as it appears in the Committee’s proposal. Then we substitute the word “Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges” for the words “Select Committee.” I accept those formulations, Sir.  

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Then, Sir, we stood over making a decision on rule 74, awaiting our discussion on the rule on the Appointments Committee, under rule 143. Rule 74 deals with secret vote and it states that: “There shall be secret voting in the House in respect of-

(a) a Bill for an Act of Parliament on any provision of the Constitution,

(b) the election or removal of a person holding office under the Constitution or under a law made under the Constitution,

(c) the election or removal of a Parliamentary Commissioner,

(d) the censure of a Minister, 

Remove the words “Vice President” because we have decided against it.

(e) a decision on an appeal from the President or a reference from the Appointments Committee under Rule 143,

(f) any other matter, if the House so decides upon a motion.

MAJ. KAZOORA: MR Speaker, I remember that it was Hon. Dora Byamukama and I who wanted to move under rule 8(2) that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You mean this is connected?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Yes, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: Rule 74 is connected to rule 8?

MAJ. KAZOORA: Yes, because she was promised that when we reach rule 74 then it would be connected with rule 8.

THE SPEAKER: Then why do we not first dispose of rule 74 and then we see what happens next?

MAJ. KAZOORA: I want to be clarified, MR Speaker.  I wish you would look at what rule 8 says.

THE SPEAKER: I think this is suspension of rules.

MAJ. KAZOORA: Yes, Sir. It says that this rule shall not apply in respect to rules 4, 5, 6, 7, and she had wanted to add on that 74.

THE SPEAKER: But my point is, let us first agree on rule 74. When that is in our rules, then you can move to rule 8 to say that it should never be suspended. I think that is how we should proceed. I now put the question to rule 74.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Hon. Kazoora can now proceed.

MAJ. KAZOORA: MR Speaker, I would like to move that rule 74 be considered like rule 8(2); that this rule shall not apply in respect to those others, and rule 74.

THE SPEAKER: To help those who may not have the Rules, why do you not tell us what rule 8 provides for?

MAJ. KAZOORA: It is on suspension of rules, MR Speaker. It says: “Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House, and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended.” 

Then 8(2): “This rule shall not apply in respect to Rule 4, 5, 6, 7.” 

This is talking about the election of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker that these must be by secret ballot. My argument is that even rule 74 as we have passed it, that it should be by secret ballot. Then a member should not move that it be suspended. I hope it is clear now.

THE SPEAKER: That you should never say, “let us suspend secret voting.” That is what he is saying.  

MR WACHA: I have no problem with that, Sir.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Okot Ogong): MR Speaker, rule 74 as it is, is good. When you remove rule 74 and put it under rule 8 whereby you cannot suspend it, I do not like it. And we go ahead and provide that even when you want to censure a minister you do not have to go through open voting! I would prefer that on certain matters, our electorate must actually know what choices we make, like when you are deciding on censuring a minister. 

On certain matters we should all go to the lobby and be seen. We should actually stand by whatever decision we take. When we now suspend it, I know our politics, I want to be very clear on this –(Interruption)

MR AWORI: I just want to know whether he would also be very happy if we were to line up instead of hiding under secret ballot. Would you be happy?

MR OKOT: MR Speaker, I have known politics, I have seen politics. There is a lot of torturing, there is a lot of jealousy, and there are a lot of under-hand dealings. When we make rule 74 subject to rule 8, I see that danger. It might not actually help us. It might complicate certain matters, especially when it comes to issues like censuring a minister, removing a Parliamentary Commissioner and others. I believe we should leave this as it is, then we pronounce ourselves on the other one.

THE SPEAKER: What you have to examine is, why do we have rule 8, why do we suspend the rules and what are we trying to protect by the secret ballot? I think that is how we have to deal with this issue.

MAJ. KAZOORA: I find the reasoning of the hon. Minister for Parliamentary Affairs really inconsistent, because when you look at Rule 4, it is talking of the election of the Speaker, that this must be done in secret voting and it will not be suspended. Now hon. Felix Okot is saying the public should not know why their representatives have voted for a particular person. Why should the public not know which person I have chosen as a Speaker or as a Deputy Speaker? Because of these very reasons, honourable colleagues, I am urging you that we pass this rule that we do not suspend secret voting. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

MR MWANDHA: I think the argument put forward by the Minister is self-defeating. He is saying there is jealous, there is arm-twisting. And by the way, that happens if somebody is going to be seen openly, and the only occasion when there is no arm-twisting is when people are given the opportunity to vote secretly.  After all, why should we say lining up is no longer fashionable, we should go for adult suffrage; one man, one woman, one vote!  It is the same concept that we were trying to say in respect of this very important decision that we must do personally without any undue influence. So I think the Minister was contradicting himself.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WACHA: Sir, that brings us to the end of the Rules.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Speaker, I wish to inquire whether there is room to introduce new regulations. I have one in particular, if it is permissible. 

Mr Speaker, I wanted to make a proposal to have a Committee on delegated legislation.  As you know, Sir, in many of these laws we give permission to Ministers and other bodies to stipulate regulations, byelaws, statutory instruments and some of them contain matters which conflict with other laws or sometimes which oppress the population.  This also includes byelaws passed by district councils and so on and so forth.  

In many Parliaments, a committee is set up to look at all these laws where delegated authorities are given to other people.  I therefore wish to make a proposal that we set up such a committee.  

Mr Speaker, over the weekend we were discussing the law regarding procurement, and apparently the Minister of Finance made a major mistake. Unfortunately, even the Attorney General’s office, which drafted the rules for them, did not see that it was wrong for them to set up a board under these regulations because there were some other laws that were conflicting with these particular regulations. 

I think in the reformed Central Tender Board it was realized after that that what was done was wrong, and that is why the Ministry was advised later to come up with a proper law to repeal the Act that set up the Central Tender Board so that they operate legally. Otherwise, they were having serious difficulties.  

This is just one example, there could be many, many, examples which do not come to us. Therefore, Sir, I would like to make a proposal that we set up a committee on delegated legislation.  I wish to move, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Member, you should appreciate the practice we are following here of passing bills; we have Sessional Committees dealing with sector ministries.  When a Ministry has a bill here, the particular Sessional Committee dealing with that particular ministry handles it.  Therefore, if that Sessional Committee has been able to deal with the bill, definitely it will be able to deal with the delegated legislation arising from the same rule. 

I think when a Minister is required to lay before Parliament certain statutory instruments, before it is effected, the Sessional Committee in charge of that sector ministry deals with it.  It is true, you have said, there was a mistake in this one, and that was a technical mistake.  If a technical mistake was done in respect of a matter that was handled by a technical ministry and the Attorney General, what guarantee do you really have that if you have a committee of just ordinary Members of Parliament, that that will not arise?  

The only problem here is the policy, and Sessional committees are handling it. And I think they would love to handle the matter arising from the baby bill.  This is what I see; otherwise I quite appreciate your position.  I do not know what the chairperson wants to say about this. 

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, if you guide me in that way, then maybe we should make a provision under the functions of each of the Sessional committees to look after delegated legislation because I do think this is one of their roles, although occasionally ministers will not volunteer and take some of these authority instruments and regulations for Sessional Committees to look at. By the way, delegated legislation is byelaws that are passed by district councils, and I think these also need to be looked at, in my view, but of course the Chairman can guide us.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but before the Chairman can comment on that, it depends on how you make the laws because you can make the law and direct that any statutory instrument made by the Minister before it becomes effective shall be brought to the attention of the Parliament. Then Parliament will be able to see the statutory instrument that you passed, and if it is conflicting, improve it.  But where the law has been made in such a way that you just say this board has powers to make other regulations, then there is no way Parliament will come in to call for that regulation when actually they have never been provided for in the original – but the Chairperson can help.

DR OKULO EPAK: Mr Speaker, local Government district councils are supposed to make ordinances, not byelaws. And they are required to submit those ordinances to Parliament. 

MR WACHA: Yes, you are right, Sir. There would be a problem if another Committee to deal with delegated legislation were created, because you would not define where the powers of the ordinary Sessional Committees would stop. Every aspect of any bill that comes before this House has a Sessional Committee dealing with it, because they come from a ministry. Since these Committees are in charge of ministries, they will inevitably look at those. 

You are right to say that not all subsidiary legislation need come here because if it is not provided for in the bill or Act that the Minister, in consultation or with the consent of Parliament, shall make subsidiary legislation, he can go ahead and make it. Of course, if Parliament wants every piece of legislation where the subsidiary legislation is necessary, it should now provide that such subsidiary legislation should come before Parliament before it becomes operative. But that is for Parliament to decide.

THE SPEAKER: I hope it is clear, hon. Member. This ends the consideration of the Rules. I thank you, chairperson and the Committee. (Applause). 

BILLS
SECOND READING

The National Women’s Council (Amendment), BILL 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE (GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill 2002”, be read a second time.

THE SPEAKER: The bill is seconded; proceed.

MR BITANGARO: Mr Speaker, the bill seeks to amend the National Women’s Council Statute of 1993 to provide for the composition of the National Women’s Council, the national and district women’s council, executive Committees and for the matters related thereto. 

My ministry has made wide consultations with stakeholders, including the National Women Council and we have received valuable proposals. Proposals have been made to restructure the composition of council and executive Committees, to widen the membership of the council, to make women councils more representative of the women of Uganda. 

The proposed amendment shall, if passed, widen the national women’s council linkages with all the stakeholders, that is to say, in Government, Non Governmental Organisations, women in the business sector, women in Parliament, civil society and the youth.  

It is also hoped that wider representation will increase and encourage more participation by women in activities of the National Women’s Council. These few remarks constitute the justification for this motion.  

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mrs Dorothy Hyuha): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Social Services on the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002. 

Introduction:  

The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2000 was read for the first time in this august House on 13th March 2002.  Hon. Members, I am glad to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Social Services on National Women’s Council Bill, 2000 in conformity with rule 143 of our Rules of Procedure. I hope it was not affected. 

Methods of work: 

Hon. Members, the Committee held discussions with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the National Women’s Council and various Non Governmental Organisations engaged in women affairs. Some of the Non Government Organisations included - as you can see the list, I will not read but you can read for yourselves. The Committee is grateful to all the stakeholders who submitted their views on this bill. 

Background: 

In 1993, Parliament passed the National Women’s Council Statute, which established the women council structures running from village to national level. The main objectives of women councils were to organise the women of Uganda in a unified body and engage them in social, economic, cultural and political activities that benefit them and the nation.  

Given this background, the Committee has observed that the women councils have been able to achieve the following: 

• Unification of women of diverse social, economic, cultural background for development. As a matter of fact, regardless of religion, age, rich or poor, educated or illiterate, the women have always come together through the women councils.  This is an observation.  

• More women have been empowered to contribute effectively in local and national politics. Even as I talk, we have women who, through the women councils, have been empowered to come to Parliament. Quite a number have participated through the women councils. They are now in local council Governments. 

• The Committee has also observed the creation of the national network through which the needs and interests of women have been brought to the attention of Government for action.  

Quite often Government has found it easier to disseminate information to the women through women councils and vice versa. The women have always found it easier to pass on messages to Government through women councils.  

Since the Statute became operational in 1993, some gaps, which have limited performance of women councils, have been identified. 

In addition, women groups, which were not active when the Statute was passed, have become stronger and new ones have emerged. Women councils would benefit a lot from involvement.  

It is, therefore, on that basis that amendments have been proposed to make women councils more encompassing, efficient and able to establish linkages with the other relevant bodies.

Observations.

Composition: 

The Committee observed that in the composition of women councils at different levels, the following gaps existed in the Statute of 1993. 

There was no linkage with relevant policy making bodies at different levels to ensure that the interest needs of women are taken care of in policy formulation and implementation of programmes, for example:

• The National Women’s Council which is a supreme policy making body had no linkage with the women Members of Parliament at that level.

• The parent Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development had limited linkage with lower structures of the women councils, yet the ministry is responsible for their budget and policy formulation.

• Apart from the local councils at village and parish levels, there is no linkage with local governments. The Committee therefore recommends that in the near future, the Local Governments Act should be amended to address this concern.  

• It is also observed that organisations dealing with women affairs were not participating at district and lower women council levels. Apart from the national level where we are now participating, at lower levels from the district downwards, we did not have non-governmental organisations participating, or any linkage with these women councils.  

• Women, youth and women with disabilities were not adequately represented in the women councils.

In the 1993 Statute, District Women Council delegates represented the districts. The new bill proposes that the chairperson of the district women council in the national council will represent the district.

I want to bring to your attention honourable members the fact that in the principle statute, we have been having a district delegate as well as a chairperson of the District Women’s Council. It is this district delegate who will sit in the National Women’s Council. In the new amendment, that position of district delegate has been abolished and we are saying that the chairperson of the District Women’s Council can as well serve as the district delegate.  

It is also important to note that the chairpersons of sub-county women’s councils will now be members of the district women’s councils. The Committee proposes the removal of the county women councils because of the redundancy.

In the principle Act, what was happening was that the executive women’s councils at county levels were the ones forming the district women’s councils. And of course that was limiting because you would have four members from one sub-county while other sub-counties would not be represented. So, in this new amendment we shall have all chairpersons of sub-county women councils being the members of the district women’s councils.  

4.2 Membership of the Women Councils to Local Councils:

It has been observed that the women in lower women councils also occupy political offices in local councils.

Because these two bodies constitute the Electoral College for the election of the district Women Members of Parliament, some malpractice arising from double registration have been reported.  

Hon. Members, I wanted to draw your attention to the fact that we made a law for the election of district members and women Members of Parliament. They are elected by an electoral college, which is composed of women councils from villages to sub-county and also local councils. But because some women have always been in the opposition, you may find one woman being, for example, a councillor at village level, councillor at sub-county level, and even a chairperson women council at the sub-county. That is, one woman occupying three positions! This has always created malpractices, and it has always inconvenienced us during the time of elections.

Secondly, I want to tell you that the original idea of creating women councils was to avail women an opportunity for empowering them. This was for them to have an opportunity to learn some leadership skills, and an opportunity of getting networking skills. If you have one woman occupying more than four positions, it denies an opportunity for more women to come up.

The Committee, therefore, recommends that except for the chairpersons of village or parish women’s council’s executive Committees, a member of a women’s council executive Committee shall not concurrently hold a local council office. 

You very well know that when we enacted the Local Governments Act, we provided that the chairperson women’s council village, and also parish level will automatically be the secretary for gender in that respective local government. So since the law is already in place, for the time being until we amend the Local Governments Act, we can only leave that provision in.

4.3 Mode of Elections: 

The Committee expressed concern about the mode of election of the women’s council executive Committees.  Given the fact that the current mode of lining up, which tends to create permanent conflicts in the society, has been removed in the case of election of local councils and is against the principles of free and fair elections as laid down in the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the Committee recommends that the method of election be by secret ballot to women’s councils. But we can have modalities on this one, like some that were created during the elections of the local councils.

4.4 Establishment of Secretariats:

The Committee observed that there is need to have consistent structures to facilitate running of the affairs of the councils at different levels.  

The Committee proposes the establishment of secretariats at the district and sub-county levels as it is at the national level. However, given the resource constraints, the Committee recommends that the secretariats can be established at district levels to start with. 

Hon. Members, you know how inconveniencing it has been for the effective performance of these women’s councils at lower levels. That is why we are proposing the establishment of secretariats.

4.5 Funding:

The Committee observed that the women’s councils have been poorly funded. Even where funds were approved by Parliament, government released little. It is only in the Financial Years 1999 to 2000 that the women’s councils entered the national budget line and received funds, which enabled them to open offices at district level, equipped them and carried on some activities like training of women. Since then, the amounts approved and released have continued to dwindle.  

Hon. Members, the Committee notes that some local government councils have in the past not released funds for the women councils except in a few isolated cases. The Committee is grateful to those local governments who give financial support to women’s councils. 

The amendment provides that the women councils both at national and district levels have independent legal status as bodies corporate. This will enable them to source for funding with supervision from the centre to ensure accountability and proper use of funds.  

The Committee further recommends that funds to the women’s councils be decentralised to the districts as conditional grants through the normal accounting system. The Chief Administrative Officer would then be responsible for the accountability of the funds. 

I beg your indulgence to emphasize this point, Mr Speaker.  The question of funding women councils and generally the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is a big issue. I wish to request this august House to seriously debate and make serious input for the proper functioning of women councils and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development at large.  

I can give you an example to emphasize what I have been saying about under-funding. In the financial year 1999 to 2000, this august House approved Shs 750,000,000 for the women’s councils, but the Ministry of Finance released only Shs 550,000,000.  In the following financial year, 2000/2001, given what the Ministry of Finance had released, they gave a ceiling to the National Women’s Council; they told them that they should plan within a limit of Shs516,000,000 and that is what we approved here. 

Given that we approved Shs516,000,000 for the performance of the National Women’s Council, the Ministry of Finance only released Shs459,000,000, still below the required amount.  

In this financial year, what they have released is what determines the ceiling.  You can see the trend of the ceiling with what we approve and the amount released. This financial year we approved Shs450,000,000. The financial year is soon coming to an end and the Ministry of Finance has only released 199,000,000 shillings for the operation of women councils. In other words, they are releasing money for salaries and wages. What do we pay these people to do? What if they are not going to perform? What if they are not mobilizing the women councils?  

Given the social factors we have in society, how many stories have we heard of mothers locking and burning themselves up with children in the houses? Those are social factors, social issues in society which should be addressed by these women councils. So, the performance, the operation of national women’s councils has been a problem.

Hon. Members, you know very well that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has all the marginalized interest groups under it. The department of youth and children, the department of gender and culture, the department of the elderly and the people with disabilities, the department of workers - that is the department of labour and industrial relationships – are all under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  

Let alone all those departments, there are also semi-autonomous bodies: the National Council for Women, the National Council for Youth, the National Council for Children, the Public Libraries Board and the Industrial Court. How much is released to all these? 

I am just emphasizing this point to draw your attention to the fact that generally, the National Women’s Council, which is a semi-autonomous body under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is grossly under funded, and therefore, their operations become difficult.  When we approve little, the release continues to dwindle every year.

To crown it all, last week we were meeting the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development officials. It was not amusing to hear from the Ministry about the accommodation of whole ministers of these semi-autonomous bodies. Finance has not provided 350,000,000 shillings for this Ministry to partition the offices where they sit, and we have been encouraging them to move and sit nearer. One department was in Kisenyi, another one in Udyam House - all over the place! Parliament, through the Committee on Social Services, encouraged them to come together for proper functioning –(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I am following this report, and I am trying to follow what the chairperson is reading, but I cannot see it.

THE SPEAKER:  Please read the report.

MRS HYUHA:  Mr Speaker, I clearly begged for your indulgence to emphasize the point. And I am emphasizing the point of grossly under-funding the National Women’s Council and the ministry. And I am concluding on that point.

THE SPEAKER:  I think the problem came in when you started talking about Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in totality.

MRS HUYHA: - which I said is accommodating the National Women’s Council, and today our concern is the National Women’s Council. The point I am going to draw the attention of this House to is the under funding which makes these women’s councils not operate properly.

The last point - to bring the member back on board – is 5.6.  

Candidature to the National Women’s Council Executive: 
The Committee proposes that the women’s council executive Committees be elected from the members of the council at all levels.  

All of us in this House have sisters, daughters, mothers or wives, I request you to support all these interest groups. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE: (Isingiro South, Mbarara): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson for a very elaborate report, which she also presented very well.  

Secondly, I would like to thank her for marshalling all her troops to sign this report.  Out of all the 25 members, 21 bothered to append their signatures. This Committee is one of the few that is gender balanced; 50 percent women, 50 percent men.  

I am a gender sensitive man, but I really find it very difficult to identify the function of women’s councils. I have tried as much as possible. Because they are not so well funded, they are therefore just structures struggling to look for a function.  

My own view would be that the women’s councils be mainstreamed into the normal LC III, LC V and then they push for more women representatives on those councils. I do not mind having 50 percent men and 50 percent women at LC III level. I think they would achieve more for women other than having another structure, which is never funded.  199 million shillings is not a lot of money for Uganda, even for where I come from. 

This bill cannot amend the Local Governments Act because I understand you cannot amend a law through another law.  But I think this Committee should really pressurize so that there is a meaningful amendment to the Local Governments Act, so that women are supported more meaningfully rather than by token through these women councils. 

These women councils do not have a link to the Ministry. It says so in the report. They do not have a link with Members of Parliament. In other words, they are out there floating. The only time they are active is on Women’s Day. Even then, you really struggle to get them to move.  Most of the members of those women’s councils belong to other structures in the normal councils, so why put another structure?  

Madam chairperson, I think we should move with your energy - from the way I see you marshalling your troops - so that we move as quickly as possible and abolish these councils and then empower women to move in meaningful ways rather than by token.

MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu West, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for their elaborate report; however, I have a few issues to raise.  

I would like to demand for clarification from the chairperson. On page 3, the Committee expressed concern about the linkages that have been lacking, especially with women councils at the sub-county, county and the district levels. 

On bullet two, she recommends that we should have similar linkages like the ones established at the local councils at village and parish levels, whereby the chairpersons of women’s councils at all levels should also be members of the local councils at similar levels. But then, when she goes further to make a recommendation under 4.2, she says that “a member of a women’s council executive committee shall not concurrently hold a local council office” which I see rather as a contradiction, and I wonder what she actually wants. 

Here her concern was basically that some women were voting twice, because they happen to be members of women councils and then also happen to be members of a local council. I think basically those are just malpractices which we have been having in elections, which can be corrected administratively. We should ensure that we have one man/ woman one vote, to avoid having people voting more than once.  So, I would like to have a clarification over this issue.  What does she really want; does she want the linkages but when it comes to voting then we could compromise and we do away with the linkages?

Concerning the funding of these women councils, I think this is the gist of the matter because without adequate funding, these women councils will not function effectively as we want them to do, it appears here we are pegging their funding on the funding from the central government, which you know is not adequate to cover all these women’s councils. 

I imagine we have over 800 sub-counties that would give us over 800 sub-county women’s councils, then over 50 district councils; they are so many. But when you look at the financial implications, the document that was given to us, they are proposing that for the next coming financial year Shs 854,108, 000 is needed to run these women’s councils. This is very little money! And as I am talking now, these women are somehow united, but this money is going to divide them more because women’s councils at various levels are going to fight over it.  

So, if the money is not enough, we would rather not risk sending down this money. Otherwise, we are going to divide these women more and one of the goals as you have seen, we want to have womenfolk united.

So, Mr Speaker, the issue of funding should be looked into seriously, and we should encourage these women to look out for other sources of funding, like from NGOs and other organizations rather than making them to believe that there is a lot of money at the centre, which is going to come down to assist them to implement all their activities as the current trend is now.  But I support the amendments.  Thank you.

MRS ROSE MUNYIRA (Woman Representative, Busia) :Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Social Services that undertook to look at the amendments in the Women’s Council Act.  As a way of empowering women, I think it is very important that Government supports the provisions that have been brought forward.  There is no sense in saying that these structures are put in existence when actually they are not funded. I do not really see any reason why we should say that we are trying to develop this country when 50 percent of the population is not being considered.

These women’s councils are important, Mr Speaker, because they have, as you have been told, brought up many women leaders who have come up, even at the level of being in Parliament. We should not only look at women’s councils as having provided leaders who have come up to the level of Parliament representation, but also they have provided leaders in administrative positions. So, I really feel that these women’s councils should be supported! They are necessary, and they really help to empower women right from the grassroots level.(Applause).

Mr Speaker, I also support that the gender budget should be taken more seriously. What has been presented to us; if you look at funds that have gone down to the women’s councils, they are very little. Even money that is considered to be a loan to a whole district is only to the amount of about Shs 5 million.  What is Shs 5 million to a whole district? I would rather put this money in something else if Government cannot supplement or raise funds that can be used to bring up or to support women activities. 

We all know very well that women are the backbone of this society, and normally money that has gone through the line of women goes for a good cause.  So, for that reason, Mr Speaker, I would suggest that if we were really serious, we would raise this money so that the women can take up their activities. 

Down there at the grassroots, these women councils have mobilized women. You find that they are in groups, but because they do not have facilitation, they are desperate. So, Government should consider giving women’s councils more money.  They should not just be used for elections.  They should be looked at as a development vehicle that would take development right to the grassroots, and empower our local women.

I would also like to support the need for a Secretariat for Women’s Councils at the lower levels, especially at district level. I find that even when facilities are sent down to the districts, for instance, sending a bicycle, motorbike, it is useless if we do not have a Secretariat that is going to coordinate these women to the higher level at the national women’s council.  So, the Secretariat will be able to put their books in order and also coordinate and assist these women to come up with their project proposals and enable them to get some skills that are very vital for their empowerment.

I would also like to support the idea of having the chairpersons of the women’s councils act as the delegate at national level. The problem is that if the delegate is separate from the women’s council itself, normally she does not feel the responsibility of reporting back to the women in the council.  There is normally the conflict between the chairperson and the delegate. So, it is really a good idea that we have the chairperson who is in command of the committee at district level to attend or to coordinate between the National Women’s Council and the district councils and then the lower women’s councils.

Representation at the county level is actually redundant because there is no funding at that level. There is no funding and because of the arrangement of the local government, you find that women’s councils at LC III are more active than those at the county level. So, it is actually in order that we promoted the sub-county women’s councils to be members of the district women’s councils.  I thank you very much.

MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, MR Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the chairperson and the members of the committee for having come up with such a good report, which has put most of the members in the picture of what the women councils are for.  

I wish to support this motion, but before I support it in its entirety, I would like to have some clarification on issues on page one. It has organisations that were consulted and have been recommended to be included in the National Council, and I wonder why the Uganda Joint Christian Council should be represented on this committee but not the Moslem Women’s Association. Because, if we are catering for all women in the women’s organisations, since the Joint Christian Council caters for the Christian women, I would like to propose that we consider – (Interruption)

MRS MEHANGYE: Thank you, MR Speaker. I am a member of the Social Services Committee. These organisations listed here were the ones that were consulted as we worked on this bill. It is not a conclusive list. They were just consulted as we worked on the amendments to this bill. Thank you very much.

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, MR Speaker. I wanted to add that during the discussion we invited quite a number of stakeholders. We thought that the Non Governmental Organisations that are engaged in some women’s affairs or activities at the grassroots should be consulted for views. We never limited the invitation but those who turned up are the ones who are listed down here. 

And when you read further in the amendments, in the original amendment, which was specifying which NGO should be part of the Women’s Council, we refused to mention a specific Non Government Organisation. If you read further, you will see that we were careful to see that any women’s council at any given stage can propose which ones can contribute to them. So we are sorry that the Uganda Moslem Women’s Association did not turn up but we invited everyone.

THE SPEAKER: There is the Aga Khan Foundation; it came up.  

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you but that is not a Moslem association. I thank you, madam chairperson and the hon. member for the clarification. 

I would like to move on to page three, the last paragraph. I am happy to read that the members who are elected to the local councils cannot hold any other position on the higher councils, but I would have wished to have it more clarified so that even the reverse applies. In many cases, when some of these laws are left like this, not all people in our respective areas can see the hidden meaning. 

It could be interpreted, in some areas, to mean that it is only women in local council positions who are barred from joining the local government councils, yet it applies that even women on local councils should not contest for positions on women’s councils. So, I wish to see that that is included so that our members on local councils do not contest for positions on the women’s councils. 

As the chairperson explained, this has created problems on women‘s councils. In some instances, there could be a popular woman who is however not a performer, and if she is elected, say, on Local Council II or III, and then she contests for Women’s Council, that means that she will not perform. Once she fails to perform as a local councillor, she will equally fail to perform as an executive member of the Women’s Council. 

And it has been a very big handicap for the local women to get proper leaders because of this greed for leadership. Many leaders in the lower councils feel that the more you participate or are elected on all the councils, the more popular you become. This as a result frustrates the work of local councils. 

So, I am very glad that the council members came up with this proposal, and I strongly support it. I would however like to have it added that even members who are on local councils should not stand for positions on Women’s Councils.

I would also like to comment on this financing of the councils as proposed by the Committee. First and foremost, I am equally perturbed by the amounts suggested. When I came to break down these amounts as suggested, in some cases it cannot cater for the whole district. For example, what Mukono should get would be about Shs 90,000 only, but considering our forty sub-counties with six islands, and you give us Shs 70,000 for water transport alone, that means that some councils on the mainland would go without transport.

So I think that much as the Committee wanted to be very lenient and not to look so bad before Parliament, they underestimated these amounts. Again, I do not know how they came about with fifty districts when we have fifty-six districts. Does it mean that there are some districts that are not going to be catered for in this Financial Year? Let me hope that Mukono is among those to be catered for. (Laughter).

And then as we go for 2003, I would have expected that these figures to go on rising from 2002/2003 and then on to 2003/2004. We are expecting these councils to come up with more programmes, more mobilisation, more interactions and even secretariats to even have more staff and more activities. 

So, when you go on depreciating the budgeted amounts, I get worried. Maybe the Members thought that they are just creating these councils for this financial year. So they expect the next year to be stabilised. But I expect that after they have activated these councils this year, the following financial year should require more funding, because more people will have been enlightened and the women councils will be standing on their own. Therefore, they will have identified more activities and more interactions between the districts and the national council and the secretariats. 

As you know, once we pass a budget, it is very difficult to push it upwards. Instead we maintain it or lower it. So, if we pass these figures as they have been stated, I fear that these councils might never improve the way we expect them to. Otherwise, I am very happy that at last this report has come up and I pray that our male counterparts give us overwhelming support with these councils to be in place. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS EUGENIA MINDRA (Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I commend the Committee for the report well presented. Nevertheless, I have this observation to make concerning funding.  

It is true, as my colleague from Mukono has stated, the budget has been very meagre. I remember some two, three years back, some money was given by the Central Government to the districts to facilitate women’s activities in the form of a sort of revolving funds, and each district was given only five million shillings. My district, small as it is, complained about the little funding. What about big districts like Arua and others with big population? So, the budget really needs to be made a bit higher, although when we make the budget, they tend to sideline women’s issues. Women are great mobilisers, and these big men use the women for all the mobilisation activities. So, I urge them to support the women’s issues.

Regarding lobbying for funds from elsewhere, I would like to make the following amendment. The district should be given liberty to lobby for funds anywhere within Uganda and outside. Maybe some of the Members have got friends or influential persons outside Uganda who could help them to lobby for these funds. They should not be restricted within the country.  

Concerning this supervisory role from the Central Government, I suggest that since we are moving towards decentralisation, it is better this supervision is done from the district, because the districts are becoming more and more stronger.  It may be a bit difficult to make this supervision from the centre. If the Central Government releases funds to the districts through the local government, then they should be accounted for by the CAOs there because it is nearer and easier. The CAO then can make their financial report to the centre.  

I commend the Chairperson of this Committee, and I greatly support this motion for the cause of women’s issues. Women are the greater population in Uganda, so let us all look at them as an important asset so that we can all work together for the development of our country side by side with the men. Thank you.

MR GODFREY KIWANDA (Mityana County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee for the good report presented, and for the amendments in the existing Women’s Council.

I support the issue of having all chairpersons at the sub-county Women’s Council to be part of the Women Council V; however, my worry is about the funding. We might complain about the funding at the national level, but we should also focus at the lower councils. When you go to the districts, and even in the lower councils like the sub-counties, sometimes a vote allocated to women is diverted to other issues. For example, if you check the 2000/2002 budgets, most of the money, which had been allocated to the women activities, was taken to another vote. So, as we are doing it here, we should also sensitise women councillors at the local councils to be vigilant about their vote.  

I also urge women and other interest groups that as long as we talk about interest groups, we should encourage them to get involved in other activities at the sub-counties, and other lower councils. They should utilise the resources, because the youth might come up the next day and say, money allocated to the youth is not given to them. But other programmes are there for them. How are they utilising these programmes? If the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture is coming up, how are women utilising it? They should tap all this money. We should sensitise our people to know how to benefit from these programmes.

The problem of only one person being the chairperson from Women Council I to Women Council V - I do not know whether this is a problem of the structure itself, but maybe it is a problem of the Electoral Commission because it happens even to other interest groups.  

I was a chairperson of the village youth council up to Youth Council IV in my county. I think it is not a problem of the structure but of the Electoral Commission. After organising a general election, they do not go back and organise elections down there.

I urge all Members to support this motion because women contribute a lot to our nation, and even to the votes that we get. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): MR Speaker, having listened to the honourable Members of this House, both sexes need this bill and need more financing for the good of Uganda. I beg that the question be put and we proceed to the next stage.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the motion for the Second Reading of “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill 2002”.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL 2002

Clause 1:

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 1 stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the Committee is proposing some amendment on the composition of the National Women’s Council.  In Clause 2(5) on page three, the Committee is proposing to replace paragraph (a) to (i) the composition of the National Women’s Council with the following: “(a) The chairperson of each District Women’s council –“ (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it not page one?

MRS HYUHA: In the amendment bill it is on page 3 but in the report it is on page 1.  Can I go ahead?

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman we are proposing an amendment on the composition of the National Women’s Council. This is in Clause 2(5), which is on page 3 of this amendment bill.  The committee is proposing to replace paragraph (a) to (i), the composition of the National Women’s Council with the following: 

(a) the chairperson of each District Women’s Council; 

(b) a representative of women with disabilities to be elected from among themselves through their structures;
 
(c) three women representatives of non-governmental organisations which are involved in women’s affairs or business determined by the National Women’s Council; 

(d) a representative of the Ministry responsible for gender and women advancement; 

(e) the secretary for female youth on the National Youth Executive Committee; 

(f) a representative of women parliamentarians elected from among the Women Members of Parliament;  and 

(g) the Executive Secretary of the National Women’s Council.

In Clause 5(2), the members of the council in paragraph (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of sub-section (1) shall be ex-officio members.  This is to create a linkage between the Women’s Council and the relevant policy making bodies.  Secondly, to tap on the expertise of non-governmental organisations.  

The Committee also felt that the members referred to under sub-section (2) are made ex-officio members so that they do not take over the council but just participate in it.

Hon. Members you will also realise that we didn’t specify which NGO, because with time some NGOs move up to the grassroots while others deteriorate, so we did not want to specify the NGO in the law, but that will be determined by time.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the thing is clear.  Now I put the question – yes hon. Minister.

MS NAMUSOKE KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Chairperson.  I certainly agree with the biggest part of the amendment, but I have a problem. I think she was talking about the composition of the National Women’s Council, but then somewhere she said that three NGOs will be determined by the National Women’s Council, yet it is the composition of that National Women’s council we are talking about. So which one now will be determining?    Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Don’t you think I should clear this before I come to you?

MRS MATEMBE: Mr Speaker, on the composition of the council, we discussed this matter very seriously, bearing in mind the roles some of us have played in the whole gender question, and we thought that on this council it would be very crucial to tap the skills and experience of these other national NGOs in order to guide and assist the – (Interjection) – yes; there are some NGOs constituted in this country with specialised knowledge, skills, information, experience and they have contributed seriously to the movement of women in this country to where it is.  

Therefore, when we were discussing, we said that these local councils as they come from the grassroots, when they come to the national level, they would benefit from the experience and the skills reserve of information to strengthen the Council.  We said for now it is an umbrella organisation for all these NGOs in the country, let it be on this board or council because once it is there, then the voices of the local women NGOs are there, and it is a good structure through which they can link with these women.   

Then we said that on the national NGOs there is FIDA; there is Uganda Women and Finance Credit Act; there is ACFODE, there is FOWODE. There are quite a number of them - professional, skilled and national - and they link together through a network called UWONET. So we said – (Interjection) – yes; I know them because I belong to all of them! So we said that this network called UWONET, which is an umbrella for these professional skilled national women NGOs to be on the council – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: But now, the problem is that you are trying to make suggestions by naming NGOs but I think let us start with the first clarification from the Minister of State for Internal Affairs.  She was saying if it were the national council that has to nominate the three, how would it nominate when it is not in existence because the other ones are part of it? I think that was the clarification.  How will you do it, will you do it after the others have been set in and then nominate so that the complete council is set up?    Let us start with that. 

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I want to thank hon. Kiyingi who asked the question for clarification. This will also help others get clarified on this issue.  

When you look at the composition as is being proposed here, (a) is talking about the chairperson of each district women’s council, and that will bring the number to 56. When you add a representative of women with disabilities and then look at these other categories mentioned, they are going to be ex-officio members.  

The members proposed that on the first day of assembly, as they come to elect the chairperson and the executive, one of the issues they should decide on should be which NGO should be represented. Mr Chairman, if you may permit me to also answer hon. Matembe’s concern -(Interruption)  

MRS MATEMBE: I am making this point, and I beg the indulgence of Members. You can imagine; there are - I do not know how many women NGOs in this country, how do you choose three from them? Honestly, three NGOs out of all these thousands of women NGOs in this country! 

To facilitate this difficult exercise, we said, up to where we have reached so far, women have been having a voice nationally, that is through NAWOU.  So, we said let NAWOU be on this council. We then said, for these professional skilled women, where most of these Kampala women belong, they link through UWONET. Otherwise, I do not know how you will choose FIDA and leave out ACFODE, or choose Gender Resource Centre and leave out FOWODE. What criteria would one use?  

We said, if you choose UWONET, which is an umbrella organization, I can assure you, through UWONET we have worked on gender issues like the co-ownership of land, and we always come together and fight for gender issues. 

We are saying, why don’t we facilitate this otherwise difficult thing? Put NAWOU and UWONET, and then the rest you will put. I do not know why they have decided to say three NGOs. I am telling you, it will be extremely difficult for them to sit and decide which three women NGOs should go on this council.

THE CHAIRMAN: Arising from her contribution, she is proposing an amendment to the Committee’s proposal in respect of this particular clause. I take it as an amendment.  

She is making an amendment because your committee has made a proposal. It is not committed, but it is saying the body will choose.  But as far as she is concerned, she is certain these organizations, if they were included, would serve the purpose. So she is amending.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, what hon. Matembe is saying is what is proposed in this amendment bill. It is what the Committee and stakeholders debated at length and we came up with this amendment. 

The very criteria the Minister is proposing on how they came to choose UWONET or NAWOU will be used by the national councils. Why do we underrate their capacity? (Applause). They will also come together and use the same criteria to decide.

THE CHAIRMAN: There is no problem. She is entitled to make an amendment. Let us dispose of this matter. It has been made clear, and you know the organizations she has mentioned. So, I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

MRS HOPE MWESIGYE:  Mr Chairman, I would like to know from the Committee why the council should choose the three representatives rather than identifying the NGOs and then the NGOs elect their representatives amongst themselves, just like they are providing for other groups.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I would like to add to what my colleague has just asked. If we let the women councils choose the NGOs, what criteria are they going to use?  That is a very important question because we may end up causing conflict amongst the NGOs.

THE CHAIRMAN: I see the point by the Member for Kabale District. She is not opposed to naming the NGO, but who? She is suggesting that the named NGO would send the person actually to sit on the council rather than the council itself naming a person from the organization.  Isn’t that the case?  

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I am suggesting that when the national council identifies the NGOs, be they 10 or 20, then those 20 NGOs should convene and elect their representatives.  

THE CHAIRMAN: There is no problem, because the national council will not know whom the suitable person from that particular NGO is. On the other hand, they are in position to say, “this NGO is helpful to us, it should be here. Let it send a person to sit on the council.” What is the problem with this, chairperson? Let us deal with this.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, hon. Members, I do not think the Committee will have any problem with this. Our only interest is to have NGO representatives but not to mention a particular NGO in the law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, how do you want this one to read?

MRS MEHANGYE: “Three women representatives of Non Governmental Organisations elected from amongst themselves and …” Add the rest (Laughter).

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the technical person will know how to re-draft this one.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Chairman, I would like the Chairperson to clarify to us whether she is insisting, after we have qualified these three women representatives of NGOs which are involved in women affairs to elect their own representative from amongst themselves, that they still remain ex-officio members, or will they now be full members of that Women’s Council? 

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, as hon. Wambuzi has asked, it is clear here. We are saying that representatives of (c), (d), (e), (f), (g) remain ex-officio members. So I maintain that.

THE CHAIRMAN: They are coming in because of their technical knowledge about women issues. So they are not in the administration. I now put the question on the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3:

MRS HYUHA:  Mr Chairman, in clause (3), the Committee is proposing to insert “name” after the word “corporate” appearing in the second line so that the new one would read: 
“A District Women’s Council shall be a body corporate and may sue or be sued in its corporate name and shall carry out any other activities carried out by a body corporate.” 

This is because of a printing omission. I beg to move.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4:

MRS HYUHA: Clause 4, Mr Chairman, is about sub-county and county women’s councils, which should be falling on page 4 and 5. The Committee proposes a new paragraph (a) as follows:  “(a)	by substituting for sub-section (3) the following new sub-section -  

(3) A sub county women’s council shall consist of-

(a) all the members of the parish or ward women’s executive committees;

(b) a representative of women with disabilities elected from among the disabled women in the sub-county through their structures;

(c) secretary  for  female  youth on the sub-county youth executive committee who shall be ex-officio members;

(d) two women representatives of Non Governmental Organisations or community-based organisations, which are involved in women affairs or business registered and recognised by the sub-county, to be determined by the sub-county women’s councils, who shall be ex-officio members; 

(e) the officer responsible for gender and women advancement in the sub-county who shall be an ex-officio member; 

(f) the sub-county women representatives in the district local council, who shall be ex-officio members; and

(g) Secretary for gender in the sub-county local council who shall be an ex-officio member.” 

Mr Chairman, we also have further amendment. I do not know whether we first handle that one – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: This one of sub-county? Yes, hon. Matembe.

MRS MIRIA MATEMBE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. In line with the amendment which hon. Mwesigye brought and was passed, I suggest that a consequential amendment follows because she was reading of the NGOs down there and it was the Council to determine who should represent them. Thank you.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, it is true we have agreed that these NGOs can elect among themselves, but we have not agreed on who should actually re-convene these NGOs for them to elect among themselves. For us, we had agreed that the National Women’s Council in the first meeting reconvene and determine the NGO. But here we are saying we want to give them an opportunity to elect from among themselves. I wish you could agree on that, Mr Chairman.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Chairman, on 3(d), ”registered and recognised by the sub-county to be determined by the sub-county Women’s Council who shall be …” I would like to be clarified by hon. Bitangaro what exactly he means by ‘registered and recognised?’ Is it in the NGO national board or by the sub-county board?  

MR BITANGARO: The clarification is simple. There is an office for registration of CBOs and NGOs, which are operating in the district. So, they mean those CBOs operating and registered in the district and so recognised as such.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the Committee is proposing to amend (b) on page 5 - it is about County Women’s Council - by deleting sub-section (4) thereof.  This is because County Women’s Councils are redundant, and under decentralisation, the focus is at sub-county and the district. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: Clause 4(5) is about District Women’s Council.  We have been talking about Sub-county Women’s Council. Mr Chairman, the Committee proposes to replace paragraphs (a) to (d) of sub-section (5) as follows:

 “(a) the chairpersons of the sub-county, division or town women’s councils;

(b) a representative of women with disabilities elected from among disabled women through their structures;

(c) secretary for female youth on the District Youth Executive Committee;

(d) two women representatives of non-governmental or community based organization involved in women affairs or business, which are registered and recognized by the district, to be determined by the District Women’s Council. 

(e) the officer responsible for gender and women advancement at the district;

(f) the District Woman Representative in Parliament;

(g) the Secretary in charge of Gender in the district local council; and

(h) the head of the secretariat of the district women’s council. 

(5)(a) Members of the council in paragraph (c)(d)(e)(f) (g) and (h) of sub-section (5) shall be ex-official.”

This is to make the women councils more encompassing, and  to attract expertise and also create linkage between women councils and other relevant bodies.  We can finish that one, then I go to the next one, Mr Chairman.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am proposing a consequential amendment on (d) to read as follows:  “two women elected among representatives of NGO’s or Community based organizations…” and so on and so forth.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think what is going to happen is that the technical people have to harmonize the formulation in respect of this category of people so that whether it is a county, a district or at the national level the formulation reads the same way. I think that is what is agreed on.

MR BITANGARO: What we should put on record is that the women’s councils will sit and nominate the NGOs and the NGOs will give in their representatives. This should be clear that when we have selected the three NGO’s at the National Women’s Council, then those NGOs give us their representatives.

THE CHAIRMAN: I think that is what we are doing.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman still on clause 4(a), that sub-clauses (6) and (7) on page 5 be deleted.  This was about a chairperson of a sub-county women’s council being a member, but of course we cannot amend the Local Governments Act now, it will be conflicting and that is why we are deleting it.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the new clause on sub-county women’s councils be adopted.  I beg to move.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: You are amending that one but I am asking about 4(5)(f), the district representative. Is he a member of that council or is he an ex-officio member? It is also the same for the next group down there.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, the Member is asking what we have already pronounced ourselves on.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4 as amended put and agreed to.

Clause 5:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman in Clause 5, the Committee is proposing an amendment on the Women Executive Committees. This is on page 5 and it is section 8 of the principle Act. We propose to substitute paragraph (f) so that it reads as follows:  

(f) in the case of the District Women’s Council Committee- 

So we are replacing (f) in the principle Act because (f) talks of what should be the Executive.  It talks of the Chairperson, Vice, Publicity, but we are replacing it to read: “the district woman representative in Parliament who shall be an ex-officio member.” In the principle Act it was talking of a Member of NRC.
“ 
(i) Officer responsible for gender and women advancement at the district who shall be an ex-officio member;

(ii) a representative of women with disabilities elected from among the disabled women in the district;

(iii) Secretary for female youth on the District Youth Executive Committee who shall be an ex-officio member;

(iv) two women representatives of non-government organizations determined by the district women’s councils, which are involved in the Women affairs or business, registered and recognized by the district, who shall be ex-officio members.”

So out of the three representatives of the NGO’s we can have two of them on the Executive. This one will also be ex-official. 

“(g) Secretary in charge of gender in the district local council who shall be an ex-officio member”

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay. You see, what I have seen in your drafting is that there is a lot of inconsistency because in certain categories of councils, immediately you mention the ex-officio members.  Then in another category you jump them, and then at the end you say these are ex-officio members. I do not know whether you have detected that.  So, really, what do we do? Do we want to attach “ex-officio” immediately to the category or at the end and we say such a category is “ex-officio”? There is inconsistency, which I have detected now.

MR SAMUEL BITANGARO: Mr Chairman we would like to make them consistent by stating at the end of every other clause that they are ex-officio members.

THE CHAIRMAN: So now you want to do this here?

MR BITANGARO: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, can you read?

MR BITANGARO: I beg to move that Members in clause 8(f) 1,2,4,5 and 6 shall be ex-officio members.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, now the other inconsistency is that in some areas you use Roman numerals and in others you use letters of the alphabet. What do we do with that?

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman in this section 8, Roman numbers are for those sub-sections (f) and they are already in (a) which is talking of a chairperson in the Principle Act up to (f). It is (f) that we are replacing to put in these other categories.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment as improved on by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5 as amended put and agreed to.

Clause 6:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman in Clause 6 on page 6 of this amendment bill, the Committee is proposing some amendments in the composition of the National Women’s Council Executive Committee, and that is section 9 of the principle Act. The Committee proposes the following amendments:

Sub-clause (2) paragraph (e) is replaced to read as follows: “Secretary for female youth on the National Youth Council who shall be ex-officio members.”
 
Sub-clause (2) paragraphs (f), (g) and (h) are replaced as follows: (f)	The ex-officio members of the Council as ex-officio members”; and then, “two female representatives of non-governmental organisations, which are involved in women’s affairs and in the business, determined…” - I think this one is consequential.  

“(g) a representative of the women with disabilities.” 

Now in (f), (g) and (h) we did not want to repeat what is already there because we have already mentioned it. This is for consistence, and it is applicable to all women councils, and also to avoid external influence. The new clause after Clause 6, that one will come later, Mr Chairman.

MR MUTULUUZA:  Mr Chairman, on the composition of women councils, we see that chairpersons of districts will be the representatives on the national council.  Now, I am asking myself; how? And if this particular chairperson has been elected on the executive, will they have to elect again? And if they elect, will that district not have two representatives on the National Executive Council?

THE CHAIRMAN: I thought there is a council and then there is the executive, and the executive comes out of the council!  Members of the executive are part and parcel of members of the council, but it is a few who are on the executive, and that happens anywhere.  

MR MUTULUUZA: The problem is that nobody should have two offices.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Then how do you get a government out of a council? It must be some members of the council that you put in the executive.  I think it is clear.

MRS HYUHA:  Mr Chairman, it is provided here in this Amendment Bill on page 7 under “Filling of vacancies of councils and committees: Except for the National Women’s Council and the National Women’s Executive Committee, where a position falls vacant on the women’s council and women’s committee, the next higher women’s council shall within 30 days after the position falls vacant, supervise election and fill the vacancy, and the chairperson for that next higher council shall notify the Electoral Commission”. 

So, this one it is only for the National Women’s Council and National Women’s Executive Committee, but the rest they can fill in immediately according to this.  So, we did not amend this.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: After Clause 6, the Committee proposes to introduce a new clause -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Is it a new clause and not part of Clause 6?

MRS HYUHA: I think it will be part of that but a sub-clause, because thereafter we are going to Clause 7.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay.

MRS HYUHA: Now, this is what I sent to you, Mr Chairman, because it is different from what is circulated here. 

Mr Chairman, on page six of this amendment bill, it is talking about a woman occupying one office. We are moving an amendment to read: “Except at the Village and Parish levels where the chairperson of the women’s council is the secretary for the women’s council, no person shall hold an office in the women’s councils together with an office in the local council, both of which entitle her to participate in the voting of a district Woman Member of Parliament”. 

This is to avoid conflict, especially in the Electoral College for the election of the district woman MPs.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Is it clear?
  
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7:

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, in Clause 7, the Committee is proposing an amendment on the appointment of a secretary.  That is to re-draft Section 11(2) of the Principal Act to read as follows: (4) “The secretary shall be appointed by the Minister on the advice of the National Women’s Council and in consultation with the Public Service Commission.” 

This is to put the appointment in line with other appointments in the public service, and to ensure that the right person is appointed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: Mr Chairman, we shall have a new Clause 8 after 7, a new Clause to the Principal Act -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Then I think I put the question that Clause 7, as amended stand part of the bill -(Mrs Hyuha rose_) 

MRS HYUHA: No, but this one is before 8, because once we pronounce ourselves to Clause 7, we shall go to Clause 8, Mr Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, proceed with Clause 7 again.

MRS HYUHA:  This is a new Clause 8 after 7.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, were there amendments on Clause 7?

MRS HYUHA:  Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now I put the question on the amendments.  So, after you have agreed with the amendments, then I have to put the question that Clause 7, as amended stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA: A new Clause; this one will be Clause 8.  The Principal Act is amended by inserting a new Section 15(a) after Section 15 as follows - this is now in the Principal Act; it is about funds of district and other women councils.

(1)  “The funds and resources for the district and other lower women councils shall consist of: -

(a) such sums as may be appropriated by Parliament for the purpose of the women council through the Ministry responsible for Gender and Women Advancement; 

(b) any monies accruing to the relevant women council in the discharge of its functions under this Statute; and	

(c) grants, gifts or donations to the relevant council.

(2) The monies appropriated under sub-section (1) shall be decentralised and directly transferred to the relevant women council by the Treasury.

(3) All incomes and monies of a council shall be deposited to the credit of the council in a bank approved by the Minister, and shall not be withdrawn except with the approval of and in a manner determined by the women’s council;

(4) The provisions of Sections 16 to 21 shall apply to the district and other lower women’s councils.”  

The justification is that the women’s councils should have a budget in the national budget to operationalise the women’s councils. I beg to move.

MR WAMBUZI GAGAWALA: I would like to be clarified by either the Minister in charge or the chairperson, whether actually this law we are about to pass had clearance from the Budget Committee as per the Budget Law.

THE CHAIRMAN: Nobody has the answer. Can we proceed?

CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, maybe the chairperson could also clarify on (3), which says: “All incomes and monies of a council shall be deposited to the credit of the council in a bank approved by the Minister.” 

We have just passed that these councils are body corporate, and they appropriate funds from the Consolidated Fund.  I thought the incomes would go to the Consolidated fund, not as the Minister would approve it.  I need some clarification on that.

MRS HYUHA: I did not get hon. Capt. Byaruhanga’s question, because in relation to the Minister here, it is the bank to be approved by the Minister. And when they talk of the Minister, he may have a representative, an official in charge of gender and women advancement in the district who may act on his or her behalf.  So, I did not get your question whether you are referring to the monies or approval of the bank.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: I mean the incomes; what incomes do you have in mind? Is it from business or fundraising?  If you get funds from the Treasury, are these fundraisings you are referring to or you make business as a body corporate?

MRS HYUHA: But hon. Capt. Byaruhanga, with your experience! We have just heard here what is appropriated from the centre, is it really enough? We are saying let us allow these district women councils to be body corporate so that they can generate income. They can write proposals and send to donors, they can organise fundraisings; what is wrong with that?  They can have their handcrafts and sell or an income-generating project!  So all those monies should be deposited to a bank approved by the relevant officer, and that is the Minister.

MR BITANGARO: Mr Chairman, we are really making a consequential amendment because Section 15 of the Principal Act provides for sources of the council funds, and because we have decided now to make the women councils at the district level body corporate, we have replicated section 15 of the Principal Act to come to the district.  That is all.

MR WAGONDA MUGULI: Mr Chairman, I have a difficulty with transfer of funds to all levels of councils directly by the Treasury.  We have laws that make the CAO the accounting officer in the district.  Now, by transferring funds directly to a council at LC III, you are effectively making them also an accounting centre, which I think will make the work of the Treasury very difficult. Would the Chairperson and the Minister like to clarify on that?

MR BITANGARO: Mr Chairman, the honourable member is right. The monies in sub-clause (2) should be decentralized and directly transferred to the district, because the CAO is the accounting officer in the district under the Local Governments Act.

THE CHAIRMAN: So now what happens? How do we proceed?

MR BITANGARO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that sub-clause (2) be amended to read: 
“The monies appropriated under sub-section (1) shall be decentralised and directly transferred to the district for the benefit of the women council by the Treasury.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question to the amendment by the Committee as improved on by the Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS HYUHA:  There is a new clause.  Inserting a new section after Section 21 under part VI as follows amends the Principal Act: “21(a)(1) The District Women’s Council shall have a Secretariat to assist in carrying out its functions under the Act.

(2) The Sub-County Women’s Council shall have a Secretariat to assist it in carrying out its functions under this Statute, and the effective date for the provision of this sub-section shall be determined by the Minister.” 

That is concerning the sub-county, and the justification is to keep the activities of women’s councils at district and sub-county levels actively running.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

Clause 8:

THE CHAIRMAN:  Clear? I now put the question that Clause 8 of the original text stand part of the bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR GAGAWALA:  Mr Chairman, I had asked a question to the honourable Minister and the hon. Chairperson as to whether we are consistent with the budget law. That if we pass this law, it will not impinge on the budget.  In fact, it is mandatory that before we pass any law today in this House, we must be in agreement with the budget law.

MRS HYUHA:  Mr Chairman, unless the Member has not been consistent, but last week as we provided the report, we also provided the financial implications of the Statute’s amendment. We have the budget estimates of the years 2002/03, 2003/04, and of 2004/05, and the Committee was convinced that these amendments would be within the budget.  That is why we proposed that for the secretariat at sub-county level where we thought that it could have financial implications –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Just answer the question.

MRS HYUHA:  We have provided the financial implications, we are within.

The Title:

MRS BINTU:  Mr Chairman, I am seeking for your guidance and possibly a clarification from the Chairperson.  In the proposed amendment (g) on page 1 of the amendments, we have used the name “the Executive Secretary of the National Women’s Council”. On page 6, we passed a sub-clause saying that the Minister shall appoint the secretary. I am seeking clarification and guidance as to whether these two terms are being used interchangeably. Thank you.

MRS HYUHA: It is the same post. And in the principal act, they have defined a secretary.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE, GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

THE MINISTER OF STATE, GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002” and passed it with a few amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2002

THE MINISTER OF STATE, GENDER AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Bitangaro): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2002” be read the Third Time and do pass. I beg to move

THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2002

THE SPEAKER: The bill is passed. Now we come to the end of today’s business. The chairperson of the Budget Committee is not here, but she indicated that there is some delay in sessional committees with reports on the budget. Please take necessary steps to ensure that we beat the deadline of submitting the reports to the Budget Committee.

With this we come to the end of today’s business, the House is adjourned until Thursday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 5.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 May 2002 at 2.00 p.m.)


