Wednesday, 30 April 2003

Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS
(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)
The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Parliamentary Football team has been invited to go and play a Labour Day match in Fort Portal against the Kabarole district team, in a curtain-raiser match for the Labour Day celebrations. Capt. Steven Basaliza, the MP for Burahya, sponsors the match and the chief guest is going to be the NPC. So, the parliamentary football team and the supporters are invited to be at the North Wing Park at 8:00 a.m. ready to proceed to Fort Portal for this important match. We hope you will be able to beat the Kabarole district team and come back with some distinction.  

The second matter I wish to communicate is that owing to the importance of the debate today, I will alter the Order Paper. Item No.5 will move to No.4, Item No.6 will move to No.5 and item No.7 will then move to No.6 so that we can have sufficient time to deal with the statement from the Minister of Defence. Thank you.

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, as I was coming to Parliament this afternoon, I checked my pigeon hole and there was a letter from His Excellency the President to the Speaker of Parliament forwarding names of five gentlemen and one lady for approval on appointment as members of the National Planning Authority. 

There is a matter that has not been resolved by this House and this one particularly concerns Iganga district. You remember, Madam Speaker, this House approved the reconstitution of the Appointments Committee. Iganga district was represented at that time by hon. Dr Richard Bulamu, who has since moved to the AIDS Committee, which is also a Standing Committee, and our rules do not allow a member to belong to two committees. This means, therefore, that Iganga does not have a representative on the Appointments Committee. But we cannot nominate some other person on the district basis because the rules do not allow. So what are you going to do, Madam Speaker?

MR NYEKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Likewise, Kapchorwa district used to be represented by hon. Dr Chebrot; he also joined the AIDS (HIV) Committee. So we are not also represented on the Appointments Committee as a district. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you permit us to study the situation and advise you on Friday morning on how we shall proceed? 

Now, I also have an unfortunate announcement from the hon. Simon Mayende, MP for Samia Bugwe South. He is reporting to us the death of his mother, Mrs Erina Bachayaya, which occurred this morning at 5.00 a.m. Burial will take place at Mpaija village Busiisi sub county in Hoima district on Friday, 2 May 2003 at 2.00 p.m. He is directing those who will be able to go that Mpaija village is 5 km from Hoima town, along the Hoima - Fort Portal Road. And their home is near Mpaija Primary School. 

He is also informing us that during his absence, the Vice-Chairperson, the hon. Betty Udongo Pacuto, MP for Nebbi district will handle the matters pertaining to defense and internal affairs. Can I request colleagues to stand up for a minute of silence in memory of our colleague’s mother?  

(The Members stood and observed a minute of silence.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I also have a small announcement from the Chairperson, Budget Committee who invites vice chairpersons of Sessional Committees to attend the Budget Committee meeting on Monday, 5 May. I understand it is imperative for all of you to attend this meeting. 

But can I ask Members - I wish you could help me and bring this to my office before I come here. I am receiving messages and you know I have an office in this building. I would really appreciate if they were brought to my office.  Otherwise, I will never stop communicating.

MR AGGREY AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern. Madam Speaker, I stand in this august House to bring this important matter to your notice. 

A fellow Ugandan who was encouraged by His Excellency the President of Uganda in London to come back home and invest his wealth locally - an unfortunate incident has befallen this honourable son of Uganda. He brought the equivalent of Shs 200,000,000 in terms of investment. Uganda Investment Authority encouraged him to see a prospective landlord; they identified Uganda Railway Corporation as a landlord with surplus piece of land. His Excellency again encouraged him to do a feasibility study to see NEMA if this particular investment is not inimical to our environment interests.  

Madam Speaker, URC gave him a lease on Plot No. 19, Ggaba Road. This company is called WIDESPUR. They put up mechanical equipment to clean vehicles. Madam Speaker, other Ugandans have also joined him in this venture. What is unfortunate is that in the middle of the lease, for unknown reasons, Uganda Railways Corporation has cancelled it and they are in the process of evicting him from the plot, notwithstanding a 200 million shillings worth of investment. As I speak now, the man is almost under arrest. His facility has been surrounded by security on the order of URC.

Madam Speaker, if the President of the nation encourages me to bring my investment back home, if the President of the nation encourages Uganda Investment Authority to facilitate my investment, if a parastatal body of this government gives me a lease in good faith and suddenly they turn against me, what message are we sending to local investors?  What message are we sending to international investors?

Madam Speaker, I had drafted a motion for a Resolution of Parliament, but I am now making it in form of a statement. I request that the Minister of Communications gives us full information and directs the Managing Director of Uganda Railways Corporation to remove security from this particular facility and facilitate the operations of this business.  

Madam Speaker, if this august House does not assist the bona fide Ugandan investors, if this august House cannot listen or direct ministers to stick to the policies of the government, that would be unfortunate. 

Madam Speaker, unfortunately this afternoon in this august House, we do not have a Minister of Communications, we do not have the Leader of Government Business. But Madam Speaker, I request, and with support from my honourable colleagues present here today, that we request the Minister of Communications to direct the Managing Director of Uganda Railways Corporation to allow this bona fide investor to continue with his business without interference. I thank you - Madam Speaker, it is not in the wetlands.  As I said, he has got a NEMA certificate of approval.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the absence of the Minister of Works, I cannot see how to proceed except that we shall pass on the text of the Hansard of what you have said to him and we request him to come back here and explain to us the circumstances surrounding this matter.

MR KEN LULYAMUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week on Friday, the Speaker of Parliament directed that the Attorney General of Uganda answer the queries I raised as matters of public importance. Yesterday, Madam Speaker, you repeated the same. Now that the Attorney General has surfaced, isn’t it prudent that I get the answers?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, yesterday we declined to entertain your matter for two reasons: one was that there was a pending question on the same matter by hon. Katuntu and to entertain your matter would be in breach of Rule 63.  So we said that since what you want to raise is similar to what hon. Katuntu wants to hear, we have put hon. Katuntu’s matter on the Order Paper and the Attorney General will answer. You will have a chance to give supplementary questions.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the Inspectorate of Government to Parliament for the period January to June 2002. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The report will be sent to the appropriate committee for consideration, and they will report back to this House.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER OF STATE, LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Henry Obbo): Madam Speaker and my honourable friends, as you are aware, May 1st is celebrated internationally as Labour Day. The day is set aside in recognition of the tremendous contribution of the labour force to the social-economic transformation of respective member countries.  

This year’s theme for us in Uganda is ‘Job creation, today’s challenge’. The national venue will be Bugembe Stadium in Jinja District. 

This theme has been specifically chosen based on two issues:

    1. The current unemployment situation, especially among the youth, that has reached critical proportions. 
    2. His Excellency the President’s commitment to creating employment for each and everybody willing and ready to work.

Unemployment and poverty are related and intertwined.  People earn incomes through gainful employment. The incomes earned enable the workers and their dependants to purchase goods and services necessary for their survival. 

We all know that work for our people means a lot in terms of income, respect in society, purpose for living knowing that work is a right, duty and honour to every citizen, including responsibility and status in society. It is, therefore, imperative that we create jobs for our people, if we are to build and have a prosperous nation. Without work, poverty sets in and prosperity melts away.  

In order to address this double-edged problem of unemployment and poverty, Government has put in place a number of policies and programmes, notable amongst which are: 

    i) The Poverty Eradication Action Plan 
    ii) The Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture
    iii) The Health Investment Plan
    iv) The ten-year Road Sector Plan
    v) The Energy Sector Investment Plan
    vi) The Medium Term Competitive Strategy for the Private Sector.

In addition, my ministry is finalising the Social Sector Development Investment Plan. Under this plan, one of its main pillars is promotion of employment for poverty eradication. My ministry is aware that labour is the only asset that the poor have. We believe that the productive engagement of this labour should lead to poverty eradication. 

We also note the low levels of employment vis-à-vis the growing labour force. The present strength of the labour force in Uganda is estimated at 10 million people and growing at a rate of 3.4 per cent per annum. To keep abreast with our population expansion, the economy would need to create more than 340,000 new jobs annually. 

My ministry believes that once the Social Sector Development Investment Plan is implemented, it should create an enabling environment for increased employment opportunities and social security for all, especially for the poor and the vulnerable. 

Madam Speaker, my ministry has also completed a National Employment Policy Framework draft. The paper is before the Presidential Economic Council. I am optimistic that once the policy proposals are endorsed, it will assist in creating and maintaining jobs and decent working conditions for our people. The economy will then take a big leap forward and a thriving market.  

It is also important to mention here that my ministry and that of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, are fine-tuning four critical labour laws that are being revised. These are:

    1. The Employment Bill
    2. The Labour Unions Bill
    3. The Occupational Safety and Health Bill
    4. The Trade Dispute Bill.

It is my hope that this exercise will be completed soon.  

Madam Speaker, I am making this communication to update honourable members on the theme and venue of this year’s May 1st celebrations, and to request my honourable friends to attend the Bugembe function if they will not have arranged to do so in the respective districts. I thank you for your indulgence, Madam Speaker, and I do so for God and my country.

MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of State for Labour for this statement. I would also like to thank the Ministry for choosing a very important Theme for this year’s celebration.  

Madam Speaker, I am very glad that the government recognises the relationship between poverty and wage income.  Unfortunately, government has not demonstrated, in terms of policy, the desire to see to it that wage earnings contribute to the reduction of poverty in a substantial manner. 

I am on record on a number of times in this House to have talked about the unfair Pay-As-You-Earn (PAYE) structure in this country. If we create jobs, we do not simply create jobs just because people must go to work. When people go to work, they do so to get an income. The unfortunate thing, Madam Speaker, is that our government focuses heavily on formal sector workers when it comes to direct income tax. 

I said a few weeks ago in this House, that only 230 Ugandans contribute PAYE as if it is only 230 Ugandans who earn more Shs 130,000! I want to request our government to be very serious on this matter. 

I am informed that the Budget Committee has made a recommendation that the thresh-hold be raised from the current Shs 130,000 to over Shs 200,000. I hope the Ministry of Finance and the government will take this recommendation very seriously. If this is not accepted, then the Workers Representatives in Parliament and the workers of Uganda will not associate themselves with the Budget of 2003/4, because the formal sector has, for a long time, shouldered the burden of PAYE.  

Apart from raising the thresh-hold, we are requesting that the PAYE tax base be expanded because one of the canons of good taxation is that tax must be fair. The incidence must fall on all those on whom it is supposed to fall.

I am also glad that the Ministry of Labour is committed to putting in place an employment policy. However, Madam Speaker, for the last 10 years, I have heard about the Employment Policy being in draft. I hope this time, the ministry will make the dream of an employment policy become a reality. The absence of an employment policy leaves the realm of employment without any plan. For example, it is difficult to know which jobs will be created in which area, in what quantities and, therefore, for Government to make specific interventions, to make sure that our population benefits whenever jobs are created.  

There is a study that was carried out by our Research Department and it returned results to the effect that 40 per cent of jobs that have been created since 1997 have been taken over by foreigners, yet we are here saying that we want to create jobs for our people! One wonders where the seriousness of our government lies! (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Are you informing or you are contributing? You know debate is going to be very limited on this matter.

MR ODONGO OTTO: Just on the issue of those jobs being taken over by foreigners, it is very saddening to find out that investors are even selling sweets on Luwum Street! Investors are even selling pork! So where will our people eat? I think we really need to be very serious because the first function of any government is to protect the rich from the poor, then it protects the poor from themselves. There is a way these investors are not having limits. Of late, it is as if we are renting the country from investors. 

So, I think this employment policy should really come out together with the investment policy. Otherwise, our people are going back to the villages. The investors are running kiosks; they are doing almost everything in Uganda, in the name of investment! Thank you.

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much for your information, hon. Otto. But I just I want to advise Government and honourable colleagues. The issue of foreigners taking our jobs is a big potential for conflict in this country. Many of our people who think they should have jobs and the jobs are there, find themselves not having jobs, and there are foreigners in the jobs. It creates social strife. 

Even in our comfort in Kololo and Muyenga, these people who are unemployed at one point may make it difficult for us to sleep. After all, in other countries it is very difficult for us to get jobs there, why should we make it very easy for people to come from elsewhere and take these jobs? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement, but I would like him to take note of the following.

One, is there any plan in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for our upcoming labour force, especially the graduates, to be absorbed in this economy? Universities have expanded and other tertiary institutions have also expanded. Is there a corresponding expansion in the job market?  If that is not there, why are we saying we are celebrating Labour Day when we do not have hope for the future?  

Secondly, since we liberalised this economy, we have seen foreign investors, and sometimes local investors, also investing in this economy. The department of labour has not seriously looked at the conditions of workers in the investment field. For instance, most of these investors do not allow their employees to join or form trade union organisations. Their rights have generally been curtailed, and they cannot bargain adequately for better conditions of work. Has the ministry got any answer for this?  

Since liberalisation took place long ago, what measures do they have in place? I know in some of these investments, when the employees try to form a pressure group in the name of a trade union, they are fired. Thank you.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I thank you. First of all, I do not want to thank the minister. I do not want to flatter him with this report, because this report is below standard and I will say why it is below standard.

The minister is telling us that the current unemployment situation among the youth has reached critical proportions. Then he goes on to mention modernization of agriculture, and all this, which has nothing to do with his ministry.

He does not tell us even about Jinja. Jinja used to be the industrial capital of Uganda at one time. Now if you go to Jinja, you can almost cry. He does not even mention what affirmative action needs to be taken for Jinja, because really, it needs special affirmative action. I wonder why he even bothered to take Labour Day to Jinja. Mr Minister, Jinja is one of those places that is facing unemployment.  

Mr Minister, we are looking forward to your national employment policy. The policy itself may not create jobs, but it gives us a framework under which jobs can be created. It will force everybody to consult and see where jobs can be created.

Mr Minister, if you are thinking of heavy industries to create jobs, you better think again. Nowadays, the new economies are knowledge-based and brainworkers are the ones who create jobs - (Interruption).

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the member for giving way. Having observed, as the minister rightly says, that unemployment is critical, is the ministry relevant any more?

DR NKUUHE: I think the minister will answer that, but I was going to say that from the quality of this report, I think a lot of the people in that ministry should join the lines of the unemployed. Because this report could have been written by anybody in this House! 

It gives nothing specific in the ministry. They are all generalities that we know. Who does not know anything about the plan for modernization of agriculture? Who does not know about the ten-year road sector plan? All those are general. 

We wanted things that are specific to the labour ministry - what pilot things you are doing, what efforts you had made, what consultation you are doing to create more jobs, but not these generalities.  Mr Minister, I think you better be more serious. With those few words, I would like to thank you for this lousy report. Thank you.

MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to follow suit and thank the minister for this report, which I also find shallow to some extent.

There are some aspects, which I thought he would address. For example, when he talked about job creation as today’s challenge, and he specifically mentions the youth, I thought he would give us some statistics on the Youth Entandikwa Scheme. Jobs can be created when the youth are given entandikwa. Is this scheme operational? What has it done? Who has accessed it, and have any jobs been created? This is information I thought the minister would have given to this House.

The other issue I would like to touch on -(Interruption) 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I was one of the signatories to get money from the Treasury to put in the Co-operative Bank in 2000. For three years, 1999 to 2001, Government created the Youth Entandikwa Scheme. Government managed only to allocate 1.5 billion shillings.  Out of that, Ministry of Finance released only 500 million shillings. The 500 million shillings was banked in Co-operative Bank, which you know is six feet underground. So, that is the information I have. Now there is no money totally. There is nothing!

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you for the information. Mr Minister, you can see that you need to give us a formulation, so that it can verify what has been supplied to this House. 

My second point is on the issue of the labour laws.  These labour laws are very archaic. When you look at the Workman’s Compensation Act, it does not make any sense anymore. More specifically, when you look at the issue of employment of women, especially protection during pregnancy and after birth in accordance with Article 44 of the Constitution, you find that whereas the International Labour Organization states that they should have maternity leave of 90 days, women in Uganda are given only 45 days. 

This labour law has been very slow, and we are not given a definite deadline as to when this law will come to the House. So, we are concerned and perturbed about this. We would like to hear more on this.  The other issue  –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: I would like to inform hon. Byamukama and the House that the tripartite partners - the workers’ representatives, employers, and the Ministry of Labour, representing Government - with the assistance of the International Labour Organization (ILO), did conduct a review of all the labour laws in Uganda and we came out with drafts.   But given that the Ministry of Finance thinks that regulating labour affects business, they have made it impossible for these bills to even go to Cabinet and come to this House.  

What I want to let you know is that the Ministry of Finance and our partners are not interested, for example, in maternity leave. They are proposing just one month for maternity leave. And if these bills must come, they must get a certificate from Ministry of Finance. So, I do not know whether these laws will ever come here. I thank you.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you for that information. But what you are saying is unconstitutional, and we want to hear from the ministry what they have to say on this.  

My third point is on the issue of employment. I would like to find out why the Government of Uganda has not made any effort to secure jobs for our jobless graduates in other countries. And other countries are taking advantage. For example, graduates are employed in the armed forces in the United Kingdom and in the United States of America. They are also employed as social workers, and their own countries officially export these!  Why are we not taking advantage of this, if other countries are doing so?  

I cannot sit down without talking about the issue of Pay As You Earn. Pay As You Earn is a tax, which has been in place for more than 10 years now. When the threshold was put in place, a lot of factors were taken into account and one of the factors was the cost of living. But as we speak now, when you look at the threshold that is being taxed, you find that this is really detrimental to this group of people who can barely afford that cost of living.  

Therefore, I would propose that the ministry should come out to lift this threshold while at the same time progressively tax other higher brackets. So that whatever may be missed from the lifting of the threshold would be countered by the progressive kind of taxation. This House has hitherto proposed other ways of getting money –(Interruption)

MR OGWEL LOOTE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way, and thank you for that. I would like to inform you that Pay As You Earn did not start 10 years ago. When I first got my salary in 1978, the first and highest tax that I paid was the income tax or Pay As You Earn. So, it did not just start yesterday.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Honourable colleague, what I said was that it started more than 10 years ago.  So, my statement still stands.  

Finally, there is the issue of primary school teachers. I promised that I would talk about this issue. Every time we raise the issue of primary school teachers earning 70,000 shillings, we are told that these teachers are too many. But if we are going to talk about quality of education, I would like to insist that these teachers be given preference when it comes to schemes such as entandikwa, and maybe the funds that go to co-operatives. They can then use this to uplift their standards of living, because they are suffering. The quality of education is suffering because they have no morale to teach. 

These are my points, and I would like to hear more on this from the minister. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am sorry we have a lot of business on the Order Paper. I think this will do for now.  Minister, please respond.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LABOUR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS (Mr Henry Obbo): Madam Speaker, first of all I thank the honourable members who posed some questions for my consideration and attention.  

I would like to thank hon. Wandera who talked about wage earning contributing towards poverty elevation. Yes, that is true but then, the level of wages is determined by the economy. Government does not determine the level of wages. 

So long as we live in this economy, the best we can do is to increase productivity of the economy. And this is just what Government is trying to do, by attracting investment in here and creating a climate that can allow Members of Parliament to similarly invest in our economy.  

The second point hon. Wandera raised is the question of –(Interruption).

MR ALINTUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am failing to understand the honourable minister when he says that we should not worry about the wages of our employees. Has he never heard about something called a minimum wage? Government can set up a minimum wage and say, “whoever will employ anyone in this sector, this is the minimum wage an employee should get”. 

Mr Minister, if you really try to avoid that, it means that our people are drifting aimlessly, like a ship without a captain. We have to do something; it is our duty, it is our job. It is the Government’s duty to do something. Thank you very much.

MR OBBO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. This is an independent question. I was answering the question that had been put to me. No question about the minimum wage had been raised, therefore, I could not tackle it.  

Let me now move on the to the question of the employment policy. The employment policy indeed has been delayed. It was formulated, I think in the Sixth Parliament, before I joined this Parliament.  But immediately I came in, together with my colleagues in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, we renewed consideration of the matter. 

We brought it to the attention of the Presidential Economic Council. This is a government procedure and we have taken that step to fulfil that government procedure. As soon as the Presidential Economic Council makes comments, we shall go to Cabinet and then we shall come here to Parliament. You, honourable members, will then have the opportunity to air your views on the policy.  

On the question of manpower planning, I agree that in a developing country like ours, we should have manpower planning in place. In developed countries, manpower planning is not necessary. The economy regulates the number of people who should come out of the universities, in whichever discipline they go to the university for. For example, in the United Kingdom, the number of lawyers coming out of universities is regulated by the economy. 

As for Uganda and other developing countries like ours, we need to have a manpower planning institution in place. Government is considering this. Recently, we appointed a minister for this purpose, hon. Musumba.  So, I would like to appeal to honourable members to be patient and give Government a chance to put the programme in place.  

Hon. Otto talked about investors who are selling pork and whatever else they are doing. If the investors are doing this during their spare time, what are we to do? What can the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development do? What can Government do? This is a free country. But I do not think that there is any investor who has been licensed to come here to sell pork. Secondly, I do not know whether these investors he is talking about are indigenous investors or foreign investors - (Interruption).  

MR SEBALU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister whether, as a minister in charge of labour in this country, he links up with other relevant government departments, to ensure that the activities undertaken by those departments do not affect the labour configuration of this country. 

The specific reference I would like to make is to the Minister of Internal Affairs and the issuing of work permits. Some of these investors create their investment here, they go to their home countries and lump so many people, and these people come here to do jobs that can easily be done by Ugandans.  

In this case, I think it is relevant for the department to ensure that the activities of another ministry do not impact negatively on their sector. You find some of these people are shop attendants, for example. Someone comes here and you find about 10 shop attendants with work permits. That is impacting negatively on the labour opportunity available in the country. 

It is not a question of leaving it to the ministry. I think they need to link up with other sectors, to ensure that whatever is available is properly protected for our output, in terms of labour. So, I would like him to throw some light on that.

MR OBBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question that I was answering was about selling of pork.  A question had been asked on the Floor about foreigners taking our jobs. I have not yet answered it. When I reach it, I will attend to the point that has just been raised on the Floor.  

Madam Speaker, in this regard, I would like to appeal to you to give me the opportunity to make complete answers. If there should be supplementary questions, then they can add on. Otherwise, these interruptions are going to derail my concentration. (Laughter). 

MR KIBAALE WAMBI: Madam Speaker, the President took his time to select the honourable minister from among all of us and made him in charge of the labour ministry. He even went through the Appointments Committee of Parliament, of which I am a member. And at that time, we thought the minister was capable, and he had the brain to understand and comprehend issues. Is it in order now for him to confess here that he is not capable of comprehending issues systematically, if he is subjected to questions? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members let me advise the minister; if you are going to raise controversial issues in your answers, they will give rise to other questions from members of this House.

MR OBBO: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your very wise ruling. The question of raising points of order had actually been tackled earlier on, in some other sittings. Members of Parliament were advised whether or not it is appropriate for them to do so, and if they should do so, under what condition. The condition under which this point of order rose does not fulfil the conditions that you, Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am the presiding officer of this House. I am the one to determine whether it is a point of order or it is not. So, just answer the question.

MR AWORI: He should be kicked out of the House.

MR OBBO: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your very wise ruling. Hon. Eresu had asked whether Government has plans for people coming into the labour force. He mentioned people from schools.  Yes, I did mention that we needed to create 340,000 new jobs every year. Once we are aware of this, we are taking action to do so. 

Let me give you an example. Within 10 months of last year, new investments that came into this country, and had been registered by the investment authority, had a job potential of 330,000 people. Those are new jobs! But these are relating to investments coming into this country, just within that year. In 12 months, the new jobs that were going to come were in excess of the number I mentioned. So, yes, we are going to plan for that.  

In addition to the new jobs being brought in by new investments, even the existing enterprises do create new jobs. The number may be small, but they create new jobs, and also new jobs are created throughout the country –(Interruption)

MR MUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for what he is telling us, and especially for choosing Jinja as the venue for celebrating Labour Day. 

Last year, His Excellency was there and he was talking about improving on the industries that had died. Now I am seeking clarification from the minister. He is talking about those jobs, how many of those are really for Jinja? Because tomorrow they will ask you, you are celebrating here, how many of those jobs you are talking about are for Jinja specifically? Thank you.

MR MAFABI NANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to seek clarification from the Minister of Labour.  You have talked about investments creating jobs, and you have said they are already in excess. How many of those investments you have created really employed Ugandans?  

Two, in Uganda, 10,000 Ugandans graduate every year. I want you to give us how many, out of those 10,000, for the last two years have been employed by these investors; because you have said they have been creating jobs and they are increasing every month! Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that there will be an opportunity when you are working on the budget to discuss at length with the minister on some of the detailed questions. Otherwise, these issues will never end. Minister, please. 

MR OBBO: Madam Speaker, the next question that was raised was that some of these enterprises do not allow their workers to unionise. Government has expressed concern about this for a long, long time. I can take Parliament back a little. 

When hon. Etiang was Minister for Labour, he was engaged in discussions with such kind of employers. When hon. Mukwaya was Minister for Labour, she did likewise. We are doing likewise as well by interacting with such kind of employers who do not permit unionisation in their establishments. We also engaged the auspices of the Federation of Uganda Employers because the Federation of Uganda Employers, Government and Trade Unions together constitute what is called a tripartite. And in the tripartite arrangement, we work in co-operation. We do hope that within a short time, such kind of employers who do not permit unionisation in their establishments will be brought on board. But we are working hard and I would like to assure Parliament about this.

Hon. Nkuuhe did wonder why I should talk about modernisation of agriculture. I as a minister in Government, I can talk about any policy of Government. I can talk about policy relating to defence, policy relating to health, because I am widely read and I am very knowledgeable and I am an effective minister in Government -(Laughter)- and we believe in the principle of collective responsibility. And so if modernisation of agriculture is one of the aspects Government introduced to bring in more jobs for our people, why shouldn’t I mention it on this occasion?

Then hon. Nkuuhe also asked, “why take celebrations to Jinja?” Jinja is part of this country. We are taking celebration within Uganda. We cannot discriminate one part of Uganda, get to the other. We are nationalists and in our principle of nationalism, we shall take celebrations wherever we feel so.  

He talked about unemployment being 7.4 per cent. Yes, in the spirit of openness, I am the one who gave that information to Parliament. I gave that information to Parliament so that together we should find a formula of fighting against this enemy of our economy. But, we are working towards reducing this level of unemployment from 7.4 per cent to about 3 per cent. 

In economics, when unemployment has reached 3 per cent, people talk about full employment; and we are nearly reaching the level of full employment. 7.4 percent is nearly good employment. (Laughter).

Hon. Byamukama talked about huge - I did not pick up her first question. Hon. Bakoko Bakoru, Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development will tackle that, Lady to Lady.  

About archaic labour laws, Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, Mr Minister, what did you say? The Minister will answer because a lady asked the question?

MR OBBO: Hon. Byamukama, when she was raising -(Interruption)

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, it is a very well known rule in this House that when the Speaker is addressing the House, whoever it is, minister or backbencher, you resume your seat. Is it in order for the hon. Minister to engage in a debate with the Speaker of this august House? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. Actually, hon. Minister, you said that the hon. Minister of Labour would answer the question asked by another lady. Is that what you said?

MR OBBO: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you said “Lady to Lady”.  Are you suggesting that you will not answer hon. Byamukama's question because you want a lady to answer her? Is that what you are suggesting in this House?

MR OBBO: Madam Speaker, I withdraw the statement. Hon. Byamukama raised certain questions and while she was talking, the issue about Entandikwa was raised. I would like to say that as for Entandikwa, this programme has run into some budgetary problems. Unfortunately, since we are in the budget process today, when this matter comes up again, Parliament will have the opportunity to allocate the money under the Entandikwa Scheme, and the Entandikwa Scheme will then be renewed.

There is a question of labour laws being archaic. Yes, Madam Speaker, I agree. A number of labour laws are archaic, some of them are no longer relevant. This is just why I mentioned in my statement that we are currently reviewing four labour laws, and I mentioned that we are in interaction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We are about to reach a rapport with that ministry and then move on to Cabinet and then bring the issues to Parliament. So, we are paying attention to the question of the archaic labour laws; including the matter of maternity leave. When the issue of maternity leave comes to Parliament, where Members of Parliament will not be satisfied, they will be permitted to give new inputs.  

There is this matter about employment. While Government does not secure jobs for Ugandan graduates in foreign countries, it may be encouraging some of our graduates, particularly those who are studying outside, to work there and remit money this way. But as for an active policy in place, there is no such thing. And I know of no other government that has such a policy, and which goes to foreign countries, gets jobs and tells their number of graduates that, “we have secured so many jobs in America, go and get these jobs”.

MR AWORI: A motion on procedure. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move we exercise rule 59. The rule reads as follows: 
“If a Member persists in irrelevance or tedious repetitions or uses objectionable words, and on being called to order fails to retract or explain the words and offer an apology to the satisfaction of the Speaker, any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that the Member using the objectionable language or words be no longer heard…” I beg to move - (Laughter).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe the Minister was tackling the last contribution made. So, he is actually winding up. Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR OBBO: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. I have actually concluded my response to the questions and I thank the honourable members for their attention.

MR SABIITI: I am sorry for bringing up this matter again on the Floor of Parliament but when the human rights of certain people are not being taken seriously –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is that, hon. Sabiiti?

MR SABIITI: This morning, the leader of 170 people, who had camped outside Parliament but were dumped at Lugogo Indoor Stadium, called me. I was informed that these people have been forced out of the stadium and they are now in the green park somewhere in Kololo. This morning rain poured on them, the children are desperate and we had been assured that the relevant minister would come here and give us an answer as to how he had handled the situation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I directed that this matter be on the Order Paper of Friday. The situation has not changed. It will be on the Order Paper of Friday.

MR SABIITI: Children will have died by then! You know, it is a serious matter, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I know it is serious. That is why I directed that it be put on the Order Paper for Friday, because it is very serious.

MR SABIITI: Meanwhile, should we leave people to die? Something has to be done. The relevant minister must look for where these people should stay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the Leader of Government Business say something about that? Where are you going to put the wet children in the green field? 

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I know for certain that this morning, the honourable minister in charge of Lands did visit these brothers and sisters. I know that something is being done to alleviate this situation. I would like to appeal to hon. Sabiiti and honourable members to just remain patient up to Friday. A comprehensive statement on this matter will be made then.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 11 OF 2003 TO THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

Mr Abdu Katuntu (Bugweri County, Iganga): “Can the Attorney General or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs explain to the House the implications of the Constitutional Court’s decision to expunge sections 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2002?” 

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Directed at me?

MR LUKYAMUZI: No, on a matter of procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What point of order? What rule is that? Tell me the rule first before you present it. Tell me the rule under which you are raising the point of order.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question for oral answer by hon. Abdu Katuntu, the Member of Parliament for Bugweri was brought to my attention -(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rule number?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of order with regard to the intervention of the Attorney General now answering the question for oral answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What rule is he violating?

MR LUKYAMUZI: It is a constitutional matter and I am raising a point of order. Permit me to do so.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What part of the Constitution, and which rule?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a serious politician who greatly values constitutional law. Whenever any part of the Constitution is trampled upon, I am concerned. With reference to Article 119(3), I would like to persuade you to give me chance to raise the point of order. Article 119(3) says that:

“The Attorney General shall be the principal legal adviser of the Government.” 

Madam Speaker, as we speak now, there is a constitutional crisis with regard to a constitutional Court ruling pertaining to the Political Organisations Act. Noting that the Attorney General is an interested party to the on-going court case on the POA, about which he has also expressed intent to appeal, is it in order for him to be a source of advice in such circumstances? If so, what is the legal justification of doing so?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you are really abusing the rules of this House. For the last two weeks you have been literally demanding that the Attorney General comes here to explain the ruling. Now he is here you are saying you do not want him to explain? Please, hon. Lukyamuzi, no! Attorney General, please answer the question.

DR NKUUHE: The Order Paper on page three has minutes of yesterday’s meeting as follows: “Hon. Lukyamuzi wanted to know when he would get response on his concern over the status of political parties in view of the court ruling that nullified sections 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2002. The Speaker directed that the item should be placed on the Order Paper by Friday, 2 May 2003, since the question was pending on the same matter by hon. Katuntu.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, do not force me to take other measures as far as this matter is concerned. Attorney General, please answer.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Office of the Clerk to Parliament brought the question for an oral answer by hon. Abdu Katuntu, Member of Parliament for Bugweri, to my attention yesterday. 

The question requires the Attorney General or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to explain to the House the implications of the Constitutional Court decision to expunge sections 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2002.

It will be recalled that on the 21 of March 2003 the Constitutional Court gave judgment on constitutional petition No. 5 of 2002, where Mr Paul Kawanga Ssemogerere and five others had petitioned the Constitutional Court for declarations that sections 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act are unconstitutional, null and void. 

In this judgment, the court held that sections 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organizations Act contravene the Constitution, and declared them null and void. I was not satisfied with the judgment and have since filed a notice of appeal to the Supreme Court.  

However, this means that until the Supreme Court reverses this decision, the restrictions imposed on the political parties and organisation by sections 18 and 19 of the Act have been removed. The restrictions, which had been imposed on political parties, were the following:

    (i) Not to sponsor or offer a platform to or in any way campaign for or against a candidate in any presidential or parliamentary elections or any other elections organised by the Electoral Commission.
    (ii) Not to use any symbol, slogan, colour or name identifying any political party or organisation for the purposes of campaigning for or against any candidate in any election organized by the Electoral Commission.
    (iii) Not to open offices below the national level
    (iv) Not to hold public meetings, except for national conferences, executive committee meetings, seminars and conferences held at the national level and the meetings referred to are in sub-sections (7) and (8) of section 10 of the Act.
    (v) Not to hold more than one national conference in a year.
    (vi) Not to carry on any activity that may interfere with the operations of the Movement Political System.

The effect of the removal of these restrictions is that:

    a) Political parties and organizations are now free to sponsor or offer a platform or in any way campaign for or against a candidate in any presidential or parliamentary elections or any other elections organized by the Electoral Commission.
    b) A political party can now use its symbol, slogan, colour or name identifying it for the purposes of campaigning for or against any candidate in any election organized by the Electoral Commission.
    c) A political party organisation can now open branches or offices in the districts and below.
    d) A political party or organisation can now hold public meetings anywhere, convene meetings, seminars and conferences at all levels.

However, all these can only be done by a political party or organisation, which is registered as required by the Constitution and the Political Parties and Organization’s Act.

Madam Speaker, Article 72(2) of the Constitution provides that an organisation shall not operate as a political party or organisation unless it conforms to the principles laid down in the Constitution, and it is registered. That is the Constitution.  

Honourable members, it will also be recalled that an application was made in the Constitutional Court by Dr James Rwanyarare and nine others who are petitioners in Constitutional Petition No. 7 of 2002, seeking to suspend the application of sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 6 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. These sub-sections required an existing political party or organisation to register within six months of the commencement of the Political Parties and Organisations Act; failure of which such political parties or organisations ceased to exist.  

The Constitutional Court ruled in favour of the applicants on 16 January 2003. The effect of the ruling is that the existing political parties, that is to say UPC, DP, CP, UPM and others - if I have forgotten any - can now register at any time from the commencement date of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, without incurring any penalty for non-registration within six months. That is where the applicants were successful. 

In other words, they do not now need to register within six months from the commencement of the date of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. 

Article 270 of the Constitution only allowed the existing political parties to continue to exist and operate until Parliament made laws relating to the registration of political parties and organisations. Section 6(1) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act requires every political party and organisation in Uganda to register. Since the law is in place, existing political parties have to register. Failure to do so, Madam Speaker, means they cannot operate. 

Therefore, all political parties and organisations, whether old or new, can only exist and operate after registering and paying the necessary registration fees.

Finally, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I want to make it absolutely clear that I have never stated anywhere, as reported in the Monitor of yesterday and repeated in today’s edition, that political parties do not exist in Uganda. Of course they do. And I did mention those political parties that exist in Uganda, in my press conference. 

On the contrary, what I did say at the press conference convened last Monday was that the existing political parties such as UPC, DP, CP and UPM could now register again any time if they wish to operate. They do not now, according to the court’s ruling, have to stick to the six months limit because this has been removed. In other words, they could register any time if they wish to operate. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AWORI: Madam Speaker, in light of what the Attorney General has said, specifically referring to the petition by Uganda People’s Congress against this particular law, I assume the matter is now subjudice. Are we free to debate it? Could you guide me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the judgment that he is interpreting is a valid judgment of court. Until it is reversed, it is the law. What he is telling you is the present law, as announced by the court. So it is not subjudice.  

MR AWORI: I am sorry, Madam Speaker, I was perhaps not clear in my submission. I was referring to the UPC petition, not the DP petition on which court pronounced itself –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is interpreting the one where DP went to court and got a judgment. 

MR ABDU KATUNTU: I would like to thank the Attorney General for his response to my question. Madam Speaker, and the Attorney General, if we had listened to the words of wisdom on the 2nd of May, perhaps we would not be in the position we are in today. 

I would like to ask the Attorney General that, given the judgment, does he still think that we could import the restrictions in Article 269 into the subsidiary legislation? 

Two, what is the import of the court’s decision to suspend sections 6(3) and 6(4) of the POA?

Three, could the Attorney General explain to us whether the parties that had been saved by the Constitution and the POA immediately coming into force, cease to exist after the six months or they still operate normally?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am a strong believer in discussion. I was defeated earlier but permit me to raise my supplementary. With reference to what the Attorney General has said vis-à-vis the earlier remarks I made - and I hope he has looked at the remarks because if he has not looked at them it would be most unfortunate. My supplementary questions impact on the earlier remarks I made. 

It is good the Attorney General has said that the Monitor newspaper misreported him, and that he did not say that parties do not exist. In terms of security of existence, what is the difference between parties like CP, DP, UPC and UPM when compared with emerging parties like JEEMA and NDF? Do you take us all to be on the same level? If not, do we not deserve a qualification, which qualification was reflected by our participation in the Constituent Assembly where we became a component of what constituted the framework of the constitutional development?

Madam Speaker, what is the interpretation of the Attorney General in regard to the status quo of the four political parties, which I have just mentioned, with reference to Article 270 of the Constitution? 

Uganda did not begin living only after the Movement had come. We had long lived. If we are to value constitutional development and institutional development, we must value the existence of earlier political parties, which included one political party that saw Uganda come to independence, namely the UPC. I am talking without bias!  

My third remark, Madam Speaker, has the Attorney General filed an appeal, and is the appeal necessary now, now that things are changing?  If not, why doesn’t he save the taxpayer’s money because if he appeals, money will be spent and Uganda is one of the poorest nations in the world! The facts about political opening are becoming too obvious for any one to subject them to scrutiny. I hope the Attorney General – and the Movement - has already openly agreed that political space must come.  

Madam Speaker, the Political Organisations Act is a baby of this Parliament. Following the ruling of the Constitutional Court, that law which is our baby, aborted. Do we just keep quiet? Is there no need to recall the law so that we panel beat it to suit the circumstances?  

Lastly, Madam Speaker, this challenge I am going to make is a very strong, magnanimous challenge – (Laughter)- and if it is not answered, Government must fall - (Laughter). I am not a lawyer, but I am a debater. The challenge is, the Attorney General has accepted – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Member, I think you are offending Rule 32 of our Rules of Procedure. You are now expressing your opinions, making threats. The Attorney General did not threaten anybody, so why are you threatening the state? The questions must arise from the answer of the Attorney General. Now you are offering your opinions, expressions and your sentiments!

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I said it in good faith - (Laughter). I am making one final challenge to the Attorney General. The Attorney General has openly accepted that the status quo of CP, DP, UPC and UPM differs from that of the emerging parties, which have yet to come. If that is so, what law will CP have broken if it goes ahead with a political rally seminar at the City Square tomorrow at 3p.m? Let us know the law and in very serious terms.  

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to know this from the Attorney General. He left out the detail of the Constitutional Court ruling but part of the ruling states that the restriction of Sections 18 and 19 makes the Movement operate like a one party state. Therefore, that statement confirms that the Movement is a political organisation.  Under the current circumstance, Mr Attorney General, when are you registering the Movement?  Is the Movement operating legally or it is operating illegally?

MR PATRICK MWONDHA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is clear that the existing political parties were saved by the 1995 Constitution, and they were later saved by the Political Organisations Act.  They finally now walk under the shadow of the injunction from court. Therefore, they exist.  The Attorney General accepts that they exit and they will be free to register whenever they want to register. But what is this existence of a political party, which cannot do what it is supposed to do?  How do you justify an existence when I cannot perform the functions I am supposed to perform? I am asking the Attorney General – (Interjection) - Madam Speaker, save me from the front bench – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the Member for Bukooli to make his contribution.  

MR MWONDHA: When it comes to general duties, I will refer to the Minister concerned - (Laughter).  I suppose that the extent of the injunction from court was to preserve the status quo, to preserve the party with its organs, with its membership and with its activities. Mr Attorney General, please clarify.

THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Francis Ayume): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues, honourable members, for raising issues that are very pertinent to an important subject, which we are dealing with.  

Hon. Katuntu in his first supplementary question is wondering whether in view of the ruling of the Constitutional Court to expunge Sections 18 and 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, whether we could not revisit Article 269 and bring it by way of subsidiary legislation. I do not know whether I understood you correctly. Now, whether we should re-enact more restrictions, I think I want to clarify that – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Whether the Attorney General is still of the view that you could get those restrictions provided for under Article 269 into a subsidiary legislation like the POA?

MR AYUME: It is possible to do that but you run the risk, maybe of the court again pronouncing itself in a similar manner because that is what I understood. I understood you to mean that we could bring the provisions of Article 269 back in a subsidiary legislation, which you now clarify as being the Political Party and Organisations Act. And my view is that you run the risk of having similar problems like what we had in the recent ruling of the Constitutional Court.

The implication of the suspension of sub-sections (3) and (4).  Honourable members, maybe I will answer this question by making reference to these two sub-sections, with your permission, Madam Speaker. 

Sub-section (3) of Section (6) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act reads as follows: “Subject to the provisions of this Act, a political party or organisation continued in existence under Article 270 of the Constitution, in this Act referred to as "an existing political party or organisation", may continue in existence but shall apply for registration within six months after the commencement of this Act.”

Sub-section (4) reads as follows: “Subject to sub-section (3) of this section, any existing political party or organisation which fails to file the necessary documents for registration shall legally cease to exist and operate.”

I think I have explained in my statement that the effect of the ruling of the Constitutional Court suspending the application of these sub-sections means that the existing political parties are not restricted to registering within six months from the commencement of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. They can now register. If they do so, nobody will go after them, or they will not transgress the law. And similarly, sub-section (4) does not apply because sub-section (3) also has been suspended. Therefore, my advice to the existing political parties is to take advantage of this suspension by the Constitutional Court to register, and that they will not incur any penalty.

The third point is the existence of the old political parties. I think I also did mention that as far as I am concerned, the old political parties that were in existence before the Constitution came into force in 1994 were saved by virtue of Article 270 of the Constitution. And that is why we are recommending that in accordance with the Political Parties and Organisations Act, they should go ahead and register so that they can operate lawfully.

The hon. Lukyamuzi, I do not know whether I understood him correctly, but he wanted to compare the security of existing political parties and up-coming political parties. He mentioned one like JEEMA.

If the existing political parties register, they are secure and they can operate immediately they are registered. But the new ones can only operate obviously after they have registered. And in either camp, the requirement of registration is constitutional, and that is what the Political Parties and Organisations Act operationalised. Precisely, that is why the Constitutional Court in its wisdom did not suspend Section 6(1) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act -(Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) -, which reads as follows:

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please listen first, hon. Lukyamuzi.

MR AYUME: “Every political party or organisation in Uganda shall be registered in accordance with this Act, and shall pay such a fee as is payable under the Registration of Documents Act.” So, the ruling of the Constitutional Court has not expunged that section.  

The Second issue hon. Lukyamuzi raised is to do with the status of existing political parties in reference to Article 270. (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_) I am trying to clarify to you what you wanted to know; the status of the law as it is.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, wait until he has finished the answer, then you can raise a clarification.

MR AYUME: I think I have already said in my answer to hon. Katuntu’s question, namely that under Article 270 of the Constitution, the parties which existed before the 1995 Constitution was promulgated were saved by Article 270, and they exist. But my advice is that they should register so that they can enjoy the rights of holding rallies and doing all those things, which were prohibited.

Thirdly, hon. Lukyamuzi was wondering whether an appeal is necessary. In view of the pronouncements by the political organs of the Movement political system, I think we must differentiate between the pronouncements of the political organs and proceedings in a court of law. I have already told you that I was not satisfied with the ruling of the court, and I am appealing or I intend to appeal those parts of the judgement, and of course the ruling, which I am not satisfied with. Therefore, an appeal is necessary, notwithstanding the political developments within the Movement political system. Thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, my question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There was hon. Ekanya’s question.

MR AYUME: In case you are in doubt, I would like to tell you that the Movement political system still exists, even as per the court ruling.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, my question has not been answered properly. I said, “Is the Movement operating legally?” because the ruling says that for a political organisation to operate, it must register. You exist, are you operating legally? 

MR AYUME: Yes, I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I had not actually finished. Hon. Lukyamuzi put out a challenge, which he said, if not properly answered, will bring down this Government. I would like to tell hon. Lukyamuzi that his question is really very simple. The question is what law will the CP break if it goes on with the rally tomorrow? You will be breaking the Political Parties and Organisations Act, and you will be handled according to the law, especially the Police Statute.

Hon. Ekanya, that according to the ruling, the Movement is a political organization. Yes, that is in fact the effect of the judgement of the Constitutional Court, and he wondered whether it is now operating legally or illegally without being registered. You see, what is required to be registered is an organization, and for that organization to be registered, it must have structures. It must organise itself before it can go to the registrar to say, “Yes, we are ready to register.” And I think you are aware of the provisions or the requirements under the Political Parties and Organizations Act before you can register. The Movement is not operating as a political organization, and I have said that it is still in existence.

MR GEOFFREY EKANYA: Madam Speaker, under Rule 40(b) and 45 of our Rules of Procedure, I would like to move a motion. Rule 40(b) reads: “an adjournment motion for purposes of discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance.”
 
Madam Speaker, the urgent matter of public importance is about SARS, the SARS, which has affected all the countries in the world. I am a Member of Parliament from the border town of Malaba, and currently, under Government arrangement, there is no provision to take care of emergencies at the border. There is only provision at the Entebbe Airport. Besides that, we have Members of Parliament here who have just returned from travel abroad, we do not know whether we are safe or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Perhaps before we move forward, can I ask the Minister of Health whether there is anything to say about this SARS?

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIMARY HEALTHCARE (Dr Beatrice Wabudeya): I need your guidance, Madam Speaker, because there is so much to be said about SARS. Either I say it now or a substantive question is put and then I am given the opportunity to answer.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I would advise, honourable Minister, is that I think it is incumbent on Government to really inform the population about the dangers of this disease, explain the precautions and so on. I think you ought to come with a statement as quickly as possible.

DR WABUDEYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to say that yes, we shall bring a statement to Parliament, even if you want it tomorrow, even today. But what is important to note is that we have been informing the public, since this disease broke out, in the newspapers, on the radios and many necessary steps have been taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, you have undertaken to bring a statement to the House at the earliest opportunity.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, Uganda is a major trading partner with South Africa, and there are cases reported of SARS in South Africa: Nandos, Shoprite, we all trade in and out.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the Minister will address that in the statement.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2002

Clause 128:

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, we propose the following amendments on Clause 128. A new sub-clause (1) to read as follows: “A financial institution shall promptly report to the national law enforcement agencies any suspected money laundering activity related to any account held with the financial institution.” 

Once again we re-number Clause 127(2) to be Clause 128(2). We propose a new sub-clause 128(3) to read as follows: “Any financial institution which contravenes the provisions of this section commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 250 currency points.” The justification is for better drafting.

We reach the current Clause 128(1) and we propose the following amendment on (1). We insert after the words “in consultation with the Minister” and delete “issue notices.” We propose, Madam Chairperson, a new (1) by inserting the following paragraph after paragraph one of the bill. It will be paragraph one, it will read as follows: “Providing for the allotment or issuance and or registration of the transfer of five percent or more of any of the shares of a financial institution listed on the stock exchange market.” The justification is a consequential amendment.  

The final sub-clause we are proposing is we insert the words “in the regulations” after the word “prescribe” in line one of Clause 128(2)(a). This is to bring to the attention of all concerned of the type of penalty and not leave it open-ended.  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 128 be amended as proposed by the Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 128, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 129:

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, small amendment on Clause 129(1), replace “Cabinet” with “Parliament”. The justification is that this is a major provision, which needs the input of Parliament because it affects major provisions of the law. 

Clause 129(2), we propose an amendment by replacing “Central Bank” with “the minister”.  The justification is again harmonizing it with other provisions of the law. 

We propose a new Clause 129(3) to read as follows: “The minister may by statutory instrument make regulations- 

a) providing for the licensing of Financial Institutions. 
b) providing for the competition of the on going capital adequacy requirement for the financial institutions.
c) classifying institutions as financial institutions for the purposes of the definition of a financial institution under section 3 of this Act”.

The justification is again consequential amendments as in clause 128(1).  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 129 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 129 as amended agreed to.

(Title agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Dr Peter Kasenene): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Dr Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the bill entitled, “ The Financial Institutions Bill, 2003” and passed it with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Dr Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

The Financial Institutions Bill, 2003

THE MINSTER OF FINANCE (PRIVATIZATION) (Mr Peter Kasenene): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Financial Institutions Bill, 2003” be read a Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Financial Institutions Act, 2003

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anang-Odur, you were on the floor yesterday.

MR ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this debate, and I wish to extend my thanks to the Minister of Defence for his statement to this Parliament.  

I was a bit bemused yesterday when the honourable minister, when challenged about the appropriateness of naming places of deployment of troops boasted that this was because times have changed and that this was the requirement of transparency.  I wish to thank you for that. But, I would have been happier if the change of time in this particular case were rather extended to financial matters other than deployment.  

I would have been happier, if the minister was talking about transparency, for example, in the tender board activities in the Army, which we know has resulted into a lot of loss to this country. We know about the junk helicopters; we know about the under-size uniforms; we know about the rotten food for the soldiers; we know about salaries for soldiers, which have disappeared because of lack of transparency in the ministry.  

I would have been happier if promotions were transparent to stop a situation where five Lieutenant Generals in this country; out of five Lieutenant Generals, three come from one sub ethnic community, where sale of banks like UCBL and so on were transparent.  That would have made me much happier than just telling us where you have put the troops, which as far as we know should be matters of confidentiality.  

Madam Speaker, going on with this matter of the report, I was looking at the mandate of the Army given under Article 209 of the Constitution and that of the Police given under Article 212.  I looked at the functions of the minister and statement of the minister and my presumption was that this statement is about the state of security in Uganda, which in my opinion would fall under the functions of the Minister of Internal Affairs.  

Madam Speaker, whereas the minister, of course, might be asked to take any responsibility in Government, but this statement coming from the minister reveals one serious matter which we must address and solve all military issues in this country.  

I think it is important, Madam Speaker, for us to build the necessary institutions of the country so that we rely on them other than always taking the approach of the military.  The issues in this report are issues which should be under normal circumstances the responsibility of the Police and the Ministry of Internal Affairs.  

I want to urge Government to strengthened the Police to take charge of the responsibility of general security, so that the Army –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank the honourable member for giving way.  The honourable member has puzzled me, and I would be grateful if he could clarify to me whether Police can effectively handle all those wars that we have been fighting against LRA. 

MR ANANG-ODUR LAKANA:  Madam Speaker, in the present case of Uganda, this may not be the case.  My submission is this, if our Government was serious about building all other necessary institutions like the Police, the Police could still handle this matter very effectively.  I want to tell you that this is not the first time such situations have existed in this country.  It has been the Police or special force within the Police to handle this matter.  But I want to submit that even if it was the Army to handle the situation, it must act within the directives of the ministry responsible in this particular case, the Minister of Internal Affairs.  Madam Speaker, this is the import of what I am saying.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Yes, just to re-echo the minister's concern.  The Magistrates Court of Gulu issued an arrest warrant for Joseph Kony and it is still valid.  So, I think these are the areas where we will need the Police's contribution in terms of making the arrest warrant to be effective.  Thank you.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you my honourable colleague for yielding the floor.  I would like to give you an example of where the Police can be more successful in law and order maintenance than the Army.  At one time in this country, between the years of 1981 and 85,we had an insurrection in Luwero Districts.  We successfully used the special force to remove the insurgence.  But immediately we introduced the Army, we collapsed.  

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my good friend, honourable minister Akello, that the Mobile Protection Unit based in Gulu and in Lira have done exceptionally wonderful job.  In fact, when the Lords Resistance Army came and burnt Radio Waa in Ngetta, which is next door to my personal residence, the President directed that the Mobile Protection Unit, part of the Police based in Gulu, should be sent to Ngetta.  

The army in Ngetta was withdrawn and replaced by the Mobile Protection Unit of the Police, not of the President.  They are still there; they are the one maintaining law and order. They are well trained and their relationship with civilians is excellent.  They are special trained police force in terms of combat, in terms of quick response and in terms of intelligence work.  

They are not this type of recruit of privates you train for two or three months and then you give them AK 47 riffles and send them to Ituri forest or wherever you want.  These are fantastic people.  So, I want to say that if we can have these – (Interruption)-not in every place, they cannot go into front line, I agree with you. But I want to assure- (Interruption)- of course they cannot but there are certain situations where the PPU are best deployed.  I thank you.

MR ANANG-ODUR LAKANA: Madam Speaker, I just want to reiterate that the Police are most well suited to handle internal security situations. Because they are specially trained for that, they were briefed and they can handle this situation much better and much more smoothly than the Army can, and the testimonies have been given to this House.

Madam Speaker, in the report we have the withdrawal of UPDF from the Congo.  I want to thank the ministry for this because this Parliament has been asking Government withdrawal soldiers from Congo. In the first instance, the Army was sent to the Congo without the approval of Parliament, which is a requirement of the Constitution; and we have had a lot of problems concerning the Army activities in the Congo.

Normally, I am not a proud man, but on matters of Uganda, I am a very proud man. And I always wish that whatever we do in the name of this country should reflect the good character of our people whom you all know and are well known worldwide.  

But, Madam Speaker, we know that UPDF went to Congo for obviously good reasons and this can’t be questioned.  We heard about allegations of involvement of the genocide in the Congo; we heard about allegations of looting property and wealth of the Congo.  And as we talk now, there is a case in Hague which our Government is defending itself against these allegations.

Madam Speaker, these are grave matters and I am sure that nobody in this country would wish our name to be tarnished in this way.  Our gallant soldiers went to defend our people who are facing a lot of problems in the West, but I regret to say that some of the commanders of our army let us all down.

I am calling upon the minister to implement the recommendations and resolutions of Porter report.  I think it is important for this report to be brought forward.  It is also important for this Government to show its seriousness about when it says it does not condone what happened in the Congo.  If these allegations are true, Madam Speaker, I ask that action should be taken to punish the culprits and try to retrieve our name, which has been trampled upon by people guided by greed and selfishness.

Madam Speaker, I looked at the report and there are three areas: the issue in the North, in the West and in the North East.  There is a list of activities of Kony or LRA; for that matter these are worrying signs.  But I want to comment that under the North report, I am very disappointed that the minister could not report what is happening there now. 

As we talk now, there have been a lot of cattle rustling in Otuke, in Moroto, in Erute North, in Teso and a lot of people have run to Lira in very bad conditions.  We have heard reports of people killed. We heard a report of Adjuman, yesterday. I think honourable minister should have been more serious to inform this house about the new developments.

The minister told us about the Karamoja situation and the plan of Government to go back to disarm the Karimojong warriors.  On the 15th of March, 2000, the 6th Parliament moved a motion- in fact it was moved by hon. Mukula that the Karimojong be disarmed within one year of that date, and that development projects be taken to Karamoja to contain the situation which creates these problems. And we are now in April 2003 and the same situation which existed then is still pertaining in some areas in worse form than it were before. 

This Parliament has passed resolutions, if I remember about two or even more perhaps, and I see one coming up again on the situation in Karamoja.  It looks like either the Government is not willing to take serious action to solve this matter, or the Minister of Defence is not capable and competent to settle this matter.  But whichever the case, Madam Speaker, I am very disappointed and I want -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, KARAMOJA (Mr Peter Lokeris):  Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of information to the effect that when this Parliament resolved that disarmament be effected in Karamoja, the Government went straight to implement this resolution.  The President in person was in Karamoja explaining to the Karimojong the danger of the gun. The Karimojong responded and brought guns peacefully.  

When that was still happening, the Kony insurgency intensified and the numbers of the army were then depleted and shifted because of the cry of those people in that area.  Then when that imbalance came, the others who had not voluntarily given guns because of complexity of Karamoja borders- some people living along the borders in Karamoja are friendly to those who live in the neighbouring countries- when this exercise was being carried out, those who are friendly to people living across the countries fled there and we concentrated on those who could not cross.  

Then, of course, when we reduced their forces, these people have come back and arrangements are being made to at least, according to studies, involve regional partners in this exercise and especially Kenya so that we can do these things wholistically; so that other people do not take advantage of this situation to commit crimes.  

Government is so committed in getting rid of all the guns in Karamoja.  Even as I stand here, I have just come back from Kenya to discuss with Kenyans along the borders and their security chiefs on how we should organise to disarm the Turkana, the Karimojong and the Pokot.I was not here yesterday and those people are willing.  So the ministerial teams are organising to give a policy, so that we do these things jointly; of course, knowing that there are problems in Sudan; there are problems in Ethiopia; there are problems in Somalia.  All these things are being studied together so that when we are moving in everybody is safe.  That is the information, I would like to give you.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR ANANG-ODUR:  Madam Speaker, I wish to thank the minister for his information.  But I want to ask the minister to be very serious and I just hope this is the beginning of seriousness on his part and on the part of Government.  

This is not the first time we are hearing this sort of talk. Many times in this Parliament, the Minister of Defence, the Minister of State for Defence and many other people have given similar assurances.  But every time round, we have heard the scourge of the looting and cattle rustling from the Karimojong warriors. This has been going on for years, not for two weeks and not for one day.  

Talking with Kenya, this resolution, Madam Speaker, was passed in the year 2000.  If the Government was serious and they knew what was happening, these contacts which are being made now could have been made at that time.  This is the crux of my argument.

We have been talking about moving troops from Karamoja to Acholi land and so forth.  First of all, the minister contradicted himself. He says the Karimojong voluntarily have been coming to handover the guns.  If the Karimojong have been coming voluntarily to handover the guns, why would you need a big troop?  They would continue registering their guns and that would be it.  But let us accept that this exercise was coming to a stalement and the minister must find better ways of calming the situation.

We heard from the minister himself yesterday and that is going to be my other point.  That in fact we are moving about 10,000 troops from Ituri back to Uganda and these are the troops we are going to deploy in the North and North East.  This is what he said yesterday.  My question has been, how many troops do we have in this country? If we have 10,000 outside, where are the others to handle the matter in Karamoja and in Acholi land?  

Madam Speaker, these are the questions which are very serious and I think to be honest, we must be understood, those of us who come from those areas which are affected.  When you look at the numbers of troops you are talking about in the country; when you look at the numbers which are now being said were sent out and coming back and yet troops which were required on the ground in Karamoja and Acholi were not there, then we must be understood if we start asking what is the agenda of this Government regarding other people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Try to wind up, hon. Odur.

MR ANANG-ODUR:  Madam Speaker, I am actually winding up and that is the question I want the minister to explain to my satisfaction.  Two short issues; first, this matter was raised on the floor of Parliament yesterday. I am repeating it because I think it is very important. 

 We have been having war in this country since 1986 when this Government came to power:  For the last 17 years or 18 years, we have been having war without any break.  This is a fact and the minister knows we have new groups coming up. We have - is it PRA coming up?

I think the minister instead of just giving us military solutions which he has been reading here; he should try to understand the causes of this war.  Could it be because we are intolerant?  Could it be because we are in the opposition we have no dispensation politically?

If Kiiza Besigye and his group were not harassed, mal-treated and election rigged and that sort of stuff, could we have avoided forming PRA?  Mr minister these are serious matters, if we can find a solution, we can almost be there.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, the social contract between the people of Uganda and the people of Lango is that Government of Uganda must protect their lives and their property.  I wish to inform you that to a greater extent Government has not honoured this particular provision of our social contract.  

Madam Speaker, the other time when His Excellency went to Lango, he apologized for not having been able to provide security to our people.  This is on record.  He did the same in Gulu.  We understood it was made in good faith, but when these matters continue to happen even after his apology and after so many promises, we get let down. And I want to put it on record that unless this situation is addressed, we shall have no alternative but to go to court and seek reward for what Government has failed to do in protecting our lives and our property.  I thank you.

MS BETTY AMONGI(Woman Representative, Apac):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to add my voice to others on this subject.  I want also to thank the minister for the narrative statement, which does not answer fundamental questions like why and how; it talks of what and where.   

I want to start with the issue of the peace process. On page one, the minister starts with Government efforts to talk peace with LRA, and it goes on to say that on 10th March, the President as Commander-in-Chief directed the UPDF to cease operations in Lapul subcounty, Pader district to allow LRA make contact with the Government team peace.

Madam Speaker, fundamentally there are four issues in the peace process: one, the peace process can only take place when they are two parties; two, the peace process can effectively take place when there is a mediator; three, the peace process can effectively take place on a neutral ground; and four, the peace process can only succeed without conditionality.  Those are the four fundamental principles of peace process.  

But when you look at these events and the process that is being enhanced by Government, it lacks almost all these principles.  When you tell somebody that you should go to a particular place- and this is also a force that you want to talk peace with- that is tantamount to telling the person that go and surrender.  

It is like 1985 situation where Lutwa Government told Museveni and NRA to go and report to the nearest police station.  Did you go in 1985 when Lutwa told Museveni and NRA to go and report to the nearest police? What was your response? So, I want to know what your response was, because if really we have to be sincere with this peace process, we need a mediator. 

Who is the mediator for this peace process?  How can two parties who are fighting each other go and talk with each other without a mediator.  Do we have a mediator?  Let me know whether we have a mediator or not.  A mediator should be an independent person who does not have Government interest or LRA interest.  

In this circumstance, who is this independent mediator in this peace process? Otherwise, it is a hoax; it is fraud. It cannot be called a peace process and therefore we have to question it. Is there Government will to end this war- and for me let me tell you this is the question people ask me when I go to my constituency.  

The other day in Otwal subcounty, LRA came and abducted over 200 people and carried all the household properties. The President went their and called the leaders from the North and told us, “by the way, you know why I am in Gulu, it is because these Salim Saleh and UPDF commanders failed to end this war because of indiscipline and corruption” Now has this corruption ended and how many months has he been in Gulu?  

That is what he told us, “The fundamental problem- you know his usual talk: “The fundamental problem of indiscipline, I am trying to sort it out”.  So, can I know whether these allegations of corruption which the President had promised to investigate; and he actually had accepted that there is indiscipline; there is a problem of command; there is allegation of corruption which he would investigate. Has he investigated, and what is the outcome of the investigation? Because we are bound to assume that corruption and indiscipline is still going on and that is why the war in the North cannot end.  Can I be clarified on that?  

Can I be made to understand the problem? What is the problem?  Because Lakwena was there, she came and went. LRA is there; UNRF was there and they are talking of peace, but what is the real problem that makes this war continue?  Can I really understand? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please wind up.

MS AMONGI:  Let me go to the Rwanda-Uganda issue.  Mr minister, this statement sincerely on the Uganda-Rwanda issue is very hostile by all standards. As Government, you should have tried very much to use diplomatic language.  Because, if you look at page 16 and 17, you see that it is a very hostile language and if there are efforts out there to try and solve this conflict, it becomes a problem. It is hostile to diplomacy as a practice because governance should be run under diplomacy at a certain point. But if you come- and let me tell you, this document tomorrow will be handed over to somebody in Rwanda and yet they are efforts to talk peace and this will derail this process with Rwanda. 

On page 16, you say that the reason there is a fluid relationship with Rwanda is because Uganda wanted the Congolese to manage their own internal affairs while Rwanda preferred to play a more assertive role. So, the fundamental issue is the difference over how to relate with the Congolese. 

I wanted to know something, because in a diverse society, the question of “how”, which is formality and strategy, there are always differences. I would have been more comfortable if you had told me that you fundamentally disagreed on “why”. Because “why” is more fundamental; it relies on issues. But “how” is on strategy; it is on modalities. So really, it should not have made you disagree - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, please conclude. 

MS AMONGI: Finally, honourable minister, can you tell us about the GVC report? Here, on the same page, you are saying that this is the reason why Rwanda attacked UDPF in Kisangani three times. As far as I am concerned, there was a fundamental disagreement on who started the war. But this statement is saying this is the reason why Rwanda attacked UDPF. It is already saying Rwanda is the one who attacked. 

As far as I am concerned, there was a GVC committee that was put in place to investigate who started the war. I have never seen that report. I do not know what that report says. Can you tell us what the report says, before I am convinced with your reason of Rwanda being the one that attacked UPDF in Kisangani? These are the issues that make the fluid relations continue. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS GETRUDE KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start on a sad note. The situation in Kapchorwa has not changed. We have just got a report that this morning, there was another raid by the Pokot and 400 animals have been taken. We do not know how many people have been killed. 

There was also an ambush from the Karamoja side. A World Vision worker, working under POKATUSA, has been injured and his fate is unknown. So, Madam Speaker, I really do not know where we are going as far as Kapchorwa is concerned.

First of all, I want to thank the minister for his report. But I want to say that Government, all along, has been taking cattle rustling as a secondary issue. And yet in reality, there is no difference between cattle rustling and a rebellion which is taking place in other parts of this country. So, we would be very happy if Government started taking cattle rustling in the same way they are taking rebellion in other parts of this country.

Madam Speaker, I want to say that it is important to know the root cause of this incident, especially with the Pokot. I want to put the blame squarely on the Pokot of Uganda and Kenya. For the last five years, the people of Kapchorwa gave hospitality to the Pokot of both Kenya and Uganda.  We fed them and we gave them land to graze their animals. Now, what we have got in return is destruction of our lives and property.  

I want to state that the root started some time in December last year, when the Pokot of both Uganda and Kenya raided Nakapiripirit and took away 800 animals. When the Army tried to pursue the raiders, the Pokot killed the Army men and the LDUs who were following these animals. One of the people who was killed, was a cadet coming from Kapchorwa District. 

As a result of that, the Army was angered over the death of their soldiers. So, the Army later on followed these Pokot, and that is when Col. Sula found the Pokot of Kenya had crossed into Uganda. I think he was still pursing them to recover the 800 animals, which had been stolen. In the process, they took some animals from the Pokot. 

If you remember, in the papers it was said that hon. Lolem had even found it very difficult to travel through Nakapiripirit at that time because he was a suspect; the Army had suspected him. So, Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I want to get clarification from her. I want to start with the 800 cows. The issue of the 800 cows raided by the Pokot of both Uganda and Kenya is a total lie. On the 27th of December 2002, the Pokot entered Namalu, following their cows, and they took cows. They were not 800, it was even in the papers; they said 200. When you are counting the legs of the cows, it is not good. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lolem, are you suggesting that it was okay for the 200 cows to be stolen, rather the 800? Is that what you are saying?

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, Karimojong have their own business. When you raid one, the other has to follow and then grab from you. That is their business. My sister is trying to say that I had problems, so I could not pass Nakapiripirit. I pass Nakapiripirit, I go to Namalu, the constituency of the minister, and I can stay there. 

The issue of cattle rustlers is not our problem. The cattle rustlers are doing their own thing in the bush, but not in town. So, I always pass Namalu. I do not have any problem.  

When you said the UPDF and the LDU’s were killed, it is the LDUs who track, and they were using the local tyres. So, when these Pokot of mine found the footmarks, they had to follow. This idea of saying the LDUs, the UPDF - none of the UPDF entered the bush and went to my constituency. I want to tell you that clearly.  

On the issue of Col. Sula pursuing the Pokot, let me tell you that we should not blame the UPDF. You invited the UPDF to chase the Pokot in Kapchorwa.  You, the leaders, under the chairman for security and the LCV chairman, you made him chase the Pokot to Kenya. So, on the other issue where you took the 3,000 cows, it is you people who invited the UPDF and not the Pokot. Thank you.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA CHARLES: Madam Speaker, I am a bit lost with this information from hon. Lolem.  He said, these Pokot of his. Is he representing the rustlers in this House, or he is representing the people whom we are trying to put in line with government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lolem, can you explain to us your relationship with that situation?

MR LOLEM: Madam Speaker, I represent the Pokot of Uganda. Be there cattle keepers, farmers, rustlers or doctors in my constituency, I represent all. (Laughter).

MRS KULANY: Madam Speaker, you can now see how my colleague is not straight. 

I want to say that the Pokot have also taken advantage of the disarmament that took place in Kapchorwa. They know very well that the people of Kapchorwa, at the moment, have no guns. That is why they are playing, left and right. They come and kill, rape and destroy. 

That is why now we are requesting Government; we are very grateful, you have given us a battalion, but this is not enough. We want the local people who know the tricks of these Pokot, to deal with them. This is what I request from the Minister of Defence. Please, you pursue the directive given by His Excellency to arm the LDUs. That is the only way we shall balance forces with the Pokot and the Karimojong. That is the only way out. 

I know the Army is very willing to assist us, but they are thin on the ground and the region is very vast and wild at the same time. So, I hope the minister – (Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank hon. Kulany for giving way. I am seeking clarification. When hon. Getrude Kulany tells Government to arm the LDUs, she knows that in Kapchorwa we have a political problem there. There are mainly two political groups, and each group has got its people. Now, when we are looking for LDUs, these political problems come in. 

What Government, or the UPDF, has decided is to use a neutral force. We have deployed in more than seven places in Kapchorwa. Meanwhile, the NPC and other people will be handling the politics in Kapchorwa. Then, maybe, we shall be in a position to arm the LDUs in Kapchorwa. Now, I want to know whether that will be possible, with those political divisions in Karamoja. (Interruption)

DR KAPKWOMU NDIWA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The attack of the Pokot on the UPDF, on 6th February, resulted in terrible loss of human life, guns and ammunition, uniforms and cattle. 

Hon. Lolem is telling us it did not happen. Officially, one full lieutenant died, one 2nd Lieutenant died, 15 LDUs died. All those guns and uniforms went. These people were guarded by the Pokot of Uganda, up to when the vultures actually worked on their dead bodies. 

The unofficial figures put the number of guns taken at a very miserably big number. The number of the dead soldiers and LDUs are also very big. Because of security reasons, I cannot reveal them here. 

We have been warning government. I have warned government several times, and when these people come, they actually cause havoc. The next time they come to get those soldiers as a full battalion, prepare as many trucks to transport dead bodies to their respective homes. I am guaranteeing you.  

We are saying, we need the LDUs to be armed and deployed to work with these soldiers. Now, people are dying. Yesterday, we were people under threat and some have died today. Is it in order for the Minister of Defence to tell us to wait, that they shall arm these people later on, when we are losing lives? Is it in order? Are you very happy?  Are you rejoicing?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the minister was seeking advice from you, the leaders of that area, as to how best to handle that situation, taking into account the local circumstances. I think that is what she was asking.

MRS KULANY: Madam Speaker, I want to put it to the honourable minister that the confusion, as far as politics is concerned, is confined to Tingey County. But the areas affected now are Kongasis County and Kween County, and they have no political differences. This is what I want to make clear. So please, if you want, you can stop arming Tingey County, but Kongasis and Kween should be armed, because at the moment people there are dying innocently.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, try to wind up.

MRS KULANY: Now, Madam Speaker, what is the way forward? I would request the Minister of Defence that if it was possible, you should put up a new special force to counter cattle theft. The army is so busy with rebellion. We want a force specifically to handle the Karamoja and Pokot issue.  

Also, we have found out that there is a problem with the command. The commanding officers in the field are not taking your orders. You should also try to analyse their interests. If they are more interested in commercial business, then you should relieve them of their duties. (Interruption)  

MR LOOTE: Thank you, hon. Kulany, for giving way. I would like to inform you that some of these commanding officers, who have been deployed to command and direct these LDUs in Karamoja, are just new graduates from the School of Infantry in Jinja. So, they do not know the terrain of the region and the tricks of these warriors. They were in a difficult situation. There is no transport; there is facilitation. So, I think the minister should address that. Thank you for giving way.

MRS KULANY: Finally, Madam Speaker, I will just confine – (Interruption).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please go to the solutions. We shall give you another chance. Let us go to the solutions.

MS NACHA ROSE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable colleague was thinking of government deploying a special force to handle the Karimojong cattle rustlers. I would like to inform her that besides the Karimojong and the Pokot she is talking about, cattle theft is being done even by the UPDF soldiers. Thank you.

MRS KULANY: That is why I was saying that the authorities should look critically at their commanders in the field.  

Finally, I was saying that we have a communication gap between the people’s representatives and the Government. When we inform Government that there is problem, they do not take us seriously, and at times they are persuaded to take information from people who do not matter in the district. So, I request that we work together because this country belongs to all of us, and we all want peace in this country. 

The other time when we got the attack in Suam Sub-county, I tried to ring both ministers of defence. They were not on phone. Their phones were not available, and yet people were dying. When I was talking to the commanding officer, he was telling me he could not take my orders because I was a civilian. So, when I was trying to get in touch with his bosses, their phones were not available. 

For the sake of this country, we request the authorities that it is very important that we all work together for the betterment of this country.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have had many debates on this matter when we were discussing the neighbours of Karamoja, the LRA and so on. Can we concentrate now on solutions, not lamentations? We have heard many of these things. Can you please concentrate on some solutions?

MRS LOCHIAM ROSE MILIGAN (Woman Representative, Moroto District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This report gives me the impression that the ministry and the minister are not serious on Karamoja issues. On page 9, point 3 a, the first statement reads as follows: “East and North East are generally peaceful.” How can that place be peaceful when the sources of guns are open? The guns are flowing in the area and this is a danger, and this statement says the place is peaceful.  

On the point of raids by Pokot from Kenya, many incidences have been written about this. But I also want to add that in Moroto District, the Turkana are also a problem. It is not only the Pokot.  

Then I turn to page 11, the disarmament exercise.  This statement shows that the guns were recovered. In practice, these guns were recovered with the involvement of many partners. But the UPDF messed up the situation because it does not trust the leadership of Karamoja. I am also referring to the papers, when they started commenting that the Members of Parliament have guns. It became difficult for Members of Parliament to go to the ground to work hand in hand with other partners.

When the UPDF go the villages, they even harass the LCs who are partners in the disarmament process. This harassment messed up the whole process. Some LCs even lost their lives in the process. If the UPDF acts like this, then the disarmament process may not be done properly and we might not achieve what we are planning for. 

There is also an issue of road thuggery. It is not mentioned in this report, and I wonder why the minister did not include it. People are dying every other time; this is no secret. Is it a question of the minister and the ministry not being informed, or does the ministry not have a connection with what is happening in Karamoja, on the ground? I cannot understand.

The issue of internal rustling is not also mentioned. People are losing lives and property.  Since the external borders are not guarded, handling internal security has become a problem. So, it would be good if the UPDF who were brought from Congo could also be taken to the external borders of Karamoja, instead of only allocating them to other parts and leaving out those external borders.

The minister mentioned some areas and left out Karamoja. I wonder why that external border was left out. Is it because it is not the responsibility of the UPDF? The minister will have to tell us.

There is also part e, which talks about the water and the roads. We were expecting the security roads, for example, to be in place. Up to now, there is nothing that has been put in place along those lines. That is why the situation is still as complex as it is. So, I do not believe this statement. It is a false statement.

All in all, the details of the situation are not in these papers. So, I am disappointed with this statement. I feel, maybe the minister could collect more information, so that the Northeast could be seen in reality. It is not safe. Thank you.

DR JOHNSON NKUUHE (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I start with solutions. Let me talk about Karamoja, because my colleague on the other side one time said that cattle were rustled and taken to Mbarara. How he knew they went to Mbarara is beyond me. But that is not impossible.  That can happen. 

But for Karamoja, I think I will use the sort of solutions that I have been forced to use when trying to promote people to use technology, because they talk about problem analysis. What is the problem analysis? You ask what the root causes are. You first start with the root causes, the primary symptoms, then secondary symptoms.  The difference between a symptom and a cause is, when you remove the symptom, another symptom comes. Therefore, it means it is not a primary cause. 

For instance, in Karamoja people talk about arms, guns and all. Supposing you removed guns, do you think the problem would go? I do not think so. I think people would use spears, but the conflict would continue. So, in my view, Karamoja needs a comprehensive wholistic approach, looking at sociology, anthropology, economics, agriculture and all these defence matters, so that finally you solve the problem. 

So, in the Ministry of Defence, I hope they have sociologists, missionaries and all those. Those kind of people work with the Karimojong; they know how to deal with them. Obviously, when there is a fire, you come in and put out the fire. But I think they should follow it with that.

The other matter is on Rwanda and Uganda. If the ministers can give me their e-mail addresses, I will send them a report from the International Crisis Group. There are many reports, of course, on the Rwanda-Uganda conflict. This group here is headed by Marti Ahtisari, who was once a Prime Minister of Finland. He is a respectable man and the members of that group are very credible. 

This International Crisis Group (ICG) has a website, www.crisisweb.org. On Uganda-Rwanda, they go through this whole thing, in fact they wrote a report. There are many reports, but the one I am referring to is 2000 after Kisangani. In this Minister’s statement you see him talking of Rwanda supporting PRA, Besigye and all that. But Besigye became a factor in 2001; Kisangani was in August 1999. 

So, really in terms of conflict, you talk of root causes, catalysts and triggers. So Rwanda, PRA and all those cannot be root causes. They can only be catalysts; they are catalyzing a misunderstanding that is already existing.  Therefore, we need to go deeper than just the symptoms we see on the surface. 

In this report, they say the relationship between Rwanda and Uganda is conducted more or less on a personal level. When there is a problem, President Museveni picks a phone and rings President Kagame. When there is a problem on the other side, President Kagame picks a phone and rings President Museveni, person to person. They are saying, you should use institutions because institutions have better memory, because when I talk to you on the phone you cannot know whether it is written down; it is phone to phone. So, they say you should use institutions and then try to work confidence-building measures. 

This report stresses the refugees, the Rwanda people coming here. It stresses the formation of RPF and all those misunderstandings between the Commanders who were of Rwandese origin and those of Ugandan origin, especially from Ankole. It goes into all that. So, when we just talk about misunderstanding in Kisangani, it means we already had bad blood.  You see, if I think you are a bad person, any time there is a problem, if we go, say, to a well to get some water and we start a quarrel there, then we blame the well or the water. In actual fact, there was a lot of bad blood. 

So, for Rwanda and Uganda, the reason I think this is important to me is because I share a border with Rwanda. I have two refugee camps. President Kagame used to live in that camp himself. A lot of the leaders in Rwanda were in that camp. When they went, another set of refugees came and I am hosting all those. 

So, I would like all these things to be settled so that the people can go back and my people can use the land; this is a personal interest.  

Next week, some Members of Parliament from Rwanda are coming here. I think we should try to sort confidence building measures because the tone of the Minister’s speech - and I think I agree with a colleague there - is tough. But on the other hand, if you see what they are saying on the other side, you cannot blame the Minister. Theirs is in fact worse. One time they had a full day of propaganda, phone-in and all that. That kind of thing cannot help build peace between Uganda and Rwanda. You see, war is like a misunderstanding in a family; you cannot know where it is going to end. If there is war, everybody will be a loser. 

You look at what Kony has done. Somebody said, ‘I do not think Kony has a website, I do not think Kony takes notes.’ Kony is an illiterate man, but you see what trouble he has given us. Rwanda is full of people we trained here. 

So, I think we really have to sit down and try to solve the many socio-political problems that need to be attended to. I think we have to draw the road map for peace because a lot of the reports are saying individual Commanders within Rwanda Army and Uganda Army have personal clashes and a lot of those take centre stage. But I think those are probably not even root causes. We have to look at all those and then come to a solution, because if we do not, I am sorry to say, all these things we are doing will come to naught.  

I thank the Minister for the report; I did not have time to thank him. It is a comprehensive report and I wish we get more. It is nice to have reports on security but I would like to hear reports on development because without peace and security you cannot develop. It is like a foundation for a house, but then you cannot take ten years building a foundation because they will say, when will you start building the house? These are the kinds of things. Security is important but then you need security so that you can do something else. So, you cannot spend all the energy, all the effort on security otherwise you go the way what happened in Russia. 

Russia was spending so much on their security economy, defence economy, military economy, they were taking all the best scientists into the military and you saw what happened. They neglected the civilian economy and what has happened? From the first world now to third world, it is terrible. So, it is very important for all of us, this is our country and I think the sooner we solve the problems the better. I thank you.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO (Kassanda South, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you know this is my maiden contribution in this August House, so you will allow me to thank all the colleagues who supported me during my struggle to realize my dream of becoming a Member of Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that I have started my maiden contribution on this very critical issue, but of course you tolerate me because you have tolerated us since the Parliamentary Commission found it unnecessary to take us for an induction course. You tolerate me if at one point I say things that look un-parliamentary.  We are learning on the job but we shall learn and we shall cope.

Madam Speaker, first and foremost I would like to say that the people of Kassanda appreciate the efforts of the UPDF in restoring peace in this country. As you may recall, around 1998/1999 the ADF had started spilling over to parts of Buwekula and Kassanda, but as we talk now, the whole area is very peaceful. So we are very thankful to the UPDF and to Government.  

Two; I am very happy with the report of the Minister, very elaborate, it has touched all the facets of security in this country. However, on the issue of Kony or LRA, I have this to say. To me, what is going to bring problems to this crisis is dividing our effort between war and peace talks.  We have to choose, either war or peace talks. If we continue dividing our effort between war and peace talks, this war will not end. Let us measure the risks of peace talks.  As Government, can we take these risks?  As Uganda, can we take the risks of peace talks with Kony? Let us look at them, let us look at the risks of war and decide on one.  We cannot go on dividing the effort. The tempo at which the UPDF went in the “Operation Iron Fist” in Sudan, all of us were happy this was going to end. When Kony was being hit, people were surrendering. Then the propagandists came in, let us talk peace. Then Government started dividing their effort between peace talks and war. 

MR JACOB OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the hon. Member. I do not intend to intimidate you on your very important moment, But may I give you this information. When Operation Iron Fist started and Kony was hit, as you are saying, he was hit, when the Sudan had the UPDF in Sudan. Kony came back here and started burning houses in Gulu and other places. July and August saw the worst of this insurgency in Northern Uganda. 

So if you say Kony was hit, I do not know what you mean. I just want to inform you that he left the Sudan, came back to Uganda and started hitting people, burning houses and doing all kinds of things. I do not know whether you are aware of this.

MR THEMBO: I thank you very much. I think you are strengthening my argument. I have been here for sometime, I have been in this country and following these issues very, very critically. I know the cycle through which these rebels pass. I know what took place when ADF was hit from Congo. When they were hit, in fact, they came back here and even they went to Kichwamba and burnt it, but they were hit and they have been defeated. 

So, I still stand by my point that let us not divide our effort between peace talks and war. If we decide on war, let us go in for fighting. In fact we are very happy – because we are concerned about this war. In fact, when I hear people calling it “Northern war”, I get irritated, we get insulted. Today my farmers in Kassanda South are not getting coffee seedlings and we are told money has been allocated to Defence to finish this war. 

When we heard that we had acquired MI-24Z, we said, yes, Government has decided on war. If it is war, let it be war and let us defeat these people. If it is peace talks, let us sit on the table, let us take their conditionalities and talk peace. But dividing our efforts between peace talks and war will not help, because what I see –(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE, HIGHER EDUCATION (Ms Betty Akech): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I just want to inform the speaker holding the Floor that for the last 17 years we have been fighting. In fact the issue of negotiation or peace talks is more or less a recent development from the time of Betty Bigombe. During that time, there was a bit of a lull. But when that peace talk failed, we went back to the gun and we used it and it has not ended the war. 

The kind of people we are fighting are desperate; they are fighting for their lives, they have nothing to lose and they will fight to death. The difference, therefore, between our soldiers and those people is that our soldiers are humane and they do not feel that they should fight to death because these are Ugandans with whom they should be able to come to the negotiating table. 

That is the reason why Members of Parliament together with His Excellency the President agreed that two approaches should be used. The one to put pressure on the LRA in the bush so that they could be forced to come to the negotiating table, meanwhile we continue with the military approach. The military approach alone, I would like to say, will never solve that problem. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know that a maiden speech is usually protected. So can you please make your contribution and do not give way yourself.

MR THEMBO: Yes I am trying really. I am going to finalise because I had only that point and that is why I am spending all my time on it. That is why I am emphasising –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Point of order. I seem to be behaving by institution or reactionary. But I have been trying to masticate the maiden speech of my honourable colleague and I rise on a point of order. In his speech, he said that until propagandists came, the doors of peace talks were somehow open. This bothers me so much, especially the roles some politicians from Northern Uganda, including the Minister who has just been talking have been playing in this process. Our Rules of Procedure are very clear that such allegations must at least be backed by the necessary facts. 

So, Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence so that the hon. Member can substantiate and mention a few propagandists who help to interfere with the Government hitting of LRA. Perhaps this could serve as a basis to aid Government to see how to handle the situation. So, is he in order to make baseless allegations on politicians from the North and who are playing a crucial role to lobby the masses of the Ugandans to accept talks with the LRA? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, before you stood up on that point of order, I said a maiden speech of a Member usually is protected from interference and I told him, “please do not give way”. You are protected for the whole of today from interruptions. In any case, he did not say where the propagandists come from. I do not know whether they are from Nairobi or from where. He did not say anywhere. Please, proceed and do not give way again.

MR THEMBO: Thank you very much, and with due respect really, Members of Parliament cannot be propagandists. So that is why I am emphasising this point. I know that the game of optimisation is not a simple game. We are dealing with numbers. Optimising two situations is not easy. In most cases you have to choose what you have to do. Since this is politics, I think this is a critical question. 

I challenge Government to sit down, analyse all the risks and come up with a solution; whether we should go to war - not war 100 per cent; it can be war 90 per cent, peace talks 10 per cent. But in the recent past, it has been 50 per cent, 50 per cent. Let us have a strategy with actual dominance. If it is war, we should see all the strategies directed towards that dominance. If it is peace, we should see all the strategies and tactics directed towards dominance.  

Lastly, on the issue of Rwanda, we are reliably informed and I am sure maybe Government knows that these people have even gone to the extent of their Parliament approving that we should be attacked. But when the hon. Minister was talking about this issue yesterday, I was not convinced and I am still worried and our people are worried. Are we prepared for these people? Because much as we say what, my colleague there was talking of diplomacy. Whatever diplomatic language we may use, if war was to break out, it will break out.

The question will remain, is Uganda prepared to defend itself? I do not want to wake up one morning seeing RPA surrounding my house. Are we prepared, we need that assurance. Because what we hear in the corridors, on the streets, and in the rumour means of Kampala, which are not always very wrong, is that these people are prepared to attack us. How prepared are we? Thank you very much.

CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Minister for the statement -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, whose telephone is that? Where is that telephone?

CAPT MATOVU: I also want to thank the UPDF at least for some good work done for this country. Madam Speaker, I call upon my colleagues in this House to work in partnership with Government. The issue of security in this country and elsewhere is very crucial. So, we should all put our cards there and work with Government to really have security for our people.  

The war in the North, as we have heard, has been on for some years. It has claimed all lives, soldiers, rebels, the innocent, the children. I do not want to comment a lot on that war, but last weekend, I had an opportunity to interact with somebody by the names of Mr Angoliga Muhamood Salim, who was the liaison officer of UNLF II.  That officer has a lot, which Government and Parliament could learn from and maybe we save the situation in the North.

He is very, very anxious to talk to us as Parliament and sincerely he has a lot. You cannot believe it. He is so determined, he is so straight forward. I pray that, Madam Speaker, we get interested in this officer, bring him up, maybe commit a day as Parliament, listen to him, we could really help our colleagues. Because the situation in the North has over delayed, it has been on for some time. People are dying; it looks as if we are all desperate.  Nobody even seems to have a solution. I want to stop on that in as far as the Northern war is concerned. 

But maybe also I have seen something in the Minister’s about the welfare of soldiers. I am happy about that, but still we could back it with the Army Bill. This bill has been in the Government hands for some time. I think it is only this bill also which could justify even the defence expenditure it came up. That bill has a lot of support in Parliament; some of us have been there, we are still there, the majority are parents. I pray that the Minister really considers bringing this bill and we streamline a few things so that our soldiers really can perform for this country.  

Madam Speaker, the issue in north-eastern part of the country; the Karamoja, the neighbours: Whenever this issue surfaces in this House, tempers flare. There is mutual suspicion. There is holding back. People are dying; there are so many factors at play in the region we have been told. I think we are in an era of trying to adopt a lot of things. If you look at some of our Government programmes, the PEAP, the UNISEF, the what, we could maybe bring also some new words on board to address this problem in Karamoja. Because it is, I am told, as old as colonial days. Arms have been there; rustling has been on. May be it should be understood or why don’t we - I want to offer to initiate a programme called AFCC (away from the cattle culture). Yes, away from the cattle culture. I am told Karamoja has a lot of gold, we need maybe to go and see what we can initiate so that we bring these colleagues on board -(Interruption) 

MS TUBBO NAKWANG: Madam Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to mislead this House to say that this is a culture? It is not; it is like any other theft in Kampala and everywhere else. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, some minutes ago one of the Members from that area admitted that he represents cattle rustlers.  So, I do not know whether it is an ordinary theft. He admitted that there is a class of people called rustlers who are represented by himself.  So, it is not just a question of culture, there is something wrong with that activity. 

CAPT. MATOVU: I thank you, Madam Speaker. In the report, the Minister admits that there is some problem of discipline in the Army and the headquarters is handling it.  Discipline in the Army falls under the Department of the Chief Political Commissar who is now Brig. Kale Kaihura.  Kale is now a commander in Ituri. I appeal to the Minister that strengthening that department be looked into because once we lose that department, I think we shall not be safe as an army. I trust the 17 years of peace in this country has a lot of route from that department. I used to work in that department and I think you have no problem with dealing with Capt. Matovu in this Parliament.  

The last one, Madam Speaker -(Interruption) 

MR WANDERA: Thank you very much, hon. Matovu for giving way. Talking about discipline and particularly the department of CPC, I have received information that of recent we are bringing back into our army, people who had been retired on ground of indiscipline under the category of people whose services were no longer required. So, having worked with that department and being a serving officer, I do not know whether this information I have is true or not. Can you give me -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, you are introducing matters which are not in the Ministers statement. I did not read anything about bringing back people who had been dismissed. It was not in his statement. You do not have to answer it.

CAPT. MATOVU:  Madam Speaker, the last one is, in the report of the Minister, it touches on the 22 PRA soldiers or rebels, and that the majority were supporters and sympathisers of the Reform Agenda. The fact that these were recruits implies that they must have been recruited especially from here. The Reform Agenda has its own officials here. I do not know whether we are yet to arrest some of their supporters. 

Secondly on that aspect, one of our honourable colleagues has been missing in this House for quite some time - on official duty I am told. The spokesman of the Parliament has alluded to that. However, there are whispers in the corridors here and in town that this colleague may be on the run, especially as some of these things unfold. I would want the Minister to help this House and clear the air –(Interjections)- about hon. Winnie Byanyima. It is said that her place in Mbarara is also under threat. I saw in the press recently that people are now gathering to stand against her. We want assurance. Is her life in danger, in case she came back tomorrow, from Government? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALICE ALASO (Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will try to confine myself to about two and a half issues on this report. 

I want to thank the Minister for once telling me something that I think I could follow up in tangible terms. He has told me that he is going to deploy a battalion somewhere at the border between parts of Teso and Karamoja. I think that was the first tangible thing the Minister told me, for which I am grateful. He has not been giving me very tangible statements, but this one I will follow up. In the next one week I will surely know whether it has happened or not, and I am willing to give feedback.

Madam Speaker, I want to concern myself with the revelations the honourable minister made concerning people who are targeted for recruitment by - is it the PRA or RPA? Among the groups targeted for recruitment he cited the serving army officers and men, especially those un-deployed veterans, the LDUs and the jobless. I have picked on this particular issue because it is not only the un-deployed that are targeted. 

I want to concern myself with those deployed and serving in very difficult and absurd conditions. The deployed LDUs in this country have no security of tenure. Recently we went to Katakwi to try to see how those LDUs were trying to work. We found them without shoes or uniforms, but they were there. And apart from that, they would tell you they are entitled to four plastic cups of beans for a whole month. They also told us that when they sign for their salaries, somebody tells them, “You are signing this but you do not have to know the figure you are entitled to. I am the one who gives you the figure.” 

So when we are talking about people targeted for recruitment by people who do not probably wish the country well, we should also talk about the conditions of those we have deployed. They could easily be lured because they are working in very bad and deplorable conditions. I would like to let the honourable minister -(Interruption) 

CAPT. BASALIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you honourable member for giving way. I would like to inform my sister, hon. Alaso, that the conditions they are working under now are not as bad as they would be if they went to the bush or to Ituri. The other ones are worse, and serious. 

MS ALASO: I want to thank my colleague. That is beautiful but the promises they give them are to the effect that they will get better situations, they will get promotions, they will get better terms of service; and that is why as a responsible government, we ought to look into some of these things. 

Then the other category that the Minister has talked about is that of the veterans. For some time now we have seen veterans with all sorts of complaints, and the questions of joblessness and income generating activities still arise. If you have a veterans force like the one we have in this country, surely we need to be very keen on the complaints of those veterans if we do not want anybody to mislead them. 

I would like to let the honourable minister know that the security committees of the districts that border Karamoja, and particularly the Teso region, had floated an idea to the Ministry of Defence. It was that instead of shifting all the troops to Northern Uganda and to Congo and leaving us with a vacuum, why not consider the proven experience of the veterans? They have a demonstrated commitment to Government. You only needed to re-orient them and get them back to help protect the people from the warriors and the raiders. That was – and I believe still is - one way in which the honourable minister would keep these veterans from being lured into being idle and disorderly. 

Yes, that is a reserve force, like the Minister said. It is indeed a reserve force and I thought somebody would make very good use of it. It is still my recommendation, and I would like to follow up what Capt. Matovu said, the issue of a comprehensive Uganda People’s Defence Forces Bill. I think for a long time it has been viewed as a demand more relevant to those who would consume it. I think for a long time Government has not seen the advantages that would accrue to it if this Bill were debated and passed, but I know you would have much room to better the terms of those people. 

I would like to urge this House to take very definite steps to urge the Minister to give us that Bill in a comprehensive state, before we pass the budget. He is saying he is going to improve the working conditions of these people using the upcoming budget. How can you improve their conditions without a comprehensive law? We have called for amendments so that things are improved for these people. If this Bill were in place, honourable minister, it would stop you from having sleepless nights worrying that somebody would take your reserve force. Why not get them better terms? Why not define the working conditions? Why not have a legal document that will help you?

Secondly, the other advantage we would have from this Bill is to reassure people who are associated with these reserve forces, like the women. Honourable minister, one of these days we will not only be talking about un-deployed officers and men, but also about widows. They will also be recruited, because the widows of the LDUs who die in service apparently do not have any entitlement. We try to process forms for them and the immediate thing you ask is, “what was the number of the late?” Now, LDUs have no numbers.  So, one of these days somebody will be recruiting the widows also, and I am sure they will put up a performance for you honourable minister and you will not like it. 

My other point is about the tempo of the disarmament. Before I stood up, one of my neighbours told me, “Alaso, we hope you are not going to talk so much about Karamoja.” However, I would like to tell the honourable minister, you state here that you have got 10,659 guns from Karamoja, but people who have live in Karamoja tell us that every home in Karamoja probably has three guns. So, if you got out one gun from each of these homes, that is only a third, and you are one-third through with the task. 

I want to urge the honourable minister to keep the tempo of the disarmament high. It is as if having got the 10,000 guns you are beginning to think, “fine, we can now just protect these people in the neighborhood”. The tempo seems to have gone down completely and it is unconvincing, because we expect you - through the disarmament process - to get something close to 40,000 guns. If you got only 10,000, surely there is a very big problem.

The other issue I want to comment about is that I expect the Minister to be very keen on security roads and not just roads between Karamoja and Soroti. We have a road good enough to transport business produce, but the roads we expect you to be telling us about are those that allow your troops to follow if the raiders came. And I have not heard you say that a particular road has been opened from this place to the other. You are only referring to roads in very general terms. I would appreciate it if next time you are here I hear about the security roads. Thank you.

MR CHARLES ANGIRO (Erute North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to contribute to the honourable minister’s statement about the “state of wars” in this country by also thanking him for the first time giving us this statement. Last time he was here he told us he was going to check on the conditions in the North, but then he went to Sudan so I do not know whether that was the North he was talking about in this House.  

However, the statement he has made in this House has qualified him for a change from the “Minister of Defence” to the “Minister of Wars”. When you follow this statement, you will see that we have fronts in DR Congo - there is a sure front there in Ituri fighting the UPC - and we are talking about having fronts with Rwanda and then the PRA. We have a front already with the Sudan and then we have a front with Kony. We are also talking about fronts with Kenya, through Pokot, and then we have another front here inside Kampala, with thugs. So you can see that he definitely qualifies to be a “Minister of Wars”. And if the situation continues in this manner, it is likely that we could go beyond those war fronts.

I want to request the Minister to give me some clarification about how the battalions he was trying to tell us about have been distributed. I want to know the criteria that were used to distribute them. I am concerned. He told us that the 75th Battalion was going to be put in Adwelo. You imagine the distance from Adwelo to Minakulu, is apparently over 150 kilometers. And if that one is meant for the Lango sub-region, I want to know the coverage of one battalion because Adwelo has around eight or nine sub-counties and it is in Otuke County. The most hit areas are Erute County and then Oyam North, which is virtually left vacant by now. 

I want to appreciate your effort because that will handle the Karamoja issue very effectively if implemented. However, the area now controlled by the LRA has been completely left to LRA administration. You have been following recently that in Aromo sub-county over 290 people were abducted. This is the incident over which the Army Spokesman, Maj. Shaban Bantariza, refuted the number of abductees, but I want to assure you that the number was even greater than that. 

The latest information I have is from the Chairperson LC II of Apuche parish in Lamogo sub-county, who happened to be one of the victims. He was also abducted, and he told us that they were over 290 people. I do not know how the counting is done by the Army Spokesman but what he has been telling us is that you could be abducted and then when you pay some money, say Shs 30,000, you could be released. You negotiate the sum. Those who are too old to move because they cannot carry loot were also dropped on the way and some of them managed to escape. 

When they reached a place called Koyo Lalogi, which is about 60 miles away from Aromo sub-county - after one and a half days’ walk - they were 24 in number. Then 11 more were released. These 11 left behind 13 captives, and for those 13 the chairman told us that there is no hope for their release or even escape. They are now currently under heavy guard. So you can imagine, this is an area where for the last week there have been consecutive attacks.  

I want to get a clarification from you on this; many times we leaders have been requested to give you information as to the traditional routes of these rebels. We have laboured to give you routes and since then these routes have never been seen. We are stakeholders to these efforts and if you do not take our advice then how do we co-operate? This area which has been the food basket of Lira District, has just been left to whom it may concern. And this is an area, which initiated the peace talks of the Kyalibongo in Lango sub-region, which brought the Langi to lay down their arms. 

The benefit they now get out of that is death and the loss of their property in this manner? We have several times requested that at least a battalion be put at this point to control the four districts of Lira, Apac, Gulu and Pader. That is a very strategic position. If the people of Aromo decided to join the LRA, there would be a serious situation in this country, but we still say we are not going to join them. However, we want protection of our lives and property. So today I want to hear from you, are you going to protect us and our property or not? This is the eleventh time we are requesting for this kind of protection from the Government.

On the other hand we have requested and appealed to Government that they should let us defend ourselves through the local defence process. There are now many people who are ready to be trained as LDUs. That has been dragging on for over a month. Why do you not want to entrust us with our own protection, and with the gun? Tell us if you think we are going the ADF or any other group’s way. Be honest because we want openness. This is a very serious matter. If there were a certificate for being serious and annoyed, I would apply for it. 

Also, honourable minister, we want you to inform us about this; many times the President has promised that he would come to our area to address and console the people of Otuke, Erute North and Moroto. I wonder when that visit will materialise. We are waiting for it so that he could perhaps help console those who are bereaved. In my capacity, I cannot do it because I am also a victim. 

Finally I have compiled - to prove to the Minister of Defence and the Government that we have suffered a lot - papers, which I would like to lay on the Table. It is on those who have been killed by the gun and for the gun. Some have died in the hands of the NRA, other people have died in the hands of UPDF, UPDA, Alice Lakwena’s Holy Spirit group, Kony’s LRA, Chelebong - the local people whom we suppressed, Karimojong, the LDUs and others from the helicopter gunship. When you study this list, you will find that the total number of people killed in these two sub-counties is 1,500. 

The highest number of people was killed under Kony in that particular area, followed by 66 of Alice Lakwena, followed by UPDF 42 and then the Karimojong 42, the Chelebong 16 and then the LDUs, three.  

The total number of people killed in Aromo is 219, in Nuguru sub-county it is 186, totalling to 405. Can we continue with such a situation? To make it worse we have failed to see any high ranking government official going there to console the people about this. It was worse when we lost some LDUs in a funny crossfire. We buried them like dogs and no government official attended. Can we continue in this manner? Is our relationship with the Government good? You had better think about this.

You should go and study this paper, which to me even has an error of ten percent of those who have not been registered. I am going to do further investigations about that. You will then know that this is either correct or wrong. The parish and sub-county chiefs compile it, and the district chairmen have appended their signatures to it. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I beg to lay this on the Table.

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, as the debate continues, we should start thinking of what we want the Government to do. This can only come in form of a resolution. That is why I have stood up to move a motion. I am grateful for the statement of the Minister, which I will refer to later, and the motion reads as follows –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Omara Atubo, before you move the motion I need to hear from the hon. Member for Aswa, who is on the peace mission, and hon. Ogenga, the Minister without portfolio –(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: Madam Speaker, if the debate is not ending today, I am ready to move it on Friday or Monday. I was just afraid that possibly you are ending the debate today.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not anticipate my activities because I have not heard from members from the other side yet. Could we hear from the hon. Member for Aswa, who is on a member of the peace team, then hon. Ogenga, hon. Katuntu and the Minister? 

MR REAGAN OKUMU (Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to thank the Minister of Defence for giving us a detailed analysis and situational report on the security of our country. 

I start by appealing to some of my colleagues whom I have heard make some statements to the effect that the Acholi people support the rebellion - I want to ask those few people to rethink that. If the Acholi were supporting these rebels, then who else is killing them? Because you cannot kill the person who supports you. The Acholi people have suffered for 17 years. I encourage the honourable members of Parliament to visit the sub-region, the three districts of Gulu, Kitgum and Pader, and see for themselves the magnitude of the problem.

Madam Speaker, I agree with most of the Minister’s statement. I only want to add and subtract a few things. On page 7 of the Minister’s statement, paragraph 1 creates the wrong impression that while there was a cease-fire, the Kony people continued killing people in all these other areas. I would like to correct this impression. 

The figures the Minister gave of attacks by LRA are true, but this cease-fire was limited to a parish called Koila-Luge. Elsewhere we witnessed gunship bombardment, we witnessed Mig fighters, and the mobile units were not resting; they were doing their job. I think it would be wrong to continue giving this impression, because there are many people who have been alluding to the fact that perhaps there are no forces in their areas, because the troops are in the Acholi sub-region. The troops are also not there. 

If they were there we would not have had these attacks all over the three districts. It is extremely difficult to move between Gulu, Kitgum and Pader. Very many vehicles get ambushed on a daily basis, people get abducted on a daily basis, and even camps are raided on a daily basis! If the World Food Programme distributes food today, in the night, the LRA will come and raid these so-called protected camps and take away the food from our people. That therefore means even our people are not protected. So, there is a problem somewhere and if that problem is command or deployment, it should be dealt with.

When you are in Government, your first priority and preoccupation should be the protection of lives and property. In the event that you cannot do this, what do we do? People continue to suffer. This so-called LRA cease-fire was never effected because first of all the LRA never respected it. It was supposed to begin on the 1st of March but at the same time the UPDF made a clear statement that it was business as usual and they were not respecting the cease-fire. It takes two to talk, and therefore, there was really no ceasefire apart from a ceasefire in a parish called Lapul, which actually started on the 10th to the 31st March of this year.  It is because of this that is why the UPDF sabotaged the first ever Presidential Peace Team meeting which was supposed to be held with the LRA at Koyo Lalogi.  

 It was on the 6th of March at Koyo Lalogi and we were all taken aback.  It was because of this that the peace team went and pleaded before the President and the President accepted to designate the whole of that area as a contact zone so that we may use it for future contacts with the LRA, and that was extended from the 10th to the 31st of March.  

On page 7, K (2) -(Interruption)

MR MAFABI NANDALA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I want to get clarification from my colleague.  Usually in the peace talks there is what we call a mediator.  Who is the mediator between the LRA and the Government of Uganda?  

MR OKUMU REAGAN: Madam Speaker, in as far as I am concerned, peace talks have not yet taken place between the peace team and the LRA.  We were merely seeking a contact zone where we would agree to proceed on the other business. 

Later on a number of suggestions were being made to propose the people they wanted to mediate between them. Because it takes two to agree on who should be the mediator but that has not been agreed upon. There are very many people who are expressing interests, both local and international, but they need to be accepted by both sides.  

On page 7 of the minister’s statement, K (2), I was little bit disappointed that after all these attacks the minister elaborated, that now he thinks the Acholi should be protected after bringing back the troops from the Congo. Clearly, Congo was a priority, the Lendu and Hema were a priority to our Government and the Acholi people were not a priority.  This is a very big disappointment, because when you were removing these troops, taking them to the DRC, you knew the situation was extremely bad.  

Last year in July, when the Operation Iron Fist failed inside Sudan, it dragged on inside Uganda and you saw the cost of this on the lives and properties of our people.  We as leaders we have been feeling extremely bad that you don’t mind more of these killings in Acholi.  People are being killed in big number, why should you mind of Congo first other than us?

On page 5, No.3 of the minister’s statement on Oroko-Apyeto, I completely blame the UPDF on this because on the 30th of March, the Presidential Peace Team went to Labworomo and in our company was Lt Gen Salim Saleh. And earlier on I had requested him to take back the detach which was formerly at Lohor protected camps and he told me that Col Nathan Mugisha, who is the doctor of the fourth Division, told him that the people of Lohor were stubborn and that they were rebel collaborators.  

When we went for the meeting at Labworomoro on the 30th of March, the people of Lohor came and pleaded with tears and requested Lt Gen Saleh to prevail over the UPDF to deploy soldiers but nothing happened, and it is ironical people who are alleged to be supporting the rebels were massacred by the rebels afterwards. 

 I squarely blame the UPDF for this, because they never bothered that the Lohor people in protected camps also needed protection, because the UPDF created that camp and they have been protecting them for all this period but they were abandoned.

Therefore, I would really conclude, having looked at all this, I think some of the UPDF are not interested in protecting our people, partly due to attitude problem; others may be interested in prolonging this war while others would wish to have a military victory, but this would be costly as we have seen in the last 17 years.  Therefore, I would like the minister to clarify. 

Lt Gen Salem Saleh who is also a honourable member of this House has repeatedly made this statement that the UPDF hard-liners should give peace a chance.  Does it mean that there are some people within the Army who are interested in sabotaging the peace process? Because, he has repeatedly made these statements time and again and it was reported in the Press that UPDF hard-liners should give peace a chance.

I want to give a correction on page 5, No.2, on the killing of Capt Okech Kuru.  First of all, the Presidential Peace Team condemned the act by the LRA when they were informed by military intelligence that Capt. Okech Kuru was killed and we came up with a statement. 

 I was personally in Gulu, but I also would like to say and state it clearly that Presidential Peace Team never sent Capt Okech Kuru to make contacts with LRA.  We were later told that Okech Kuru actually entered some understanding with David Pulkol in the event that if something happens Government would compensate.

 Capt Okech Kuru and his family are my constituents.  I am now being bothered and burdened.  I wanted to appeal to the Minister of Defence to compensate this family because they entered into some understanding with David Pulkol before he left for the bush.  The peace team was only informed when he was killed; we condemn the act but we did not know the dealings completely. I am requesting the minister to compensate his family. 

Page 7, K (1), the minister talked about the Army engaging in air power. I have personally seen these helicopter gunships going out to raid these rebels. But I want to assure you, honourable minister, that most of the casualties are freshly abducted children. 

It is, therefore, an irony that when people are abducted, we call them children; when they are rescued we call them children; when they are killed we label them terrorists.  I think this defeats the very logic why we persuaded Government to negotiate with the LRA.  

The biggest reason why Government negotiated with the LRA was that majority of these LRA captives are children.  We as leaders failed to protect them; they were taken from the hands of their parents to the bush and it would be difficult for us to follow the same group and kill them when we ourselves failed to protect them.  

So, while we get this air power, we should be considerate where we use it. Because the other day we were from Laguti, Kitgum, we found children who were somewhere rescued by fighting and they informed us that the smajority of people who were killed were just children who were newly abducted and this is what is taking place.  So, your air power, honourable minister, should be used more in a conventional warfare than in this kind of situation because it is going to defeat the very logic why we want to rescue lives of these children.

Lastly, on page 15(1) the minister was talking about prisoners of war captured from the Ituri. And he linked them to having been former supporters or sympathizers of Reform Agenda or Dr Kizza Besigye.  I would like to say that, first of all, we are all signatories to International Convention and therefore we should treat these prisoners of war as prisoners of war.

Secondly, the minister knows very well that his own constituency has a large number of Reform Agenda activists.  It is, therefore, an irony for the minister to come to Parliament and start complaining about the very people he is representing in this House- (Laughter)- so I think this kind of statement is not healthy, because you are pushing your own constituents to the wall.  You are labelling your own constituents that they are possible supporters of PRA and you are pushing them there and I think this can be very dangerous.  When you are faced with this situation, I think avoid general labelling of people.  

PROF. MONDO KANGONYERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank Reagan Okumu for giving way.  I want to give him and the House this information.  Hon. Mbabazi’s district is neighbouring mine and until yesterday, we were practically the same district and our politics are pretty much similar, if not exactly the same. 

But we draw a distinct difference between three groups of people: One, those who supported Col. Kizza Besigye as a presidential candidate in his own right as a person.  Two, those who belong to the Reform Agenda but are definitely opposed to insecurity; they are there, we know them and we want them.  

Three, the honourable member should know and recognize the fact that there are some Reform Agenda supporters who are highly suspected. I have no exact information, but I can assure him there some departments of this Government which have got exact information that there are members of the Reform Agenda who are definite supporters of insecurity in this country. 

Therefore, that demarcation should be clear in his mind, and if any impression has been created that all of them are the same, that impression is incorrect and we are correcting it now.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Minister.  You also know your constituency is a hot plate of reformists. So, my concern is that it would be risky business for you people to start condemning your own constituents as we move towards opening up space because it would not be healthy.  

Nevertheless, if there are people you know, you should identify them as individuals, because this collective condemnation has been around in our country and is very dangerous. For example, when I hear of Lt Col Antony Kyakabale being linked to Reform Agenda, and yet this is a gentleman who was a very strong supporter of His Excellency, President Museveni, who was a candidate and he was beating our supporters; he was beating our supporters in the Kabale during the election.  Then I fail to understand.  So whoever is defecting and going to the bush or heading somewhere is not being sent by Reform Agenda.

MR SABIITI: Surely, is it in order for the honourable minister, hon. Kagonyera Mondo, Member of Parliament for Rubabo, after having answered on behalf of hon. Mbabazi, to start pointing a finger at me when they start talking about Kyakabale?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, from where I am seated, I do not know exactly where his finger was pointing. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am really winding by again repeating this appeal that labelling people wholesale is a risky business.

Secondly, really pushing people to the wall all the time, that you know you are so and so, you are supporting rebels without substantial evidence is also a risky business. And I think as Government we should be mature that if you found evidence that somebody is engaged in this kind of activities, you should get him as a person. 

Even while I was in Gulu, Pulkol was spreading news around that we got a message from Reagan. He has sent a message to the LRA to wait to come out of the bush.  That I sent a phone message to LRA and all this kind of thing; I think these are the kind of things which should be condemned.  

If you have evidence that somebody is engaged in rebellion, come out clearly.  You only have two options: One, take the legal action.  Two, if you want to handle it the political way, call this person and put him down, and then call other witnesses and say here is the evidence.  Why do you want to engage in this kind of activities?

Now if you cannot do these two, then you are gossiping.  It is irrelevant, and I think it is risky business to push people to the wall like this, because you push me today, I am not there; you push me tomorrow, I am not there; when you push me ten times, I will opt now to go forever and it will be bad and I think this is not healthy for this country. 

Our State operatives should be responsible people and professional people.  Our politicians on the frontbench should be responsible people and they should know that generalisation is not healthy for the security of this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

PROF. LATIGO OGENGA (Agago County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to also contribute to the debate on the statement by the minister on the security situation.

I think everybody knows I come from Agago and all the big stories about insecurity that have been coming out in the last few months have been from Pader and my constituency of Agago.  

So, I would like to take this opportunity to put on record some of the missing incidences that are important for this country to know, and also to point out some of the gaps in the minister’s statement which if they reflect his full thinking on the issue, it brings out the reality that the security situation in our region has not been thoroughly thought out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, hon. Ogenga, I was hoping that you are going to give us some solutions.  But if you are now going to add to what the minister left out- 

PROF. LATIGO: Madam Speaker, I must thank the minister like many others who have thanked him on the many promises that have been made which he fully implemented and have far reaching implications to the improvement of the security situation in our area.  

Allow me also to note the transparency with which the honourable minister made some of his pronouncements. And I hope that the promises made on strengthening deployment are not going to be the promises that we saw previously for which results are not there to see. 

On the situation in the North, I thank the minister for the broad content of his report.  I concur with many aspects of it and the efforts that have been made, particularly by the President and the peace team, in trying to find a peaceful way of resolving the conflict in our area. 

I would like also to re-affirm the commitment of our leaders from Acholi for trying to an end this war.  Let nobody make any mistake about it; we are the real victims of the war, not anybody else.  We are the real beneficiaries of the end of that war, not anybody else. 

First, because it is our people who are in camps; it is our schools that have been abandoned; it is our children who have been abducted, and let this be the last time that this country knows from us that all that we say here is an attempt to end this war and to contribute objectively and fairly to ending this war; but that contribution will be futile if some of the realities are hidden.

I would like also to thank the minister for making a promise that the World Food Programme will have the escort team that they have been asking for more than a month now.  

I would also like this country to know that last year the weather failed and the insurgency was so intense, and in the last four months, Karimojong raids have been so intense. Our areas of Eastern Acholi are full of people who are starving and who, if they do not get fed, and if they do not get the opportunity to cultivate, the consequence of this conflict for the first time will emerge as a real disaster.  

I would like to also agree and support the affirmation of the Government that they will pursue the dialogue path.  But I have a few worries that arise from the minister’s statement.  

First of all, the minister’s statement does not give us a picture of a comprehensive plan that they as Government are going to grapple with the twin problem of LRA insurgency and the Karimojong cattle raids.  It is one thing to point to this being done and it is done, but it is completely another thing to have a comprehensive plan that shows integration, which shows wholistic comprehension and planning for the solution.  I did not see that in the minister’s speech.  

Hon. Anang-Odur mentioned the fact that President Museveni when he went to Lango and Acholi, he made apologies for the fact that for many years Government had failed to protect the people.  

In typical, Amama Mbabazi style, there is no single recognition of the suffering of our people in his statement.  There is no apology; there is no remorse; there is no recognition that people have been killed, houses have been burned, vehicles have been destroyed in ambushes and cattle have been taken.  I wish statements that come to this floor bear some human face; it would help us to reconcile and to move forward.  

I would also wish, for the record, that the minister’s statement catalogued the very many things that have happened in Pader District and in Agago county.  Last Sunday, for instance, there were five ambushes of vehicles moving between Lira and Pader District alone.  The Secretary to the District Service Commission was shot and injured, one vehicle was burnt and four survived burning because they carried soldiers and those soldiers responded.  

The same Sunday in Patong, where there is a brigade headquarters, Karimojong cattle raiders came and raided the place twice.  This is a repeat of what had been happening before and all the times that camps are raided, particularly by Karimojong cattle raiders and people get no response from the Army. When they are asked, they tell the people that they were not sent there to chase cattle raiders.  They were sent there to fight LRA.  I do not know if the minister is aware of this fact and whether that was the instruction he gave to the military who are supposed to protect the lives and properties of our people. 

The President some time ago promised to post a battalion in Payimur, there used to be a battalion in that place and that battalion operated between Agago and Chwa counties patrolling the borderline with the Karimojong.  I talked with the leadership of the Fifth division and they were hoping that when their troops come back from Congo, they would deploy a battalion there.  In the catalogue of areas that battalions would be deployed, the honourable minister did not mention whether Payimur would be a beneficiary.  

Now, there are other four small matters to address:  One is really a matter of concern.  Today, I saw in the papers that the MI-24 helicopters that we bought costed about 20 billion shillings each.  

About a week and half ago, there were reports in the papers that one of the helicopters, through an accident, was damaged.  The following day there were reports and cartoons in the papers that said that the helicopter came from the East and there were conflicting stories that it was damaged while being loaded at Ato hills. 

Of course, not being a military person, I do not think the Army would be so daft to put ammunition dumps in the battleground.  What we have seen, even when we are seeing in CNN, they go and load from their base and they come and hit these guys and go back to base.  So, the story is not clear, honourable minister.  Given the kind of sacrifices we make, could you tell us what the state of that helicopter really is and whether it has already been repaired and at what cost? 

The issue of security roads has been mentioned. I thank the Government. Two security roads were constructed in Pader District, one was from Puranga to Pader District headquarters. Unfortunately, the second one was a very irrational thing. Government constructed security roads parallel to the Kitgum Corner-Kilak road, a difference of 11 miles, running parallel to Atto hills, when there is some other access to Atto hills. 

Instead of that, the real road that we needed, to address our security concern, was the road from Pader to Kalongo. That one passes through the area called Atut. The minister is very aware of this area. 

Atut is the base where the LRA sit. Even those days when nearly everybody had gone away to Sudan, you would still find LRA camped there. And from Atut, they operate in all directions. If they went northeast, they would reach Kalongo. If they came southeast, they would hit Adilang. If they came south, they would hit Patongo and Lira Palwo. If they moved westwards, they would hit Pader District headquarters. 

The Karimojong even now have realized the strategic importance of Atut. When they steal cattle from Patongo, instead of going east to Karamoja, they run to Atut first. They reorganize there for a few days, and then eventually take out the cattle. Could the minister let me know when that road will be done?

Lastly, honourable minister, we are grateful that the urban security has been addressed. But all of us in this country seem to be suffering from some extreme trauma. We do not seem to know that this life that this country has been leading for the last 20 years, where at any one time there is war in one place or the other, is abnormal. We do not seen to know that. We now take it as normal.  

Instead of addressing the root causes of the problems that make this country an image of perpetual war, we will come here and explain what you are doing, how you will soon crush this, how you will deal with those who want to demonstrate, with those who go for rallies, without any concession. We do not seem to realize that this hard line attitude we have to political affairs of this country is really what is causing this mess. 

Honourable minister, when will our Government realize this and open genuine dialogue with all people who have a real stake in this country? I do not care whether for the rest of my life I will not be a movementist. I know that I will be a Ugandan for the rest of that life, and I have an equal right to decide to participate. 

When will you really do things that posterity and greatness takes, to open up the politics of this country? So that we forget about these wars and start living as normal Ugandans, without the kind of trauma that we are living in. When, honourable minister? Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTIFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank honourable members of the House. Clearly, it is regrettable that our people, particularly those in the North, over this long period have suffered in the camps, and lives and properties have been lost.  My good friend who has just left the Floor has said that the chief executive of this country is on record apologizing to the country for this great suffering. 

Madam Speaker, one statement has been mentioned repeatedly on the Floor, that the country belongs to all of us. Surely it does, irrespective of which part of the country you come from. That is what unites us. But let me add to that. In the 7th Parliament, anyone of us today may be on the Front Bench, but tomorrow someone else from the Back Bench can come to the Front Bench. The issue is –(Interjections)- well, now there is –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not respond to hecklers.

DR KIYONGA: The point I am making, Madam Speaker, is that when we are faced with an issue, when we are faced with a problem –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

DR KIYONGA: We need to look for a collective solution. While we task people on the Front Bench, even ourselves on the Back Bench feel our duty to add to whatever solution there is, so that we can move forward. 

As Members of Parliament, together with the Front Bench, it is our duty to defend the sovereignty and integrity of this country. Any time there is a challenge to the integrity of this country from without, I think it is our duty to stand together to defend our country at all times, because that is what we stood up here to do. 

I think we must thank hon. Amama Mbabazi for the effort he has made to regularly come to the House and make candid statements, telling us, as Minister of Defence, what is on the ground, what efforts are being made. (Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO: I want to thank the honourable minister, who is also the National Political Commissar, for saying that we should defend our national sovereignty and integrity, and that when we face a problem, we should come together. This is true. 

I know that when America was faced with a similar problem, President Bush - even the British Prime Minister - together with his Cabinet, did three things. Before they attacked Iraq, he went to the political front of Congress and addressed them. He called the political leaders, talked to them and asked for their support. Then he went on radio and television, mobilized the country and asked for their support. Then he went international and asked for international support, for people to see the problem America is facing.  

When it comes to Uganda, honourable minister, you do not do this. We just hear you are in Kinshasa, we hear you are in Ituri, we hear you have Iron Fist in Sudan, we hear you are in Rwanda. You do not mobilize people! We only hear you doing things, and the strange and great success you are achieving. Now, what support do you expect from us when you do not mobilize us before you do these things?

DR KIYONGA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Omara Atubo, and I will be coming back to that point.  Since we have been here the whole day, do not consider it rude on my part, but I would request that I develop my brief points and I do not have to sit down to get supplementation from my colleagues, much as that will be welcome.

So, Madam Speaker, what is the import of this additional statement by the hon. Minister of Defence? In the last statement, which the minister made on the 11th of March, he did make reference to some of the points he has brought forward here. If you look at that statement, when it came to the country that was supporting the rebellion against us from Congo, he deliberately avoided naming that country. Today, in the spirit of candidness, he has named Rwanda and given evidence to prove that point.  

I am surprised that some members are asking why we are going that far. Surely, the Members of Parliament need to know what is going on. We need to know who may be shooting at us. 

During debate of that same statement, Madam Speaker, a number of our colleagues, particularly hon. Maate from Bundibugyo and hon. Odong, did testify. They indicated that if it was not for the presence of the UPDF in the Congo, those particular areas would be having a much more difficult situation. 

My judgment was that, at the end of our discussion of that statement from the honourable minister, we were happy that on this occasion, the Government got information and made a pre-emptive intervention in good time. As a Parliament, to be consistent, when he comes later on we should not forget that position we made. We need to build on that.  

Rwanda has been named as one of the countries that is supporting people who want to shoot at this country. Also, in the statement that the honourable minister has made, we have also observed that the effectiveness of the UN to intervene, particularly in the Congo, is lacking.  Every time they tell us to get out and they are supposed to bring so many troops, the troops are not there. The implications of this not, only in Congo but even to us, are very serious. 

Rebels will always look for somewhere to hide. So, when you have a territory like Eastern Congo, where there is no effective administration, and we just depart like we have done, and UN, which is supposed to do something, does not do it, we must know, just like day follows night, that this is trouble for us. In a matter of time, the rebels you have been saying are forming in those areas are going to call it a good day to start expanding. And it will be a matter of time, and they will be here on us.

So, Madam Speaker, I want us to note two preliminary points. First, that Government has come out openly to say that our good brothers and sisters in Rwanda do not have good intentions for us. They would like to support insecurity in our country. Two, that we neighbour a country that chronically, for a long time, has not had effective administration. The UN has come in and we are not seeing effective intervention. 

As a parliament, an organisation that must be worried about the integrity and sovereinighty of the country, these two factors must worry us. And we must find a way to address them collectively.  As I said, I will come back to the desperate move that my brother, hon. Omara Atubo, brought in form of clarification.

I had to answer some call, so I was not here when my brother, hon. Reagan Okumu, took the Floor. I have learnt that he made reference to the issue of the Reform Agenda. I did stand on the Floor of this House, sometime back, and said there is a section within the Reform Agenda that supports violence. I remember hon. Ekanya stood up and said, “we, the senior members of Reform Agenda, are here, are you saying we are the ones involved?” 

I am glad that my colleague, hon. Amama Mbabazi, has come and told us that all the people who were captured in Ituri, who are now in the hands of authorities, are former campaign people of former presidential candidate, Kiiza Besigye. 

I want to confirm, since I come from Kasese, that four of those people who were in the group of 22, were definitely campaign managers of Dr Kiiza Besigye. I think we need to take our colleagues to task, if you like, both Government and the people who are leaders in the Reform Agenda. This is not a matter they should just brush aside, to keep telling us that those people made individual decisions. Every time someone goes, they say he has made an individual decision. But he is a member of the Reform Agenda! Surely, we are playing with our security. We already have enough trouble. We should not tolerate this type of situation growing in our midst. 

I think the leaders of Reform Agenda owe it to this Parliament, owe it to this country, to fully explain this recurrent and persistence presence of their members in the rebellion. I do hope that those who are self-declared members of the Reform Agenda leadership will really give us some light on this matter.

Kony and negotiations; really, the track record of the Movement is clear. There are many rebels we have negotiated with and reached an agreement, and they have come amidst us. The latest is the agreement with UNRF II of Maj. Gen. Bamuze. The track record is there. So, there is no way we can question the sincerity of the Movement Government when it comes to negotiation. 

Kony himself was on record, on radio, through emissaries, through the church leaders saying he would like to negotiate. You recall, he even declared a unilateral ceasefire. 

When some of our colleagues in the House appeared to say there is a fault on the Government side, initially I took it that these colleagues have really good contacts. So when they speak, we should take them seriously and follow what they are saying, because this may be representative of Kony’s views. Surely, we all read in the papers, the Government emissaries were told to go to place X, Kony’s people did not turn up. I have not heard anyone saying now Kony –(An hon. Member rose_)- if I could first develop that, then I will take the clarification. I have not heard people who have talked to Kony or to Kony’s agents. 

Incidentally, once I had a very extensive discussion with hon. Okumu Reagan on this issue of Kony. He has been having some exchange with them, which is supported by Government, so that we can find a way of solving this problem, if we can, peacefully. I have not heard anybody saying, Kony is ready tomorrow, he has sent his delegation there, go and negotiate.  

Of course, it would be better if we could do it here. But someone to stand here and say that the war is continuing because we have not accepted a neutral place, or because we have not brought a neutral person to chair the talks, is really stretching this serious matter a bit too far.  

We need to come to a conclusion about the nature of Kony and not to play games, so that we are united. Because, if we continue giving different signals - others are saying the problem is Government, because it is militaristic, it does not want to negotiate; and others are saying no, let us fight it out - that does not give us strength, as hon. Thembo was saying. It does not give us strength really.

If I could come to the point raised by hon. Omara Atubo. He is a good friend of mine. We also exchange notes many times. I really want to appeal to his maturity and experience, as a leader. Friends, one of the things we must forge is a national consensus - for lack of a better word - on serious issues like security. To know that on security, here no one will break through the ring, we can talk about something else outside. 

Colleagues, see what happens when it comes to matters of security. You remember when Kabila was still alive; we were literally at war with Congo. Hon. Awori suddenly turned up and said, “I have been with Kabila, I have met prisoners of war and here I am”. We are at war with a country, one of our prominent colleagues goes on the other side, he comes back and that is what he says.  

Hon. Aggrey Awori was a former presidential candidate who could have won and become the president of this country. Another time, our soldiers, our children, were in the Sudan. For administrative difficulties, the agreement we had with them expired, not by a month but just by three, four days. The first person on the Floor here was hon. Aggrey Awori, shouting to everybody that our troops are in the Sudan illegally.  Surely, are these demonstrations of rationality?  Are these demonstrations of someone who wants to find a solution? 

So, hon. Omara Atubo and other colleagues, the main problem we still have to forge that confidence, to forge that unity, so that we can arrive at doing something as serious as carrying out a pre-emptive attack and steal across the political divide, that we are able to share that information and proceed.  

Now, in the absence of that consensus, I think what the Government has done is a good alternative, hon. Omara Atubo. After the troops are there, we are informed. We are given progress on what is going on. Surely, it is not fair for it to appear like if we had consulted before, the war would have been won. I think that is really splitting hairs, because the facts are there to show us that -(Interruption)

DR NKUUHE: I have been listening to my good friend here, and he seems to be answering the questions that the hon. Minister of Defence is supposed to answer. I am wondering whether he is answering questions of a political nature, since he is a National Political Commissar, so that the Minister of Defence can answer other matters. I need guidance on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister without portfolio has the capacity to operate in many portfolios. The statement which the Minister of Defence made, touched on issues beyond defence. So, the Minister without portfolio is adequately equipped to answer questions. Please, proceed.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the excellent guidance. Obviously, hon. Nkuuhe knows that more than 30 people have spoken. You can imagine how many questions the minister, who has been taking notes, has to answer. 

But to sum up my presentation, we have strategic issues to deal with here. How will Uganda survive in the Great Lakes Region with the instability within and outside? To take the specific example of Congo, Congo has been unstable for 30 years. It is not about to solve their problems. They are in a jungle where anybody can take advantage. 

To me, it is not strategic for Parliament to be saying every time, “do not go to Congo, just be at the border”, without us taking additional steps to make sure that these recurrences do not take place. 

The souring of relations between Rwanda and us should be a cause of great concern for all of us.  They are neighbours; they lived here; we all must be searching for what the problem is, and not just pointing fingers. All of us should get together and know, first and foremost, that Rwanda has an intention to shoot others. So, our first reaction is to defend ourselves. But of course, since they are neighbours, we then look for a way to solve our conflict.

Lastly, Reform Agenda, I want to repeat, owes this country a big explanation. We cannot sit here and every time they see Opoka is with the rebels, they say, “no, Opoka is not anywhere”.  When they see Opoka is killed, unfortunately, they say, “if it is true, that is unfortunate”. Someone is caught in Ituri, they are saying, “oh, that was his business.”  

In science, we talk about trends. We make observations and conclusions. Do not take advantage of the apparent weakness of those who are supposed to piece information, and therefore, use that. It really causes trouble to the country.  

I have seen an intended resolution, and I want to appeal to my good brother, hon. Omara Atubo. When you give him chance, Madam Speaker, if what I have is what he wants move, I just hope that it will be a resolution, which builds on the spirit with which the minister brought the statement. I hope it builds towards a strategic goal, so that together we can continue building to bring peace and stability to our country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have been here since seven minutes past two and it is now five minutes past seven. I am obliged, under Rule 12(3), to discontinue this debate. But I have made arrangements for us to sit on Friday morning. We shall debate this matter for one hour on Friday morning and then proceed to other business. 

In the meantime, you are all invited by the Members of Parliament from Jinja to go to Bugembe Stadium for the Labour Day celebrations. But we shall meet here on Friday morning at 10.00 O’clock. So, the House is accordingly adjourned to Friday at 10.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.05 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 2 May 2003 at 10.00 a.m.)


