Tuesday, 30 April 1996 

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice-Chairman, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADJUDICATURE BILL, 1996


PROF. KANYEIHAMBA (Rubanda County, Kabale):  I thank you, Madam Chairperson, and I stand to support the Bill proposed by the hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General.  I have only on point on which I want to seek the guidance of the Attorney General and presumably with his permission, if he allows, I move an Amendment.  While I have no problem with other provisions, I am a bit concerned about the maximum composition of the Supreme Court.  

As you know, Madam Chairperson, in a Bill that we pass here, which is not a Statute, the composition of the High Court is now 25 Judges and any one of that Judge can sit in a court and competently transact business of the court.  The Court of Appeal, according to the Constitution the quorum is five, and the Bill proposes to make them seven, that is okay by me.  But when it comes to the Supreme Court it is to consist of the Chief Justice and at the moment six other Justices of the Supreme Court.  Nevertheless, in some cases, particularly when hearing constitutional cases, the quorum for the Supreme Court needs to be seven; that means that all the Judges must be available, six of them which we are creating now, plus the Chief Justice before the court can transact business; and it seems to me that this is stretching a bit too far.  

My view is that the Supreme Court is composed of people who are mature, reaching their evening years; the law says that Judges of the Supreme Court can sit until they are of the age of 70 and there is a provision even to say they can sit beyond that; therefore, these people are likely to have illnesses that do not inflict much young Judges with the High Court.  Consequently, I think, that to be safe we should increase the number from six I would suggest to eight so that if one or two of them are indisposed the court can always sit, particularly, in the more important cases involving the interpretation of the Constitution.  

So, Madam Chairperson, I propose, and I hope the Minister will not oppose, that instead of just having six Justices of the Supreme Court, plus the Chief Justice who compose the bear minimum that are required to hear cases, we should increase the Justices of the Supreme Court to eight, so that with the Chief Justice you have, at least, always nine people from each seven could always compose a maximum court of the court.

With those few words, Madam Chairperson, I beg to support.  Thank you. 

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I stand to support this Bill, and while supporting this Bill, I would like to sound the following observations:  I would like to comment about the behaviours of the lawyers and the magistrates.  Madam Chairperson, we have had problems whereby some of our lawyers who take up cases on our behalf are not genuine themselves, what I am saying they are fraudulent and you find that the job which they are supposed to do on our behalf   -(Interruption)

MR LUBEGA:  Point of order.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson and hon. Members, is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to make allegations, very serious ones indeed, without substantiating?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, he is not in order.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Madam Chairperson, I was developing a point then he got me half way; so, I do not know really whether he is trying to block me so that I do not give out this point.  What I am saying, Madam Chairperson, today what surprises me there are some lawyers who go to court to represent some clients and yet they have not renewed their certificates.  There are cases, I know some, and the Uganda Law Society has never cared to even verify some of these, to find out these lawyers whether they are really registered, and if they are registered, have they paid?  

So, I have many cases of that; and another point, to show exactly that some of these lawyers are not even supervised to see what they are doing.  You find there are certain lawyers who have even cheated customers or their clients, and the Uganda Law Society has been very quiet on this point -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.   Thank you, Madam Chairperson and I thank my brother for giving way; may I inform him that it is not the work of the lawyers, but the High Court usually has to make sure that before somebody appears before them, they have got to be up todate with their registrations.  Unless this has been changed, this is what I am made to understand.  In case any lawyer has cheated any of his clients, like I was at one time cheated, you go to the Law Council and they have a committee which handles that matter.  This is usually done in the Ministry of Justice, and even if I am not a lawyer, I hope that the Attorney General would confirm this in his submissions.  I thank you.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Thank you for the information; Madam Chairperson that adds weight to what I am just saying.  Another point I would like to talk about, this is in relation to supervision of our courts.  There has been no supervision of what goes on in the courts.  Because you find that some of the judgements which are passed by the Chief Magistrates, they are not reviewed.  What I am saying, if a certain Judge in Masindi or Hoima, at least, there should be a council or a committee to see to it that if he has - these are the proceedings, he has judged this case, is this fair?  But there is no committee –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I would advise you not dwell into areas with which you are not familiar.  That is not the way the court system works.  

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Okay, but this is my observation as a parliamentarian, you know, Madam Chairperson, I am entitled to give my view, whether it is unprofessional but that is my speech.  Because I have also my discipline which I am an expert in; so, what I am saying now is that the Chief Justice or the High Court should institute some measures to ensure that there is really justice given to the people, especially, the rural areas.  Because there are so many anomalies going on -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of order.  Madam Chairman, having advised the hon. Member that he should not enter territory where his knowledge is very limited, and he himself having admitted that he is not well informed in that territory; is it in order, Madam Chairman, that he should continue to give questionable information to the House, purporting it to be correct information.  Is he in order, Madam Chairperson?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is completely out of order, and I would advise him to concentrate on the Bill.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Madam Chairperson, since you have restrained me -(Interruption)

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, I am seeking your guidance for the good to debate this Bill wisely.  When you advise Members that we should concentrate in our own area, can you advice this House who should debate and who should not so that we do not venture in areas where we may not be competent.  Otherwise, I find it that, maybe, only lawyers should continue.

MR LUBEGA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  It is one thing for a Member of Parliament or NRC to debate, but when that person misdirects himself and particularly when he is uninformed, that person must be made to - otherwise, ruled out of order, or alternatively must be informed where the statement he is making is incorrect.  This is normal practice in parliamentary debates.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Thank you much, Madam Chairperson.  Since you have restrained me from talking about that aspect, maybe, I will save the House the embarrassment which I am causing to it, by dwelling now on section 42 and 43 of the Bill.  Now, they are talking that there shall be a rules committee, and this is where I was bringing in the point of supervising these courts, which at the moment is not there; and someone thinks I am not -(Interruption)- is to see to it that there is justice given to the people; justice given to the people in rural areas.  How do the people get justice when you find a case today takes five years to get finished!  There are some civil cases which have taken more than ten years!  How are we going to solve that problem?  My being here in Parliament is to defend the wanainchi, to defend the people in rural areas where they find that things are not going normally, I should advise government, and that is why I am here.  Now, I am saying that because the courts are not supervised, cases take so many years to get finished, and therefore -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Madam Chairperson, is it in order for the hon. Member now holding the Floor to continue saying that cases go unheard for years - five years, when both the Constitution and the Statute which we passed presumably when he was present, has limited the time in which cases must be tried and if they are not tried then the accused person must be released automatically.  Is he in order to continue dragging the House into this kind of ignorantia?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, I think you should give researched information when you are contributing.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Madam Chairperson, me I am interested and I am going to dwell on this point unless - what I am saying is that cases take a long time, there is delay.  Professor Kanyeihamba is saying that they have put a provision in the Constitution but this is theoretical, it is not practical.  We are here to set ways to advise on how cases can be expedited; that is why I am here!  So, delay in administration of justice is too bad -(Interruption)

MR DRANI DRADRIGA:  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  Without any prejudice to the advice you had earlier given to my hon. Friend, I would like to inform him that in the Ministry of Justice there is an inspector of courts.  If there are administrative problems I think we should strengthen that office so that inspections are carried out, and submissions are made from districts.

MR GWAIVU:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I think the issues the hon. Member is raising are very important, and instead of intimidating him to restrain on what he is saying, possibly it would be proper that he is just advised to mention a few examples.  But we all know what is happening, even in the press these reports have been there of people’s cases being uncleared for a long time.  So, instead of intimidating him it would be better that he is advised to mention a few examples.  Thank you very much.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Thank you for that information, which is manly.  I would like to talk also about the legal costs.  The wanainchi also have got a problem of very high legal costs and, therefore, they cannot get justice because of these high rates.  I think, the Minister of Justice when he is answering he should, at least, give us guidance on what he has in mind in order to help the people in rural areas who cannot afford these high legal costs.  

Madam Chairperson, I was still on section 43 where I find there was so many things which were listed, and to me I find all these regulations were almost requiring a Bill of its own, because they are so many.  Right from (a) up to (y) and the things so look it should have been condensed so that this Bill looks a bit realistic.  I would like also to talk about the issue of payment to our Judiciary Department, because some people have been saying that they are not given money - I am just commenting, Madam Chairperson. I do not have that view -(Interruption)- the well paid department in the whole nation, and they should also reciprocate by really expediting cases so that the wanainchi can really benefit, because they are highly paid but there are so many cases which are lagging; you find Judges, Magistrates are absent - there are so many technicalities which are created and for no reason really –(Interruption)

MR KABUGO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that in most cases magistrates and judges fail to perform or to expedite these cases due to lack of logistics, and in most cases you find that the Police who are investigating these cases are the ones who are playing their delaying tactics, whereas the Judges have already decided and traveled from their offices to go and attend to those cases  and in the end they just bounce because there are either no files or the files are missing and in other cases there are no papers to write on.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Madam Chairperson, we can agree that Judiciary officials are well paid; I think the problem we have found is that - as hon. Kabugo has said, that there is lack of logistics; for example, a Judge may be there but then the witnesses are not give the transport.  It has been all along, the Ministry other than giving the officials presiding over the courts - there should be enough money, corresponding amount to enable the supporting staff like the CID, like the prosecutors, like the witnesses; the problem we have is that if you summon somebody to come as a witness he is not given money to go back, and most of these fellows are frustrated.  That is why you have the Judge without the corresponding witnesses; there should be corresponding finance to assist the Judiciary, otherwise, money only to the Chief Magistrates, magistrates and even to the Judges will not assist, if the CID, the man investigating at the grassroots is not paid the same amount; because the Judge has to wait.  But if you expect a CID man to go in a taxi to investigate loss of about half a million shilling, this file will never come. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  Anyway, just to conclude my comments, I would like to summarise as follows:  I would like, now that the Judiciary is among the highly paid departments, they should also reciprocate by trying to do the work - they should do the work as quickly as possible so that people benefit, because everyday you find lines at the High Court!  Really I get worried and I am worried, cases which do not end, as far as supervision.  I would like the Minister and his team to come out with a methodology on how they are going to supervise - in fact, in this session I would request the Minister while he is replying to tell us what programmes he has in mind on strengthening the supervision, at least, I would like the Minister to convince me on that aspect, and -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, the point made by the hon. Member who is holding the Floor is an important one.  I want to give information, Madam Chairperson, that as this council sits there is an international powerful body sitting at the Conference Centre, discussing this very question.  Why there are delays and injustices in the administration of justice in Uganda, in particular, the criminal law.  Among the people participating, who have done research on all the courts and prisons in Uganda, include a distinguished Judge who has worked in the commonwealth, including Southern Africa; they include a very distinguished profession who worked at Dar-es-salaam and various other universities.  They have been carrying out research for a long time and they have now disclosed their findings, as I say they are making their conclusions at the Conference Centre this afternoon.  I suggest that the Attorney General could get us the copy of their report and their findings and recommendations and make it available to the hon. Members of this House; I think it will make us more informed. 

MR ABA MAYANJA:  Point of information.  Madam Chairman, I am giving this information in light of what hon. Kanyeihamba has said, because I have not quite followed the hon. speaker on the Floor, but I would like to inform the House that with the assistance of DANIDA and as a condition for further assistance to the Judiciary, during the time when I was responsible for these matters, a high powered committee was set up to inquire into delays in the administration of justice, and to suggest ways and means of expediting the administration of justice;  it is looking into all procedures  - the committee was chaired by the then Justice Plat and it had very many important personalities of Uganda.  So, I think, either the committee has already reported or - what I want to say is that this matter should be specifically addressed, if it not already done so.  Thank you.

MR KASAIJA KABUUBI:  With these few comments, Madam Chairperson, I thank you.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO (Makindye Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I believe it is not too late to congratulate you for what you have achieved in the name of the House, I wish to congratulate you.  However, before I start commenting on this Bill, there is something which is very serious which I want to bring to your notice.  Yesterday while reading in the newspaper, the East African, I was shocked to read that the General Manager of Uganda Airlines, by the name of Benedict Mutyaba, has resigned.  It is a shock to me because I have been following the fate of this Airline and I have appreciated the work of this young man; and the reasons he gave were that somebody somewhere in the Ministry of Works and Transport did give away the routes which Uganda Airlines was operating and he was hopping to make up for the business.  These routes were given away without the knowledge of Board of Directors of Uganda Airlines, certainly without their approval.  This is one example of people in ministries, taking decisions which adversely affect our parastatal bodies, without the knowledge of these parastatal bodies and to the detriment of these parastatal bodies.  Therefore -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Madam Chairman and the whole House, the information is that; like hon. Ssebaana Kizito ought to know that no single Sub-saharan Air carrier can compete today with the larger European, American and other carriers; it is clearly the push in the region for cooperation in many of these areas, including air transport.  One of these reasons why these routes were taken away, I am given to understand, these routes were given to Alliance Airline in which Uganda hold 30 per cent, Tanzania 30 per cent, as states -(Interjections)- and South African Airways as an Airline 40 per cent; and one of the contributions Uganda as a state and Tanzania as a state contributed were these routes.  Uganda Airlines is not viable in competition with British Airways and other larger carriers, whereas Alliance Airline becomes viable with the contribution of the three partners.  Thank you very much. 

MR KALULE SSENGO:  Madam Chairperson, thank you very much.  It is unfortunate that the Minister of Transport is nor around; but if it is true that the Uganda Airlines is not making any profit why do we not scrap it and merge it into the Alliance Airlines?  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I believe the point about Airlines has been made and you are at liberty to invite the Minister of Transport and ask him a question; let us concentrate on the Bill.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I think you will allow me to make a concluding remark on this one.  I am very surprised that hon. Gad Gasatura is aware of what is taking place in Uganda Airlines to exclusion of the Directors and the Management of that Airline.  All that I read in the papers is that these routes were given to a Saudi Arabian national, and I do not know whether that is the same as the government of Uganda, and I also was given to understand that these were given away on a price which was not paid to the Uganda Airlines, but it was paid somewhere else -(Interruption)

MR OGWANG:  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  Is it in order for our senior Colleague, hon. Ssebaana Kizito who is a well renown private entrepreneur to keep on engaging a pilot, hon. Gad Gasatura, in this horrible debate of Uganda Airlines instead of concentrating on the Bill on the Floor?  Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I had already requested Members to concentrate on the Judicature Bill; you will be at liberty to summon the Minister of Transport to answer those questions.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Yes, I am moving away from that point, but I want to educate my your Colleague that when there is something of national importance, when you are debating on the Floor of the House and with the leave of the Chair, you are at liberty to mention it, for the benefit of the country -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I will not permit senior Members intimidating junior Members of this House.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Madam Chairperson, I want now move to the Bill.  I am also a little apprehensive of the fact that judgements take too long.  I have noticed Judges at work, and I noticed that all of them they write the evidence they receive from both sides in long hand.  I am just wondering why Judges do not teach themselves shorthand, because it takes much longer to write a statement and you may not even write it as correctly as you should using long hand, and therefore, I would like to appeal to the Minister to arrange for courses for Judges in shorthand so that they can shorten the time of hearing of evidence by recording that evidence in shorthand.  I am also concerned -(Interruption)

MR ABA MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I wonder if hon. Ssebaana Kizito would inform the House whether he has taught himself shorthand.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  For the information of my hon. Friend, whenever I want to write something as lengthy as a judgement or evidence in a court, I call my secretary who is herself well versed in shorthand.  I also know that there are so many vacations - or are they so long; vacations of High Court.  The other day I was very surprised to hear that the court was on summer vacation; a court in Uganda to be on a summer vacation! As if we were in Britain and as if we had winter and summer here in Uganda; it is always summer here, and what I have found out is that when judges go on vacation they all go so that there is no one to hear cases when they have gone!  Why is it not possible to arrange that they go in rotation so that when Justice so and so goes in September he comes back in November and somebody else goes, and so on and so forth.  Because there are so many cases and people are crying over delayed justice, because as you know, you being a lawyer yourself you know that delayed justice is denied justice.  Is that not what you say?  Now, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Justice to make leave rosters as we do make leave rosters for our senior officers -(Interruption)

MR ABA MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform hon. Ssebaana Kizito that this vacation is not meant to enable Judges to go on leave; indeed they do take leave, but this one is one of those things which we have inherited from the British Judicial system, which it may indeed be well in time for us to discard.  First of all, it is not correct that there is no Judge when there is a vacation.  During court vacation there is a Judge and now I think arrangements are being made for there to be, not only one but a number of Judges, about two or three, sitting to hear urgent matters and all that kind of thing.  But this practice of court going on vacation, the whole of it, is I think something which was taken over from the British system -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Why?

MR ABA MAYANJA:  Indeed why did we take our law from Britain; why did we take our language from Britain; why did we - as me another.

MR SSEBAANA KIZITO:  Madam Chairperson, I think, if we have taken this over from the British, it is high time that now that after 33 years of independence we should discard it, because we have discovered that it is not advantageous to us.  I have also noticed that in many cases Judges fail to appear in courts because of logistical problems.  Sometimes transport, either there is a vehicle but there is no petrol; either there is petrol but there is no vehicle, and I wonder why we cannot maintain our Judges!  I remember one of my friends who had a case in court he had to go and fetch the Judge.  It is not allowed but he could not help it; the man had been summoned so many times, and therefore, it was in his interest that the Judge attends court, and unless he had to go to his house, he had to fetch him; and as hon. Mayanja knows if the mountain cannot go to Mohammed, Mohammed will go to the mountain (Laughter)

Now, the last point I want to make is about court brokers; court brokers are agents of the court.  I am just wondering whether they have got some minimum qualifications which they must get in order to be appointed as court brokers, and if they have got some standard of behaviour which is allowed; because when court brokers are at work they are worse than invaders.  When they are sent either to an office to distress something for payment, they come and they are rough, they embarrass everybody, they take things and they throw them around, they break them sometimes and so on and so forth.  

Therefore, I would like to suggest that the question of court brokers should looked at and we should lay down specific qualifications, and also specific standards of behaviour.  I know that court brokers are useful because they are part of the administration of justice of Uganda, but they should administer justice in such a way that they do not do havoc, they do not cause havoc to the people who are affected.

Madam Chairperson, with those few remarks, I beg to support the Bill. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now call upon the Attorney General to reply.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE/THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr J. Ekemu):  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  Let me first take this opportunity to thank hon. Members for their contribution to this debate.  I must say there have been very interesting points raised, and I have personally benefitted greatly from some of the issues raised, and hope having taken not of them, we should collectively in the end take stock of the situation and improve upon the Judiciary generally.  I would now like briefly to reply on a few issues raised by some of the hon. Members, starting from hon. Bwanika Bbaale who first of all suggested that there was no provision for the children’s court in this Bill and, I think, he is right; but, of course, I would like to draw his attention to the fact that there is a children’s Bill which I think was passed in this House, and I think that Bill must be waiting only the presidential assent, and in that Bill sufficient provision was made covering the children, including the children’s court and everything else that is needed to go with -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  While the Minister is giving the reply, could he indicate why the Children’s Bill has not yet received presidential assent?  Thank you.

MR EKEMU:  Madam Chairperson, first of all I was making only reference to that, in reply to what hon. Bwanika Bbaale said; certainly I cannot say that because that would necessitate my full knowledge of the full itinerary of His Excellency the President who is the person who will assent, but I am quite hopeful that in due course this will be done to the satisfaction of the hon. Member.  Hon. Bwanika Bbaale, also suggested when he was talking about the order of precedence of Judges, and for him the though the order of precedence should take age into consideration as a primary factor.  But the Bill is very clear, Madam Chairperson, the Bill says that consideration of order of precedence will commence from the time when the person takes oath of office.  So, that is what the Bill is saying and, I think, that is sufficiently precise and much better than going by the age.  Because if you go by the age sometimes people may have grey hair when they are even much younger than those who do not.  So, I do not know what - but the Bill is quite clear about the order of precedence.  

MR BWANIKA BBAALE:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  When you look at section 3 of this Bill, order of precedence of Judges, (a) is very clear (b) is very clear (c) is very clear and (d), but (e) states;  “where in accordance with paragraph (b) (c) or (d) of this section there is equality of precedence in respect of two or more Judges, the precedence among them shall be determined by the Chief Justice.”  That is if all of them were appointed on the same, they have served the same length of time, so they are at par; now the Bill says that it is now the Chief Justice to say who takes precedence over the other.  My suggestion is that in order to give him unbiased opinion let him take age a specific consideration; that is what I mean, hon. Minister.  Thank you.

MR EKEMU:  I think, Madam Chairperson, to that extent I have no problem with hon. Bwanika Baale’s view, because at that time the Chief Justice will decide what parameter to use, if he uses grey hair then hon. Bwanika Bbaale is right, if he does not, I think it is okay.  Well, hon. Nkwasibwe, generally made reference to the Bill, but complained that there are no provisions - she generally complained about the law about the age that we should have - I do not know whether she wanted that we should have thought about making provisions covering age, but I think her general remark was that we should think about legislating specifically for the aged; maybe, just as we have legislated for children.  I have my sympathies for hon. Nkwasibwe’s views; of course, she does not apply here, but I certainly think, maybe, she has a point which could be considered at a later stage by, maybe, another Parliament or this one; but otherwise, she certainly has a good point.  

She also complained about environment and when she was talking about this she was making special reference to implementation, that is to say that many of our laws are made, but when it comes to implementation that we are not effective on that, and she made reference to decentralisation.  Perhaps, again she is right but, I think, that is a general observation which we must make as responsible leaders.  Madam Chairperson, many points were raised by hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Aba Mayanja and hon. Kanyomozi.  I think these three hon. Members raised points which were closely tied up; first of all, they were talking about resources to the Judiciary, and this point has also been raised this afternoon by various hon. Members.  Of course, Madam Chairperson, the question of resources to the Judiciary is rather a painful matter for us all, because we expect justice and all Ugandans at grass roots as hon. Kabuubi has made reference this afternoon, all Ugandans expect justice; but the system we have set to out justice is not sufficiently catered for; and this is the crux of the matter.  But why is it not catered for, hon. Chairperson?  First and basically because of the magnitude of our national resources.  If you discuss these matters like facilitating Judges in terms of motor vehicles, availing them even housing - because they are also entitled even to furniture, you will find that the biggest constrain we always have is the question of financial resources covered under the Budget, and this has been a frustrating matter.  So, as a result many of our Judges operate under a lot of constraint; their transport system is extremely poor, the office facilities are not good, even those Judges who are called now called resident judges who were put in the region, their housing facilities are totally inadequate; some of their chambers upcountry, even some of the libraries which they utilise is far from adequate if you compare to other judges in some other Commonwealth countries.  

But, Madam Chairperson, this is our problem as a nation, and this is partly a result of the turmoil we went through.  So, while we discuss shortcomings in the performance of this organ we must know why.  But, of course, I must encourage hon. Members to say that government is still trying its best, and this is why the salaries of these people were elevated a little bit.  We are also being assisted by other people of good will to try and improve on the condition and capacity of judges.  This afternoon hon. Ssebaana Kizito suggested to the House that Judges should learn shorthand.  In fact, Madam Chairperson, it is not just shorthand; I think, hon. Ssebaana Kizito had a better idea to put in.  The technology has improved.  I think, what hon. Ssebaana Kizito is saying is that we should look into the possibilities of making now judges and the Judiciary benefit from the general improvement of technology all over the world, and maybe, this means that instead of judges taking shorthand and instead of bulky filing system, maybe, we shall need to computerise the entire system of the Judiciary.  I think these are the line which we should talk about and we should generally improve the communication system in the Judiciary and as much as possible make sure that the Judges are better of.  Of course, I do not agree with the suggestion of hon. Ssebaana Kizito with due respect, I think the judges should do something better than just learning shorthand again; and I am glad that hon. Mayanja gave a point to him.  

So, Madam Chairperson, these are some of the issues raised jointly by hon. Omara Atubo - he also touched on the question of court brokers and customary laws.  Several hon. Members have touched on the question of court brokers; it is true, but the Bill provides that the committee responsible for rules now, when we pass the Bill, that committee is going to make the rules which will dictate the terms and provisions under which court brokers will operate and probably state what their qualifications should be.  So, I think, in passing this Bill we are definitely going to cure some of the problems concerned with court brokers.  Up to now court brokers have been operating in a way which hurts many members of society, and many of them are not having any specific qualification; I do not remember the specific qualifications required of court brokers, but this is one of the problems which is now going to be cured by the passing of this Bill.  

Of course, also Members mentioned about qualification of customary law.  Madam Chairperson, this is a very wide area, and it is good that hon. Members have pointed the pros and cons of it all, but I think it is that maybe in the end there may be need for qualification of customary law.  But before that is done, it needs a lot of work which should be done on the ground to process, because we have many customary laws and customary practices.  Hon. Members in this House you have yourselves sometimes applauded some of the customary laws, you have sometimes condemned others.  I remember when we were discussing about circumcision at one time in this House, some Members were condemning circumcision; when reference was made to circumcision of women in Sebei, other Members were even more condemnatory.  What does this all mean? It simply means that customary law is a bulk of practices which we shall have to deal with through before we even talk about qualifying them, and see what is going to be good for our society and for posterity and discard what is not going to be good.  But, I think, generally it is a good idea which hon. Members have brought and it should be considered and while we do this, I would also like to assure the hon. Members that we now have a law reform in place, and it is looking at some of these very seriously.  I think some of the customary laws and practices are among those which the Law Reform Commission is looking at with a view of eventually, perhaps, giving us a better picture.  

The hon. Members also made reference to the RC courts and - well, one thing I would, of course, say is that this Bill does not say very much, if anything at all about the RC court, but since it was mentioned I share the views of hon. Members that RC courts perhaps need to be a little bit more seriously and probably be improved upon. 

The Members also did make mention of the police and the clerks of the court all these goes to suggest one thing, that when we talk about justice and Judiciary we cannot talk about judiciary in isolation and the supporting arms of the system must be considered, the police handling investigations and arrest.  The Prison take care of custodial matters, there also court clerks and really it is going to be difficult for us to think of the Judges and the Magistrates working efficiently if these other arms are not working well and you know it well that in many respect some of these arms are not working very well not through their own faults, but again because of circumstances surrounding them.  Of course, Madam Chairperson as I said earlier although some of these things are not directly relevant to the Bill, I have personally taken note of them and I am going to advise my Colleagues or the responsible Ministry to see what can be done. In the meantime I will try only to restrict myself to the comments made in respect of the Bill.  

Hon. Butagira Francis generally supported the Bill, but he was particularly happy about clause 19; sub-clause 2; it actually answers the questions of supervision which hon. Kabuubi was raising this afternoon because this extends the power of the High Court to supervise especially the lower courts and make sure no undue delay goes on in the law courts that is what clause 19; sub-clause 2; does and I think it was pointed out as one of the best clauses in this Bill.

Hon. Butagira condemned the idea of court circuits that they are expensive and they should be discouraged.  Now why do we have court circuits from the High Court in this country?  Partly, really because we did not have facilities especially housing facilities to accommodate the Judges in the regions as of now, because with the view, Madam Chairperson, is that, if we could have enough facilities in regions at the moment we would be very kin and to eager to send Judges to the High Court especially to be resident in the regions because that way we shall have brought services closer to the people and that is the policy.  But for the time being we are constrain to operate on the basis of circuit because of lack of facilities of course it is quite expensive because we have to transport Judges and we are to give them some allowance to live on and many times it is a very difficult thing to sustain, but we are going I think to look into it and if we can improve the position of housing for the Judges then we hope to improve upon this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member you have just walked into the House, allow the Minister to complete his reply.

MR EKEMU: Hon. Omara Atubo, hon. Kanyomozi and my predecessor hon. Abu Mayanja who certainly did a lot of work in the Ministry of Justice and I am only glad to say I am following very closely in his foot steps to improve upon the work, some of the work which was started there is going on. For example, the complaints about lack of libraries and that law books should reach the private practitioners I do agree, just now hon. Members should know that through some assistance DANIDA, and ODA we have now updated some of the ordinary law books needed for a Magistrate and for the Judges and we have compiled what is called ‘Grey Book’ and if hon. Mayanja wanted to know all private practitioners are now free to obtain this book and it can facilitate their work.

So many other things were said including on the question of the rule of law I do share the sentiments of hon. Members, I am informed of course that the last inquest way back in 1964, of course when I was hearing that I was wondering why my hon. Colleague hon. Mayanja and hon. Kanyeihamba did not attempt to hold another inquest, but I took that very seriously because it is provided in our law I think it is important that our people should benefit from it, there many other matters Police was accused of keeping people in the custody for a long time and still beating people I think hon. Members the question of keeping people for long in custody the constitution now provides some limitation.  

Now, what does that mean?  It really means that Members of the community and especially you and me as leaders should be a little more vigilant and see if anybody is being kept in custody for much longer than constitutionally required I too will be very interested to know and we should do everything possible to bring those responsible to book.  There is really no reason why there should be much of beating of people, but I know that it seems in earlier days the way Police were trained it seems there was an impression given that getting a statement out of a person requires so much pressure that sometimes the person may be, subject to some beatings.  

So, it seems probably many of our police of that training still think that way, but generally I would like to note, Madam Chairperson, that I think there is a great deal of improvement even in the work of the Police with regard to interrogation.  I would like to say it was worse this is what is important, so whereas I certainly cannot say that there is no beating anymore I still would like to really put to Members that even if there is it must be much, much less than what it used to be.  Hon. Chairperson, we have grown up in this country and we have been following the history of events and we should definitely know.  So, I think we should strive and work very hard towards improvement of systems there is now no reason why Police should assault anybody in order to extract a statement from him, in fact, we are saying, Madam Chairperson, that there is even no need to arrest anybody for purposes for investigation only, we are saying that the reverse should be the case the Police should try to find evidence against somebody and if it’s worth arresting the person on strength of evidence available that is when the person should be arrested, that is what we are saying.

The other Member raised a question about the Rule of double jeopardy and I think that was sufficiently answered, of course this afternoon hon. Kassajja Kabubi made quite a big contribution and I picked up two points, that is first, he complained that cases are delayed.  Then second he complained that there is no supervision, well I do agree with him on the first point; cases are delayed, but there many, many, reasons why cases sometimes delay.  Sometimes cases delay because even of your counsel who is supposed to advise you, may be, he takes his time, may be, he thinks this is not an appropriate time to get the case disposed off for one reason or another because as a counsel he also uses these question.  

But, I think as far as the courts are concerned I think the courts at the moment are very zealous to ensure the disposal of cases, so much so, Madam Chairperson, that we have as a policy started divisions in the High Court.  Divisions will be there to deal with specific cases of specific nature for example; commercial cases will be dealt with in the division governing commercial issues, matrimonial cases the same thing, all this is done so that we can give those divisions chance to dispose off cases as expeditiously is possible. 

But sometimes, Madam Chairperson, there are really many reasons; one of them is that, people even litigant do no seem to realise that there many cases which may be, referred to courts, but many of those cases could be settled out of court.  I have found in certain places even counsel do not seem to appreciate this, sometimes you find lawyers saying let us go to court, let us go and fight it in court.  Now, you go and fight it in court you are now clogging the system, there some cases which are find in court which if the parties were put down were put down and advised from either side they would definitely come out to settle cases, but people just insists and sometimes counsel insists and sometimes the parties insists, so you find that cases go on and on.  So, I think while we think of delays in cases we should not only blame the judges I think the Judges are keen to dispose off cases that is why we have now got divisions, some of them work extra hours.  

When the House was discussing about vocation, really when you talk about court vacation say for Xmas, the Judges really do not go on vacation as such, what happens is they sit down for example; to write judgement which have been pending.  So, vacation is only in the sense that we do not have for example; a court operating in open court, but the Judges keep on working and some of these judges work right inside their houses far into the nights in order to get these matters disposed off.  But, I would like to assure hon. Kabuubi that part of the reason why there have been delays is that in the past the court systems were clogged because of what I have just said where cases were not being disposed, where cases were not being settled, but every effort is being made now to disengage the system and make sure that cases are disposed off.  In fact, we are setting up a timetable to say that, when you file a case in court we must have a limited time within which it should really be disposed off because also there some litigants, Madam Chairperson, who institute cases in court then they simply vanish into thin air and they leave the cases.  When the Judges notice that the cases have stayed so long they want to dismiss them, then these people surface and when they surface they want to go on, while we want the cases to go on then they disappear.  So, this generally clogs the system, but we hope, Madam Chairperson to come to the end of all this it is a part of the struggle.

There is a section responsible for supervision of courts; there is an inspectorate of courts if hon. Kabuubi wants to know.  There is a full inspectorate of courts which could really try to check on our courts, one problem also it has is that we are still building it’s logistical strength, but it is a very vital section and we intend to build it and make it more viable now that it is going to be supported through this Bill by the supervisory arm of the High Court generally we hope that supervisory work will improve.  Some Members who complain about legal costs being very high, therefore, power people are not getting - if that is not true then hon. Members I urge let us pass this Bill because also there is a provision where the Rules Committee will deal the legal cost perhaps they will have to review them because also I would like to inform the House that some of the legal costs like the court fees some of them are ridiculously low.  So, we hope this time efforts will be made by the Rules Committee to streamline all this and bring it to something more sensible, something that is more helpful to all of us.

I think I have already said things about the court brokers there has been a suggestion that I should make available to this hon. House the report of the conference which is now going on and possibly perhaps let you know about the report of the Commission of Inquiries into delay injustice which report was already presented to my Ministry.  I will be prepared to avail hon. Members this report so that you know what effort has been made and so that you can formulate what you think should be your input in this matter.  I think, Madam Chairperson, with those remarks I beg to move.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that the Bill entitled: The Judicature Bill, be read the Third Time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE


Clause 1 put and agreed to.

Clause 2

MR KANYEIHAMBA: Point of clarification.  Madam Chairperson, in clause 2; the word ‘Parliament’ is defined anybody empowered to enact laws for the whole of Uganda.  Madam Chairperson, I believe this kind of definition could create problems because the constitution only empowers parliament to make laws for the whole of Uganda.  However, in the Constitution, Parliament may delegate it’s power to a subordinate body to make laws for the whole of Uganda, but that subordinate body cannot be Parliament.  So, I would suggest that, the Minister look at this and the definition should be Parliament is as it is found in the constitution rather than confusing issues.

MR EKEMU: I have no objection.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Clause 2 as amended, agreed to.


Clause 3

MR BWANIKA BBAALE: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move an amendment to the effect that, that clause 3; sub-section (e); be amended by replacing the last word in (e) by ‘age’.  So that it could read as follows; “where in accordance with paragraph (b), (c) or (d) of this section there is a quality of precedence in respect of two or more Judges precedence among them shall be determined by age”.  I beg to move.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson I would support that amendment, but I would want slight amendment because if you say by ‘age’ it could be younger or ‘older’.  So, I would say the older in age takes precedence.


MR EKEMU: I have no objection.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 as amended agreed to.

Clause 4

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: With your permission, Madam chairperson I know I did not circulate a written amendment because I did not know we were going to move it today, but as I had suggested to the Minister I want to move an amendment in 4(b); so that instead of 6 we have 8, Madam Chairperson, I had made reasons for that.

MR EKEMU: Madam Chairperson, I listened to hon. Kanyeihamba’s reasons he talked about ‘old age’ and ‘poor health’,Madam Chairperson, those are not very satisfactory reasons.  The Supreme Court is our last court and in my opinion six judges and a Chief Justice making the seven is quite a sizeable number the Supreme Court is not expected to be a big club, Madam Chairperson.  I oppose the amendment.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: The Attorney General did not deal with my substantive point which was that the constitution now requires that this court should constitute seven members in order to transact constitution business and, therefore, my argument was that if you leave it at six the Chief Justice must always sit in order to have seven and in view of the points that I made if anyone should not be present then the court can never sit.  This is really the main point I made not just because of age, but the high quorum of seven that the constitution has made and here we are simply creating seven which means that everybody must be available to sit if that court is able to transact the business.  That is why I wanted to increase to two so that there is a marginal error.

MR EKEMU: Yes, Madam Chairperson that is probably more substantive point, but one other thing is that, we are going to have to maintain a supreme court in a manner that should be fitting.  So, Madam Chairperson, I am afraid about this explosion of numbers it is not an easy thing, it is probably easier to say than to maintain.  I still think the number as proposed in the Bill is fair and reasonable.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 4 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5 put and agreed to.

Clause 6 put and agreed to.

Clause 7 put and agreed to.

Clause 8 put and agreed to.

Clause 9 put and agreed to.

Clause 10 put and agreed to.

Clause 11 put and agreed to.

Clause 12 put and agreed to.

Clause 13 put and agreed to.

Clause 14 put and agreed to.

Clause 15 put and agreed to.

Clause 16 put and agreed to.

Clause 17 put and agreed to.

Clause 18 put and agreed to.

Clause 19 put and agreed to.

Clause 20 put and agreed to.

Clause 21 put and agreed to.

Clause 22 put and agreed to

Clause 23 put and agreed to.

Clause 24 put and agreed to.

Clause 25 put and agreed to.

Clause 26 put and agreed to.

Clause 27 put and agreed to.

Clause 28 put and agreed to.

Clause 29 put and agreed to.

Clause 30 put and agreed to.

Clause 31 put and agreed to.

Clause 32 put and agreed to.

Clause 33 put and agreed to

Clause 34

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson I seek clarification from the hon. Attorney General Clause 34 seems to exclude Government from the orders of the High Court as far as I know the provisions of the Constitution did subject to the constitution did subject Government to such orders.  I wonder whether this section is not contrary to the spirit of the constitution if not indeed against the constitution.

MR EKEMU: Madam Chairperson, I have not quite got hon. Kanyeihamba’s complain.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kanyeihamba can we have the issue you wish to have clarified.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson, the old law which this judicature Act is based on did not empower the High Court to order the prerogatives  -(Interruption)- against the Government that was excluded.  This matter was debated in the C.A and I cannot site the particular clause and it was eventually agreed that the Government should also be subject to the orders of the High Court in appropriate cases.  But if you read section 34; it seems to suggest that the High court in which the Government is a party or any question in any such proceedings to be tried any referee seems that the Attorney General would have to consent before the High Court made such an order at least that is how I understood section 34.

MR EKEMU: I think Madam Chairperson, this is quite in order, proceedings regarding Government go through Attorney General it is only normal I think that the Attorney General should be in this position in order to ensure the propriety of the provision.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35 put and agreed to.

Clause 36 put and agreed to.

Clause 37 put and agreed to.

Clause 38 put and agreed to.

Clause 39 put and agreed to.

Clause 40 put and agreed to.

Clause 41 put and agreed to.

Clause 42

MR  BWANIKA BBAALE: Madam Chairperson, this clause 42; I have got two amendments to propose.  One, 42(a); the composition to the Rules Committee does not provide the Chairman.  I want to propose that we amend this section by saying,” 42.1(a) the Chief Justice who shall be the Chairman”, so that we are specific by proposing the Chairmanship of this committee.  If this accepted then I will continue to make another proposed amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: No objection, Madam Chairperson.

MR KALULE SSENGO: I am just seeking to be educated because my worry is, if you have the Minister of Justice and Attorney General then you make the Chief Justice the Chairman will there not be some kind of - who should actually be the Chairman, is it not like -(Interjection)- that is why I said I am seeking to be educated because there are times when we have the Minister holding the two.  So, should it happen in the future that we have the Minister for Justice also acting as the Attorney General, then will you not have a problem where the Chief Justice is Chairing a meeting where his boss is just a member of that Rules Committee?

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to give information, that first the Chief Justice on this body is the highest person in precedence so he would not conflict with the Minister for Justice and Attorney General because all Ministers are under the Chief Justice as far as status is concerned, only the President and the Vice President and the Speaker of this august House take precedence over the Chief Justice.  So, there is no conflict, Madam Chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BWANIKA BBAALE: Clause 42(f);the proposal from the Minister said that, the Director of the Law Development Canter or his or her representative, I wish to bring an amendment to the effect that this last bit ‘or his or her representative’ be deleted so that we say, “The Director of law Development Canter”.  I beg to propose.

MR EKEMU: I have no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  I now put the question that, Clause 42.1 (f); be amended as proposed by hon. Bwanika Bbaale.

(Question put and agreed to).



AN HON. MEMBER: We have provided for the Law development Canter because it is teaching law, but we have the Universities which are at the same time teaching law.  I want to propose that we include a representative of a University teaching law in Uganda as sub-clause (g).

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson, with due respect I wish to oppose that amendment because Rules Committee deal with the conduct of cases and discipline of the professional body.  The universities are academic institutions secondly some of them have no bearing whatsoever to do with the law like the university of Mbale, university of Mbarara and, therefore, it would be appropriate to include purely academic centres who are not in concern with professionalism to be on this Rules Committee.  So, I would respectively oppose the amendment.

MR EKEMU: For those same reasons I oppose the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 42 as amended agreed to.

Clause 43


MR BWANIKA BBAALE: In my contribution, Madam Chairperson, if you remember I re-objected to this, making the Rules Committee makes statutory instruments.  I think somebody to make statutory instrument - personalised and I wanted to move an amendment to say that, “the Chief Justice with the approval of the Rules Committee made by statutory instrument make rules for regulating and practice of procedures of the Supreme Court.”  So, what I wanted to say, Madam Chairperson, is that the Chief Justice should be the one to make the rules with the approval of the Rules Committee.  I think this one comes out clearly than when you say “the Rules Committee may by statutory instrument” who is actually - we have to have somebody who is going to make these statutory instrument not the Rules Committee.  I beg to propose.

MR EKEMU: Madam Chairperson, I oppose that amendment because first of all the Rules Committee has we have now passed it will be Chaired by the Chief Justice, so inevitably somehow, somewhere the Chief justice will be there to sign. I oppose this amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 43 put and agreed to.

Clause 44 put and agreed to.

Clause 45 put and agreed to.

Clause 47 put and agreed to.

Clause 48 put and agreed to.

Clause 49 put and agreed to.

Clause 50 put and agreed to.

Clause 51 put and agreed to.

The First Schedule

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I was going to move that this schedule be deleted, but this is perhaps after the Minister has given explanation.  I do not see why we should preserve these certain Acts of United Kingdom to continue to apply, the Registration Act and others, Merchant Shipping Act, again I do not know what is being preserved there, certainly those colonial, may be, part two; I do not know whether we have anything left from the colonial British Acts of colonies and possessions I would feel that these are only going to bring us confusion so I was going to suggest that unless really there are good reasons this schedule and the second one which preserves the laws of the United Kingdom should be deleted as they do not seem to be necessary, but I am sure perhaps the Minister has got some possible explanation. 

DR MAGEZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Madam Chairperson, before the Minister can clarify, these have been part of our laws ever since independence and I do not see what confusion they have caused up to now.  In fact, what intrudes the hon. Member to think that enhance forth they will bring confusion, which has not been there for the last so many years of our independence.  Simply being colonial it does not mean it is bad, there are many colonial things which are very good.

MR EKEMU: Madam Chairperson, it is a very tricky matter I would cushion hon. Members the names of these registrations are colonial names, they sounds colonial and may sound outdated and useless, but Madam Chairperson, we still have some of our laws - pieces registration bearing these same laws.  What I would suggest while opposing this amendment, I would oppose this amendment and only ask Members to be patient because there is law reform review all the laws and that commission will bring before this House matters which should be amended, deleted, or removed.  I think that will be an appropriate time. For the time being I oppose  -(Applause)


PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I withdraw my amendment in light of that explanation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The second Schedule put and agreed to.

The Title put and agreed to.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Ekemu):- Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the House do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Ekemu):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled The Judicature Bill 19967 and passed it with some amendments.  I beg to move

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Ekemu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Ekemu):- Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that a Bill entitled the Judicature Bill 1996 be Read a Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

THE CONSTITUTION CONSEQUENTIAL PROVISION’S BILL, 1996

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Ekemu): Madam Chairperson I beg to move that the Bill entitled: The Constitution Consequential Provision’s Bill, 1996, be read a Second Time.  In doing so, Madam Chairperson, I would like to -(Interruption)

MR NYAKTURA: Point of order. Madam Chairperson, I raise on a point of order.  Is it in order for us to continue deliberating on a new Bill when we have no quorum.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Minister is only making his representation no decisions are going to be made and in any event the Order Paper since last week has indicated the nature of Business to follow.

MR EKEMU:  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  In moving this Bill for the Second Reading, Madam Chairperson, I would like to assure the hon. Members that this is yet another very short Bill with only 12 short clause including the Title clause.  Madam Chairperson, this Bill will seek to bring in position certain bodies which are absolutely necessary to give effect to constitutional provisions of the 1995 constitution.  In clause 3 of this Bill, the Bill seeks to establish an Interim Judicial and Service Commission.  This is a body, Madam Chairperson which is responsible for the appointment of Judges, Magistrates, and everybody else in Judiciary and at the moment since the promulgation of the new constitution we do not have a Judicial Service Commission so we cannot have appointed, we cannot have considered matters relating to people in high offices of Judgeship or the Magistrates. 

So, as we talk now, Madam Chairperson the system is paralysed and we need to set this body in place as an institutional body.  The other body under clause 4; is the Human Rights Commission, this is a very important body is provided for in our constitution, it is important for the safe guard of the rights of our citizens, it is particularly important, Madam Chairperson, at this time when we are considering the politics of the country, when sometimes human rights of people may be, abused by those who are not responsible and I, therefore, think it is important to set up this body as the Bill provides.  There is also under clause 6; the leadership Code of Conduct, this is a well know Committee where this Parliament legislated and set up what remained was only to set it up, but matters again, Madam Chairperson, were caught up by the processes of constitutionalism, but fortunately at the end of it, the CA passed under Chapter 14; of the constitution providing for the Leadership Code of Conduct, it is, therefore, thought in this Bill to re-affirm that position so that now we could consider the setting up of this Code of Conduct.  

There are also other matters under clause 7 of this Bill regarding land matters. Under the new Constitution there is supposed to be District Land Boards.  Now, these are supposed to be set up by an Act of Parliament since we still do not have that for the time being we must set up an interim body.  I remember one hon. Member was discussing this Bill in advance one day and said, this body was not necessary. But operation of land transactions especially at district levels are completely at a stand still because of lack of these bodies like the District Land Board and even the operation of the Ministry of Lands is somehow frustrated because of this; it is this, that clause 7 envisages.  There general clauses of this Bill under clause 8, and clause 9, which talk about pending cases and saving of some other laws and then clause 11; that makes a reference to an - clause 12 talks about the powers of the President to give effect to the constitution.  So, Madam Chairperson, this is a very short Bill, but absolutely necessary Bill to support the Bill which has just been passed by this House and I would like to invite hon. Members to consider it, it is also a technical Bill, but I expect to benefit from the comments made by the hon. Members.  Madam Chairperson I beg to move.


PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I stand to support the Bill moved by the hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General I think as the Title says, these are provisions which are consequential upon the promulgation of the constitution, in particular the one relating to matters of Human Rights and for example the hearing of cases indeed we are almost very late because come next week after the elections anyone may petition that some candidate or some elected person have not been constitutionally elected and, therefore, we need the courts to be in place and to have the necessary quorums to be able to transact business should there be petitions and applications against any decisions either by voters or anyone else.  So, it is really long over due and I very much hope that the House will give it the support it requires.  

However, I am not very sure that the provisions of section 7; is very necessary at this juncture because the constitution says that, the Parliament to be elected probably in June shall have two years within which to make laws and regulations governing land and I am sure one of the issues they will consider is the appointment of Land Boards.  So, I feel that, the creating of Interim District Land Boards could wait until after the election of the next Parliament, but in any case presently we have a mechanisms for resolving these matters and the constitution did say, that until Parliament has put into place a new law to govern the relationship of land lords and tenants and the leasehold which rather constitution created the status quo shall be maintained, in other words the constitutions says, the status quo shall be maintained, may be, the Minister will justify whether clause 7; does maintain status quo or whether we are trying to create new District Land Boards in contemplation of the new parliament in which case in my opinion it would be in-appropriate.  

It is important of course that we also create an interim Human Rights Commission, again this one is long overdue the Attorney General explained in part, but we have never been satisfied that at one time we had names of the Members to enforce the code - shall make this House after some debate the names were withdrawn, but if I recall correctly another list was submitted and some of us voted on that list, but we have never known the results.  So, I do not know what happened to that list and why the Leadership Code passed several years ago has never been implemented, but may be, this is not an appropriate time to discuss it.  

So, Madam Chairperson, as the Attorney General has said, these are technical and consequential provisions where we should not find no difficult in passing except as I have said, my question is on clause 7.  I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR BAKASHABARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  I stand to support the Bill and in supporting the Bill, I wish to differ from the previous speaker, who says that, paragraph 7; which creates Land Boards should not be interim.  Madam Chairperson, at the moment there is a huge vacuum in the administration of land because, there no controlling authorities of land and, Madam Chairperson, besides Ugandans, the asset we have is our land and to have land for over a year without a controlling authority affects development very adversely.  

Another comment I wish to make concerns paragraph 12; I could not understand paragraph 12, perhaps the hon. Minister will explain because to me I think within about 10 days we shall have a new president.  So, I do not know the relevance of this paragraph, for just 12 days, I think he will perhaps explain.  There is no doubt that we require a judicial service commission as well as the Human Rights Commission in place before the Presidential elections if possible because cases may arise when there necessity is extremely important.  With these few comments, Madam Chairperson I support the Bill.  I thank you.

MR RUTARO: Thank you, very much, Madam Chairperson.  I rise to support the Bill and in supporting the Bill I would like to agree with hon. Kanyeihamba that the Judicial Service Commission should be put in place as soon as possible because there may arise a case of somebody protesting or contesting the results of an election and there would be an absolute necessity to dispose of that contention.  So, I think the House should pass the Bill as possible in case that case arises.  

I also wish to agree with hon. Bakashabaruhanga that obviously land is a very sensitive issue that cannot be shelved.  I will give you an example of my own self. In an attempt to develop a plot, I have been frustrated by absence of legal documents to allow me to proceed, because the City Council is in no position to sit and give a lease and unless and until you have a lease, a plot number and therefore, documents to allow you to develop, you cannot proceed.  How long can we wait while the process of a new Parliament comes into effect and wait for two years? 

Secondly, we have the Investment Code.  A person coming here to invest either on land or development on land cannot wait for two years while his money sits either in his pocket or in a bank and that would mean a lot of loss on investment.

DR MAGEZI: Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that the question relating to the two years does not affect the District Land Boards.  Article 237(9); clearly says that ‘ the two years refer to the relationship between the lawful or bona fide occupants of land referred to in Clause 8.’   This is the Busuulu - the squatters on mailo land and also it refers to the providing for the acquisition of registrable interest in the land by the occupant.  That particular article does not refer to the rest of the land in the country, but only those which are affected by the mailo land owners, Madam Chairperson.

MR RUTARO: I wish to thank hon. Magezi for that information.  The Land Boards I am referring to - I believe we do not have a difference except when I talked about two years which hon. Kanyeihamba had referred to.  But I wish to emphasize that it is not correct to sit and wait to postpone anything on land.  Because land affects development like it does affect the welfare of the population.  

I also wish to state that the Leadership Code is very, very long overdue.  In my several contributions previously, I have risen to remind the Attorney General and the previous Attorney Generals, to put the Leadership Code Committee in place.  We are going for elections of a new Parliament and I suppose it will be correct for people just before they are nominated to declare their assets so that we start on a clean sheet.  In the case of the Presidential Elections, I think we are long overdue.  We should as soon as possible when the Committee is in place, even require either the Presidential Candidates if it is before elections or the President when he is elected, to declare his assets.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Madam Chairperson, I recall that at least one of the candidates Kaguta Yoweri Museveni did disclose his wealth which was published in one of the local newspapers and that one actually did appear in The New Vision.

MR RUTARO:  I wish to thank hon. Kanyeihamba for the information.  That information does not contradict to what I am saying.  I am only saying that, he may have declared.  But there is no committee to actually record.  News Papers do not relate to official matters of state.  So we are looking for a Committee which will be the custodian of -(Interjection)- Can you protect me from my brother?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Member you are on the Floor. 

MR RUTARO:  So, I am saying there should be an official Committee to take talk of what has been declared and of course to exercise the discipline that is expected of the same Committee.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

DR MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality, Jinja):  Madam Chairperson, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to react to the business before us.  Madam Chairperson, we are at a very critical stage in Uganda right now; and within the next two months we shall have a new government.  On the 8th of July, we should have a new government if not earlier.  We have been with some of the proposed consequential provisions for a very long time, and the matter before us is so critical that even now people are raising the issues of quorum.  So, the nearer we get to Parliamentary Elections maybe we shall adjourn this august House because there will be no chance of getting a quorum in the House.  And, therefore, my immediate observations would be yes! Let us push on and pass what is necessary to provide a peaceful transition from the NRM Interim Administration to a new government.  Anything else especially as critical as some of the proposals here, we should let the next Parliament deal with it.  They will be properly constituted, they will have a quorum and they will be still representing the people of Uganda with a fresh mandate. (Applause) 

 I really would - the heart of the matter is for instance Article 272; and Article 272 says ‘the first appointments to the following offices shall be held with six months after the assumption of office of the first President anyway.’  Whether we pass it now; six months after the new president comes in, these offices of the Chairperson and other members of the Uganda Human Rights Commission will have to be appointed in accordance with the Constitution.  The same will apply to the Chairperson and other members of the Electoral Commission; the IGG, the Chairperson and the members of the Judicial Service Commission.  I could only exempt the Judicial Service Commission in as far as it will affect the elections to be held.  But the other businesses should wait six months later, then they will be handled in accordance with this Constitution. (Applause)  

Madam Chairperson, on the question of land for instance; you see land is a very sensitive issue.  Somebody is bound to ask why are they rushing even to put there these consequential when really Article 241 is very, very clear on the Functions and the Appointments under 240 of the District Land Boards.  So, I would really like to make a plea to Members of this august House that let us not be seen to think that if we cannot participate in this Legislation, then whoever comes here is really not going to do a very good job.  The issue of the Leadership Code of Conduct even if we pass it here, still the hon. Attorney General will have to bring the names; you remember the five names we talked about and he said No! We must pick five from among the list.  So, even that exercise has also got to be done. I would have appreciated if probably the Attorney General brought the names now and said look!  We must get through these names and we shall make the necessary modifications to the law.  But let us put the Leadership Code in practice by debating the names and passing the names maybe.  But even then, the Constitution is talking about a few modifications which should be done properly with proper interested groups participating in this exercise.  I do not think that there is much else - Immigration Act of 1969; this is Clause 11, amendment of the Act.  Immigration can wait!  We have waited for this long to get where we are and there is already some Immigration Act anyway taking place.  I do not see what will wreck this country in waiting until Parliament comes in and the Attorney General is ready to come in and say now in accordance with the new Constitution, this Parliament should address the following provisions.  I conclude, Madam Chairperson, by appealing to the hon. Minister -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOKO:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.  I am seeking clarification from the Minister as a Member of government.  Knowing as we all do, when the elections are concluded and probably the new government comes in by July the 8th; that will be the time for deliberating the 1996/97 Budget. Which from experience goes on until October; and then that gives way to a Christmas break.  So the clarification I am seeking from the Minister with his knowledge is how much time is likely to be available for fitting in urgent business part of which is now being sighted in that kind of agenda?  Because I pick the impression that, the time when the Government is going to come in, is going to come in when the agenda is almost set; and if we do not have some of these things done now, that means we must also prepare to incur the cost of waiting until later.  So, I was just seeking clarification.  

Infact, if the institutional framework is made then it maybe easier to have the operative in place six months after the government is in place and then the perfecting legislation follows later when the business is going on.  Because if you are going to wait until you have - you see it that in the normal Legislative Agenda, I can see a little bit of a problem.  I just want to find out from the hon. Minister as a Member of Government what kind of programme does he see in relation to the provisions he has brought before us and also the issues being raised by hon. Dr Magezi?

MR MAGEZI:  Madam Chairperson, I really wish to thank the hon. Member for seeking that clarification.  I have some interest in the observation that is given by the Minister.  But as I was saying, Madam Chairperson, there is a lot of excitement in the country now because of the pending elections.   Even some of the people whom we want to entrust to do some of this work like the District Service Boards, you will find that they are being appointed by the District Councils.  There is so much movement; there is a lot of dynamism that probably I would still think that this might not be the right time to go into that bit.  Although the fundamental issue is that, let us get the politics right.  We have had to layoff something like graduated tax in the districts.  Because we said if we start taking people now to task about graduated tax, there will be all sorts of signals surrounding this exercise; that our people must go - you know let them chew what they can swallow rather than their getting disturbed now that the present NRC has schemed those positions and yet all the perspective candidates are putting positions known on the issues like Land, they are putting issues on Immigration, they are putting so many in their manifestos.  

So, I would beg you, Madam Chairperson, that we address only those issues which are so cardinal to holding a peaceful election within that matter and let other matters lie for the time being.  I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, we have a responsibility to facilitate the Electoral Process; so we shall have to come back here on Thursday to conclude this business.  So I would urge all of you to come back here at 2.30 p.m. on Thursday so that we finalise matters relating to the elections.  So, I would like to wish the workers of this country a happy Labour Day.  So we therefore, adjourn up to Thursday at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 May 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)


