Monday, 30 April 2007  

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members and our visitors, I welcome you to this special sitting. It is a sitting convened because of the unfortunate demise of our dear colleague, hon. Dr Yefusa Okulo Epak, that occurred on the morning of 25th April 2007 in South Africa where he was undergoing treatment. 

It is a very sad moment for all of us to be here to bid farewell to him and express very deep condolences to his family, friends and people of Oyam County South, who he has been representing in this Parliament. All of us have lost a great Ugandan who has done the best for this country. He has been very intelligent, objective, balanced and candid. He is not known to have been in the habit of making emotional empty political outbursts. 

His last parliamentary work, whose results he left in my office about two months ago, was the report on the Auditor General’s audit of classified expenditure by government departments. This is a new procedure. Before it came into being, classified expenditure was not being audited. Now there is a special procedure of dealing with it, and it was being handled by him. This was a very new parliamentary procedure, which had no precedent, but he did it well.  

The people of Oyam County South sent the right person to the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Parliament to represent them. We shall greatly miss him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

Honourable members, related to this are condolence messages, which I think I should read. The first one reads: 

“It is with great sadness that I convey to you my heartfelt condolence upon the death of our dear colleague, hon. Dr Okulo Epak. The late hon. Okulo Epak was a thorough legislator whose submissions always informed, educated and guided the House. I viewed and valued him as a role model because of his professional conduct and experience.  

The late hon. Dr Okulo Epak will particularly be remembered for his commitment to constitutionalism and good governance. His input during the constitutional review exercise, and as chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, is testimony to this. 

To the political parties, hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s contribution to the Political Organisations’ Act, his desire to see strong, transparent and accountable political parties will always be remembered.  

Hon. Dr Okulo fought a good fight. He has finished the race. May the Lord comfort the family. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.”  It is signed by Alaso Alice Asianut, Member of Parliament, Parliamentary Commissioner and Secretary General of Forum for Democratic Change (FDC).  

I have also received one from The East African Legislative Assembly. It is addressed to me and reads: 

“On behalf of my colleagues, members-elect of the East African legislative Assembly, I extend heartfelt condolences to the family, constituency and Parliament of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Dr Okulo Epak. At the East African Community level, hon. Epak will be remembered for the available contribution he made towards building the capacity of the Legislative Assembly especially at its inception in 2001 and thereafter. 

We pray that the Almighty God bestows courage and strength upon his family during this difficult time. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Very kind regards.” The condolence message is signed by hon. Lydia Wanyoto. 

Honourable members, the third condolence message is from the Office of the Deputy Speaker. It is addressed to the family of the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak. It reads: 

“I want to offer my most sincere condolences upon the death of your beloved father, husband and son, hon. Dr Okulo Epak. I have worked closely with Dr Okulo Epak in Parliament for a long time. He has been a well-respected member of the House, eloquent and articulate. It was always a pleasure to hear his contributions. 

I have also been in touch with members of the family now and then throughout his illness, and he took it upon himself to inform me that he would be leaving for treatment during a particular period. He will be missed by colleagues, family and his constituency. May his soul rest in eternal peace.” It is signed by Rebecca Kadaga presently attending an IPU meeting in the Far East.

This is from the Electoral Commission, addressed to me. It reads: 

“The Electoral Commission has learnt with shock and sorrow about the untimely death of hon. Dr Okulo Epak, the Member of Parliament for Oyam South, which occurred on 25th April 2007. On behalf of the Commission and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to the Parliament of Uganda, the family of the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak and the people of Oyam South for this great loss. 

The Electoral Commission had an opportunity to interact with the late Dr Okulo Epak in the Sixth and Seventh Parliament where he served as a member and chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, and in the Eighth Parliament as a member of the Public Accounts Committee. We benefited from his experience, knowledge and wise counsel and hoped to continue doing so, though death has robbed us of the opportunity. However, we take solace that it is God who gives and takes away. We pray that the Almighty gives you sufficient strength and courage to endure this most trying moment.  

Please accept our heartfelt condolences. We may all not be physically present with you during this time of mourning, but we are sorrowfully and spiritually with you. May the Almighty rest the soul of the deceased in external peace.” It is singed by Eng. Dr Badru Kiggundu, chairperson of the Electoral Commission, Uganda.

Another message comes from the Uganda High Commission in Canada and it reads: 

“It is with great shock and sorrow that I have learned of the passing away of hon. Dr Okulo Epak. The death of hon. Okulo Epak has robbed the Parliament and Uganda in general of a dedicated, brilliant and most open-minded legislator who served Uganda diligently in many capacities. 

On behalf of the members of staff of the High Commission in Ottawa, and on my own behalf, I wish to extend my our deep heartfelt condolences to the family and all those who knew, worked with and were friends of the late hon. Okulo Epak. We shall always remember the late hon. Okulo Epak as a great and courageous leader, especially for his remarkable achievements as the chairman of the Public Accounts Committee in the Seventh Parliament. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.” 

There is another message from members of Teso Parliamentary Group. It reads: 

“We, members of Teso Parliamentary Group on behalf of the people of Teso Sub-region, wish to extend our most sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak, his constituency of Oyam County South, honourable members of this august House and the nation at large upon the loss of our dear colleague. 

It was with profound shock and deep sorrow that we learnt of the untimely demise of our dear colleague. We, members of the Teso Parliamentary Group, mourn the death of our senior colleague. We have lost a brilliant and true nationalist who loved his country above self. 

The late hon. Dr Okulo Epak had a critical mind. He would critically analyse national issues in a balanced way, designed to foster unity and development of Uganda. He was indeed a true nationalist. 

Teso Parliamentary Group will always remember the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak for his partnership and commitment in the fight for peace and resettlement of people affected by war in the greater north. He has served this country selfishly. 

Most importantly, hon. Dr Okulo Epak will be remembered as an accomplished but humble legislator, a man of substance, principled and straight forward. He volunteered advice to those who cared to listen. 

The late hon. Dr Okulo Epak is one of those politicians who have left a political legacy because of his balanced and positive contributions, and many politicians would do well if they emulate him. We shall forever miss his wise counsel, warm voice and the calculated words of wisdom. 

Hon. Dr Okulo Epak as a politician was one of the best politicians that Uganda has ever had, and members of Teso Parliamentary Group and the entire nation will truly miss him. We, members of Teso Parliamentary Group, append sorrow and broken hearts but are consoled by the fact that he has gone to be with our creator. The gap you have left behind shall never be filled, and we in Teso Parliamentary Group shall miss what he was and all that he would have done. May his good works live beyond the sad death. 

‘The Lord gives and the Lord takes. Blessed be the name of the Lord’, Job 1:21b. May the Almighty God grant your soul eternal peace. Rest till we meet again.” This condolence message is signed by hon. Amuriat Patrick Oboi, chairman Teso Parliamentary Group and MP Kumi County. Thank you.  

2.45
Entrance of the late Dr Yefusa Okulo Epak

National Anthem 

Laying of Wreaths

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we proceed to another item on the Order Paper, I want to inform you that at this ceremony of biding farewell in Parliament, members of the family of the late Okulo Epak are seated here with us. In our presence we also have the following: His Excellency the former Secretary General, Amanya Mushega, hon. Prof. Kagonyera, hon. Anthony Butele, hon. Henry Kyemba, hon. Nusura Tiperu, hon. Annet Mukabera, hon. Wanyoto, and hon. Proscovia Salaamu Musumba, Vice President of Forum for Democratic Change. You are most welcome. The choir is from Apac District.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. DR YEFUSA OKULO EPAK, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT OYAM COUNTY SOUTH, OYAM DISTRICT

2.57
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, before I formerly move this motion, I wish to point out that hon. Dr Okulo Epak had a very high sense of humour. One day he deliberately criticised me with intent to provoke me politically. When he saw me prepare to respond to him, he quickly disappeared from the House. When I stood up to give him an appropriate reply, I realised that he was not in the House. I later found him in the lobby and he said that he did not want to give me a chance to bash him in his presence. We both laughed and ended the matter amicably.

WHEREAS Parliament learnt with profound shock of the death of the late Hon. Dr Yefusa Okulo Epak, which occurred in South Africa on Wednesday the 25th April 2007; 

AND WHEREAS hon. Dr Okulo Epak has been an illustrious Member of Parliament who is remembered as a very prolific and articulate debater since he joined Parliament from 1996 till the time of his death; 

NOTING with appreciation that he was instrumental in revamping the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament of which he was the Chairperson in the Seventh Parliament; 

AWARE that the late hon. Okulo Epak was one of the Constitution framers when he was a member of the Constituency Assembly from 1993 to 1995, where he distinguished himself as an astute analyst of complicated issues; 

COGNISANT of his invaluable contribution to the development of Uganda when he worked as the Government Chief Planner from 1972 to 1976;

APPRECIATING his pivotal role in the national effort towards the reconstruction of Uganda in the aftermath of the 1979 liberation war when he worked as the Managing Director of the Reconstruction and Development Corporation from 1982 to 1986;

GIVEN his intellectualism as exemplified by his appointment as a lecturer in the University of Nairobi where he worked from 1977 to 1979;

TAKING into account his international stature and competence which enabled him to be appointed as United Nations Chief Technical Adviser on Decentralisation and Local Level Planning for the Government of Ghana from 1987 to 1980 in addition to attending many international conferences on the environment, human settlement, peace building and management of public funds;

SATISFIED that the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak indeed dedicated most of his life to serve his fellow country men and women and the international community and therefore deserves the recognition of this Parliament,

NOW THEREFORE be resolved by the Parliament as follows:

i)	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives and friends, his constituents of Oyam South, the people of Lango Sub Region and of Uganda at large for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished son of Uganda, hon. Dr Yefusa Okulo Epak.

ii) 	That it takes cognisance of the dedicated services and contribution that the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak has, in the course of his illustrious life, rendered to the people of Uganda and the international community as a civil engineer and planner, a member of the Constituency Assembly, a member of the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Parliament, who will be specifically remembered as an articulate legislator and a former effective chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee of Parliament.

iii)	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded. You can proceed.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, hon. Dr Okulo Epak was predictable. This is a rare commodity. We disagreed in some aspects of our political life, but whenever we agreed on a position I was sure that he would not change. Political predictability was one of his major assets. 

Dr Okulo Epak was a scholar in his own right. You have heard his credentials. He used his scholarly attributes to serve not only his constituency, Uganda, but also the entire world. He was also impartial. When you appeared before him when he was in the chair, you were sure that regardless of your political persuasion, he would be professionally impartial. 

As I mentioned earlier on, he had a very acute sense of humour. There was a time when he made a point I did not like. When I got out of the House, I told him that he did not deserve an answer. He said, “Eh! Don’t you realise that I am an intellectual?”, and we laughed. 

Dr Okulo Epak was married. He has children, and of course they enjoyed matrimonial sobriety. It is extremely important for people to serve in this country and not neglect their families. Sometimes when we do not balance politics and family obligations, it can lead to problems. 

Hon. Dr Okulo Epak was a practicing Christian. Indeed tomorrow we shall have a major service, and although we shall have another function I shall be representing government at that function. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved. 

3.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof Ogenga Latigo): Mr Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I rise to second the motion that has been moved by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, that Government pays glowing tribute to our fallen brother and colleague, hon. Dr Yefusa Okulo Epak.

Mr Speaker, when Dr Okulo Epak passed away, I was travelling to Juba, from where we returned last evening with hon. Okello-Okello and hon. Jimmy Akena. I therefore did not have the opportunity to convey the condolences of the Opposition to the family. Allow me, therefore, to start by conveying condolences to the family - the wife of the late, our mother Mama Matimat Martina Okulo, the two daughters, Dorothy and Barbara, and his son Lameck and his wife, for the untimely death of Dr Okulo Epak who was head of your family. We convey the same deep sorrow and condolences to the people of Oyam County South Constituency, Oyam District, the people of Lango and Uganda in general. 

Being a member of the Opposition, the death of Dr Okulo Epak is the death of one of us, not only in Parliament but more particularly in the Opposition. We know that it has been a difficult time, given the nature of the illness that took away the life of Dr Okulo Epak. Cancer is an illness that is not easy to bear and to nurse. We know that in his struggle you had to make tremendous sacrifices, and we thank you most sincerely for all that you have done during the life of Dr Okulo Epak.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, to also thank my two colleagues, hon. Cecilia Ogwal and my Shadow Minister of Public Service, hon. Rebecca Otengo. They, together with the members of the Lango Parliamentary Group, took the illness of Dr Okulo Epak as a collective family illness. The two that I first mentioned travelled to South Africa to support the family. That is why a very senior member, who would be better placed to talk on such an occasion about Dr Okulo Epak, hon. Ben Wacha, is not in the House. He has left to make further preparations. So, we thank the members of the Lango Parliamentary Group. 

I must also say that we are very grateful that a large number of Members of Parliament took time, in spite of the fact that this is a Monday and the news of the death of Dr Okulo Epak probably got of us in our constituencies, to come and pay our respects and bid farewell to our brother.  I thank you very much. 
  
On an occasion like this we mourn, but more importantly on an occasion like this we take time to thank God for our departed and to celebrate the life that he has given that person. I will appropriately reserve my personal mourning for home and take the moments that I have to celebrate the life of Dr Okulo Epak. 

It may not be noticed by many of us, but about a week and a half ago I returned from Juba because of a crisis that needed urgent attention following the Mabira demonstrations. When we were in a meeting, members of the Lango Parliamentary Group began to whisper amongst themselves. Later when I asked one of the members what was going on, he actually said that a rumour had reached Lira, causing so much commotion, that Dr Okulo Epak had passed away. It turned out that the Clerk had made calls to South Africa confirming that it was a rumour, and then last Wednesday Dr Okulo Epak passed away.  

It may seem a simple coincidence that even when the illness could have taken his life away at that time, it was a very inappropriate time for the person of Dr Okulo Epak’s character to pass away. It was a time when the country seemed in chaos, and therefore a very inappropriate time. So, we thank God that we are able as Parliament, as a country, to focus on recognising this industrious son of Uganda at a time when we are enjoying calm in respect of the political happenings.  

Dr Okulo Epak has been referred to as an academic and an intellectual. I will not labour on that. I interacted with him so much. Many people who watched the debates in Parliament must have realised that each time a professional matter came up on the Floor you would see Dr Okulo Epak in his true colours. He would blossom and take charge, as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister likes to say. He would guide the House so that whatever we were debating, whatever legislative matters we were discussing were addressed very professionally. I will make specific reference to that. 

The other thing is that he had intellectual power that so many people did not realise Dr Okulo Epak actually suffered some disability. I do not know how many members did realise that he wore an artificial arm. He was so much in command of the situation that you would not even notice. I believe many people did not realise that. The fact of the matter is that he used one hand to write, or even to drive, but he had total intellect to take command even of a physical situation.  

As politicians, many of us have a lot to learn from Dr Okulo Epak. Every time that we have elections, we have scrambled to prepare money to appease the gods that give us the votes, and we have also scrambled to make posters. Even though with a feature like a bald head I can be picked out from the crowd, I still make portraits. Dr Okulo Epak never did this. He never, I was told. I went through his constituency and I never saw his posters pinned on trees. He talked to them and said, “If you want me to help you, vote for me; if you do not want me to help you, fine.” Fortunately, the people of Oyam County South knew better and every election they elected Dr Okulo Epak to Parliament. For sure, he never let them down. 

The other general element of Dr Okulo Epak is what the Prime Minister made reference to. He was a man that you could take at his word. He approached issues on principle. He opposed when it was important to do so, but he also supported when it was important to do so. In that process of being able to talk, to dialogue even with government, many of us would be surprised to see how many government programmes have been executed in his constituency in spite of the fact that he was a very prominent member of the Opposition. In that process, he generated all round respect, and it is that respect that always yields positive results.

Nationally, Dr Okulo Epak made a huge contribution in the Constituency Assembly. I was not a member of the Constituency Assembly, but I was keenly interested. I remember one particular meeting that was held at the home of Prince Kimera in Kansanga. At that time the parties had walked out of the Constituency Assembly on account of the proposed Article 269. 

I remember that Dr Okulo Epak and other members dialogued with the government through hon. Mayanja Nkangi. That evening it was the hope of Dr Okulo Epak and the other members of the Opposition that the parties would not be banished and that we could come to a common agreement through a transitional process. For example, President Museveni would be supported by all at that one election and then in a subsequent election, members of the various parties would be free to field their candidates in a way they saw fit. It was not because of any selfish interests, but Dr Okulo Epak saw that as a way out and he struggled to implement that. I believe that hon. Cecilia Ogwal is better placed to talk about the contribution of Dr Okulo Epak to the struggle for multiparty democracy and the internal democracies within our parties. I will not dwell so much on that. 

I would like to take this opportunity to thank him because at the formation of the FDC party, although eventually he was not a member and did not become a member, Dr Okulo Epak was instrumental in working with the committee that worked out the draft constitution and agenda of a party that had no name. Eventually when we had created a name for the party, he said, “My work is done. I wish you guys the best.” That memory will always be with the FDC. 

Mr Speaker, Dr Okulo Epak was an accomplished debater, and the Prime Minister can attest to that, and there are many others who could do so too. I would like to remember in particular the time when we discussed the National Planning Authority Bill. Having been on the Uganda Vision 2025, I was very kin on the NPA. Dr Okulo Epak as a professional planner was extremely kin on the NPA. I was very glad that this morning when the body of Dr Okulo Epak was being viewed, one of the speeches that was being played was his concern, even when the President had assented to the Bill, as to when the NPA would be in place. This is because as a planner he knew that a country such as ours needs to deliberately choose where it wants to go. It can never go through market forces. It can never go through expedients. It can never go through a random process. So, it is still incumbent upon us to make sure that the NPA works.

In Parliament Dr Okulo Epak chaired the Public Accounts Committee. There is something in the Seventh Parliament some members probably did not pick. Those who took the trouble to read the report of the committee would always find the report very comprehensive. When it came to the debate on the Floor, Dr Okulo Epak was always prepared to concede where he thought other than focussing on the substance of the report there would be diversion. That allowed Parliament to take his reports, no matter how hard they were, and accept them as a true reflection of what should have been done. I must say that the work that he did is the work upon which my brother, hon. Nandala Mafabi, is now building on in PAC.

On another note, Dr Okulo Epak struggled for peace in the North. They were here before us in the Sixth Parliament. I came and joined them in the Seventh Parliament, and he and all the colleagues were always steadfast that the best way to resolve the conflict in the North was through a peaceful approach, through dialogue, through understanding even difficult things. That contribution was so significant for us. 

I would like to put on record one particular occasion. There was a time when there was a demonstration after the Barlonyo massacre in Lira. The demonstration more or less degenerated into ethnic conflict between the Langi and Acholi. We heard the news about what was happening on the ground while at a workshop in Nile Resort Beach Hotel in Jinja. I quickly sought to discuss the matter with Dr Okulo Epak. He called two other colleagues. We wanted to travel together and then he said, “No. Let me go with my colleague - I think it was hon. John Odit - Let us first go to Lira and find out what is going on.” They travelled to Lira and when they reached Lira and found out what was on the ground, they made preparations. Following that, they called us to say “Yes, you can actually now come and hold the meeting.” 

We held a very important meeting where the religious, cultural and political leaders from Acholi and Lango all converged in Lira. We discussed the challenge that faced the two communities, and we came out with what we call the Lira Declaration. That has been the guiding principle that has enabled us to tackle the challenge of the LRA conflict in our region successfully. It was out of his sense of commitment to dialogue, his calmness and his mature approach that we have lived that firm.

I conclude by asking, what lessons do we learn? To many of us Members of Parliament, we learn two or three very important lessons, whatever your qualification. If you are going to deal with something, have the facts so that when you stand on the Floor, nobody will dispute what you say. That was Dr Okulo Epak. Debate on the Floor is a contest and no matter how brutal or bruising it becomes, maintain the temperament of Dr Okulo Epak. Make it light, laugh it off, and when you are out of the House, leave the matters of the House in the House. When we get out, remain friends. 

I can only say thank you very much, my brother, for all the good things you have done for the family. Thank you very much, my colleague, for all the good things you have done as a politician. You have played your part and even when you go still young, an auditor would say that you had very little undone. We thank the good Lord for your life. Fare thee well. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.28
MS REBECCA AMUGE OTENGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Dr Okulo Epak has been our chairperson. Allow me to begin by appreciating the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, the Government of Uganda especially the Executive, the Opposition in Parliament, my colleagues, Members of Parliament, Members of the East African Legislative Assembly and members of the African Union. 

Mr Speaker, as members of the Lango Parliamentary Group, we got to a point when we could no longer handle the case of Dr Okulo Epak. Dr Okulo Epak was such a courageous Member of Parliament, a gentleman who never told you exactly what he was going through. 

Members of Parliament from Lango sub-region resolved that I represent them when Dr Okulo Epak was undergoing medication. When I left with hon. Cecilia Ogwal, we did not know we would meet the least expected. Dr Okulo Epak was undergoing radiation treatment. He would leave his hotel room and go for his treatment at Little Company of Mary, a hospital in Pretoria. When we got there, he was rushed to a clinic for emergency care. Dr Okulo Epak did not recognise us. I never told anybody back in Uganda because we did not want to alarm others. The previous day he had spoken to the people of Lango through live radio communication.  

Mr Speaker, my disappointment in Pretoria was that it took us nine hours to get an ambulance to transfer Dr Okulo Epak to the hospital where he was always treated. I mention this because I feel that the issue of health facilities in this country must be taken seriously. If you are a foreigner in a country like South Africa and you do not have life insurance or medical insurance, nobody takes care of you. From 9 o’clock in the morning to 9 o’clock at night, we could not access the ambulance to transfer our Member of Parliament from this country. When we got the ambulance, the issue of money came in and every time they would increase the amount. It started from 1,500 Rand to 10,000 Rand and eventually came to 100,000 Rand, and upfront payments were required.

It needed 15 minutes to transfer Dr Okulo Epak from the emergency clinic to the hospital where he was undergoing treatment, but it took longer than that. By the time we took Dr Okulo Epak to the hospital, when the Ugandan doctors, Dr Ochaa, Dr Echun and others came in, he had already got a stroke. We were later informed that Dr Okulo Epak was bleeding in his brain. Those are the details I do not want to go through. 

Mr Speaker, it is a very painful thing to lose this kind of man yet when you think back, you find that you could have saved him. I would therefore like to propose that what Dr Okulo Epak has been fighting for must be taken seriously, namely, that the Cancer Institute of this country be upgraded, that the asbestos on all the buildings in this country be removed and replaced by the right iron sheets or tiles, that the issue of medical insurance be made a serious policy in this country, and that the country takes interest in every Ugandan travelling abroad, be it an official or a private person, because they are citizens of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, Dr Okulo Epak led the Lango Parliamentary Group as a model. He was our mentor. Even when things were so bad when he was sick, he still called a meeting for the Lango Parliamentary Group in his house. He warned us that, “You are leaders from Lango but not for Lango; you are for the country. Whatever comes on the Floor of the House, as long as it is good for the country never mind your affiliation, you must support it.”  

When the issue of land became so difficult, Dr Okulo Epak had already got sick but he called the members of the Lango Parliamentary Group and asked us not to discuss this issue unless we dialogue with the President. I am disappointed to note that we wrote the letter to the President asking him to meet us, but he never accepted to meet us, up to now. Okulo Epak would have given a better way forward if he had attended the meeting. I do not know whether we will attend it again.

Mr Speaker, Dr Okulo Epak led the members of the Lango Parliamentary Group and Lango community to very tough dialogues sometimes. What Prof. Ogenga Latigo talked about almost turned into a tribal war. Okulo Epak made a statement, and he said, “Kony is an Acholi but not all Acholis are Kony. If you want to know, you must also understand that Kony’s mother is a Langi, and biologically we are told that the boy children may take more of their mother’s blood, maybe Kony’s blood is yours”. That made the people of Lango to cool down. That is the kind of man we are talking about.

Mr Speaker, Dr Okulo Epak had integrity, which could not be bought and sold. He respected people, and that is why we too respected him. Dr Okulo Epak debated with objectivity and he stood by his principles. He never debated individuals. He had issues to debate.  

Dr Okulo Epak reminded us, members of the Lango Parliamentary Group, to respect the young, the old, opponents, and especially never to take our voters for granted. He stood for the rights of the common person. When he was still able to speak, he would talk about his people. He asked us to always stand together on the issue of land access, use and control, but also to look at the developments that land can bring for all the people of this country. 

As the Lango Parliamentary Group, we shall miss Dr Okulo Epak because he was a man who, I would sometimes say, was beyond human imagination and description. Dr Okulo Epak would find a solution where there seemed to be none. He was our torchbearer. There was a big problem in Lango after the resumption of multipartism and some of us became political IDPs or refugees, but Dr Okulo Epak said, “We are all still going to work for Lango.” He quickly called a meeting of the Lango Parliamentary Group even though he was not the leader by that time. He was only a member of the Seventh Parliament, but he told us that irrespective of our political affiliation, we must work for this country and we must get back and unite the people of Lango who we divided during our campaigns. He said if we are not going to work as a team, then we are not worth being in Parliament. 

Dr Okulo Epak has left a wound that was created during campaigns, especially in Lango, but he has also left a team that is united, the UPC, the independents and NRM -(Laughter)- We have three NRM members and we respect each other because of Dr Okulo Epak. 

Mr Speaker, before I sit down, allow me to thank the medical personnel of Mulago Hospital, those in Johannesburg, the medical doctors from Uganda who work in South Africa, I have mentioned Dr Ochaa and Dr Echun, his personal doctor, Cohen, and Dr Robin, the people of the Pretoria Hospital and the Ugandans in South Africa. A special thank you goes to our High Commissioner in South Africa, especially one staff member called Edith. Sometimes she would almost sleep at the hospital bed near Dr Epak. So one time we asked her “Why are you always here?” She answered, “Dr Epak is my father.” 

Mr Speaker, the contribution by the Parliament of this country was far above my expectation. The last support you sent to us while we were still in South Africa went a long way in ensuring that Dr Epak received the appropriate treatment. If that money had not come, he would have been removed from the life support machines. It arrived on time. I do not know how you made it, because it arrived over the weekend. We sent the paper by 3.00 p.m., but by 5.00 p.m. that evening the money was in South Africa and our Commissioner had handed over the money to the hospital. That is probably why he died in peace, because we were able to pay. 

Mr Speaker, as the chairperson of the Lango Parliamentary Group, you will also allow me to thank this Parliament and the Ministry of Health. Before we left for South Africa, hon. Cecilia Ogwal moved that one of our sons, a senior superintendent called Itu Moses who got injured in Liberia, be supported. We worked so fast to get an appointment for him in South Africa. He was supposed to have left on 14 May but when I arrived with this appointment letter, he had passed away. I thank you for the part you played. 

I thank you, honourable members, but I wish to appeal to you that our love will logically be concluded if we went and buried Dr Okulo Epak. May the good Lord bless all of you.

3.42
MR LIVINGSTON OKELLO-OKELLO (UPC, Chua County, Kitgum): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I worked with the late Dr Okulo Epak very closely for many years. We were in the civil service, in the same ministry. I joined the ministry in 1971 and we worked together until 1977 when we fled into exile together and both of us lived in Nairobi. He was teaching at the university and I was working in the private sector, but we shared our evenings together with other Ugandans. We would lament and wonder whether we would ever return to Uganda. In 1979, we returned together and rejoined the ministry. I remained in the ministry and he was given the role to lead a new body, the Reconstruction and Development Corporation in Masaka. However, we continued to work together.

Politically, I have worked very closely with the late Dr Okulo Epak since 1994. Dr Okulo Epak had a huge brain and he was an extremely intelligent person. He was articulate, frank, honest and courageous. He never feared anybody, no matter who you were. Whether you were a minister and he was working under you, when it was a professional matter he would say “no”. As a professional planner, most of our towns were planned when Dr Okulo Epak was in charge. He never allowed anybody to interfere with the gazetted plan of any town. In his time, planning laws and regulations were strictly enforced.

Mr Speaker, Dr Epak was a repository of knowledge and experience. He used his vast knowledge and experience for the sake of humanity. He was never selfish. When anybody wanted advice from Dr Okulo Epak, he never looked beyond the person talking to him. He did not care what your religion was, what your party was or what your tribe was; he placed himself above all these prejudices and was a very dedicated Ugandan. 

Mr Speaker, it is sad that Dr Okulo Epak had to die at this time when we are preparing for the rehabilitation and construction of Northern and Eastern Uganda. We were counting on him as one of the assets we would use in this enormous task ahead of us. Dr Okulo Epak still had a lot of contributions to make in his constituency, to the people of Lango, to the people of Northern Uganda and to the entire nation. It is very sad that he has passed away. 

Mr Speaker, last Wednesday as we were waiting for the meeting of our Appointment Committee to start, the clerk whispered to me that we had lost the war. At first I did not understand him and I said, “What? Which war?” He said, “Dr Okulo Epak passed away this morning”. I felt very bad because Prof. Ogenga Latigo and others, including myself, were already booked to go to Juba and our schedule was that we would come back this evening. However, we decided that this debate and the burial of Dr Okulo Epak could not take place without us. So we fought and the necessary arrangements were made for us to come and be with you here today.  

While in Juba I called my sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal in South Africa, because information was very scanty, I decided to call her and get the programme and she was really grateful that we could get in touch. When we got the program we decided that we had to come. Mr Speaker, a lot has been said and a lot more will be said about Dr Okulo Epak but I think one thing we should learn from him is to be Ugandans. Dr Okulo Epak had no tribe as I have already said; he had no religion and had no party. When it came to an issue that was national he was a dedicated nationalist and I think that is what we should all be. 

We shall all greatly miss our dear brother Dr Okulo Epak but we cannot reverse what has already taken place.  May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.49
DR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, in the Bible in the book of Ecclesiastes we are told that there is a time to live and there is a time to die; and this has been the time for hon. Dr Okulo Epak to pass way. Given that, I join the rest of my colleagues in examining the record of this man who is responsible for our presence here on a Monday, which is rather unusual. 

I want to suggest that hon. Dr Okulo Epak has left a record that must be the envy of every politician and public servant. He was a rare politician with a rare, sharp and witty mind that will be missed by many. Mr Speaker, Dr Okulo Epak was a good, intelligent and decent man with a fine mind and not surprisingly he was highly respected across the political divide. I remember that the late Dr Okulo Epak had a unique way of disagreeing with you yet leaving you un-offended and one respected him for that. 

He was a seasoned, knowledgeable and mature politician. He would never have supported the creeping rowdiness and anarchism that our political terrain is being made to witness of late. He would never have supported the political malfeasants that of late have been made to grace our political landscape. Most important, Dr Okulo Epak will be remembered for leaving behind a formidable record. His main contribution particularly in the area of improving equality of our debate will always be remembered. 

Many of us have from time to time been concerned about the equality of our debating these days and Dr Okulo Epak was that highland of confidence that we still have men and women that can debate intelligently and not in a sensational, uninformed and exaggerated way. He was always calm. As matter of fact, Mr Speaker, this was a man that must be remembered for leaving a legacy that becomes a challenge for all of us here to maintain. 

He had a broad understanding of Uganda’s challenges. To the best of my knowledge Dr Okulo Epak never carried the bag of sectarianism or the kind of narrow mindedness that defies God’s assertion that we are all His people, made in His image and, therefore, equal. I recall that Dr Epak often did disagree with the NRM Government on matters of governance but he would never have contemplated or even engineered confrontation with the Police or undermining the law that he helped make. Instead, he believed in the power of persuasion as well as argument. He deployed his vast and formidable intellect and won many souls to his position. This is something that must be a challenge to those of us who are living here as Members of Parliament. Dr Epak never believed in politics of confrontation primarily to gain publicity. He was a man driven by higher aims for Uganda as a land of freedom, liberty and prosperity. He saw the value of hosting CHOGM and so was determined to support the Government’s preparations so that the summit is a success. 

In his last days Dr Epak had come to accept Jesus Christ as his personal saviour. He prepared well for his departure from this world and one does hope that he has gone to be with the Lord, our maker. I make a suggestion that the day our comrade fell is the day his soul departed from him. None of us in this House has a say on the destination of one’s departed soul. Only God knows its true destination. We can only hope that Dr Epak has gone to be with the Lord. Instead let our energies, prayers and support be directed to the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s family and we should use this very sad occasion to thank God for the life of this man. 

Dr Okulo Epak was a man of infectious humour, a man of high integrity and of immense competence, a rare combination indeed. I have no hesitation in suggesting that Uganda is worse off without Dr Okulo Epak. He was a perfect example of how to maintain dignity in the face of adversity. He remained vibrant, robust and alert in the face of the debilitating disease that we knew he had; and his indomitable spirit in the face of the severe pains that he underwent has stood him out as a great man. 

Hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s departure is the most powerful reminder that all of us after all are on the same journey and because we are fellow travellers one would wish to say that it is quintessential that in spite of our political orientation, tribal origins and religious preferences, we remain the same. I thank you.

3.57
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Dr Okulo Epak. Before I pay my tribute allow me to express heartfelt condolences from my family and the people of Buvuma Islands to his family and the people of Oyam South. 

I came to know Dr Okulo Epak in the Seventh Parliament. I was privileged to be on the Public Accounts Committee and also to be a member of the team that audited the classified expenditure. Our rules dictate that the chairperson alone constitutes quorum but I want to inform you honourable members that Dr Okulo Epak at any one point called me and a third person to be present so that we could go through these accounts. 

He always wanted us to learn. He was always trying to help us develop politically and analyse issues above our political affiliations. Sir, you will recall during the constitutional amendment process that Dr Okulo Epak proposed two clauses that were not adopted by this House and as we talk every one is thinking about these clauses. The first clause was regarding the independence of the Office of the Auditor-General. As we talk, the Executive is preparing a Bill to be brought to this House and I want to advise Members present to reflect on the contribution of Dr Okulo Epak. 

Mr Speaker, as Parliament we are under the sector of public administration yet we all know that our Constitution clearly states that we have three arms of Government: the Executive, the Judiciary and the Parliament. We should be under a separate clause but the fact that we are classified under the various ministries and the like was also an oversight, which the previous House never considered. We all know that during the year 2003 when we had the graduated tax regime Dr Okulo Epak proposed the motion to abolish graduated tax and I want to inform you that this House was about to adopt his report and the Executive, through their wise counsel, conceded and took over his motion. I want to inform you that the following year graduated tax was abolished. It was because of Dr Okulo Epak’s wise guidance and his good vision. (Applause)

Around February Dr Okulo Epak wrote a very good piece and submitted it to my committee, that is, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. He was actually proposing that since we are in the budgeting process this government should attach a charge on the cigarette sector such that a portion of that tax maybe one percent of the total collection should go to the development of the Cancer Institute. 

We all know that our rules do not allow us to put conditions but we all know the state of the Cancer Institute in Mulago. I think it is high time the Executive thought about upgrading the Cancer Institute in Mulago. We have all heard what happened in South Africa but even before you go to South Africa we must have some facilities at home. We all recall, honourable members who were in the Seventh Parliament the death of hon. Bernadette Bigirwa. Everybody was cursing the state of Mbarara Hospital but you go to Mulago, which is a walking distance; the Cancer Institute is almost non-existent. Why should we wait for our comrades to go then we come here and lament? It is high time the Executive -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, at such a time when a colleague is on the Floor for another colleague to stand up, people may look at it as strange but I have decided to stand up just to give information such that we Members can reflect because we are all going to die. 

When a colleague dies it is a lesson for us to learn to plan for the future. I decided to give the information to the Chairman of the Finance Committee because we are in the budget process. Every time we lose a colleague this Parliament mourns and laments and while paying tribute we always give proposals and commit ourselves to follow them up. I just want to inform the Chairman of the Finance Committee that before the budget is finally passed let us put in practice what we are speaking because outside there are thousands of Dr Okulo Epaks dying. Outside there are children in Mulago rotting in the Cancer Institute. Outside there a lot of money is being stolen even the little meant to treat people. It is so painful that this Parliament always pays tribute, laments and mourns; from the sixth Parliament to date but little is done. Chairman, Finance Committee, please I want to plead with you and honourable members, that let us look at the budget of Mulago, let us look at the budget of other hospitals and let us do what International Hospital is doing to operate the first heart patient in this country. Let us make sure we put money in the budget, hon. Prime Minister so that the Cancer Institute is an institute for Africa. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Hon. Ekanya, thank you for the information. I think the Executive has captured this. 

Before I conclude -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, I don’t know whether that was actually information because it was more like a contribution but you can proceed.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, before I conclude I want to end by appealing to the Executive to understand that there is no harm in levying a charge of 1 percent on total collection in the cigarette industry to go to the Cancer Institute as had been proposed by the late hon. Ekulo Epak. We all know that cigarette smoking is one of the causes of cancer. 

Additionally, all of you honourable members know that in the 2006/2007 fiscal year budget, all referral hospitals never got developmental funding. My sense is that there is no way we shall develop the health sector when we are just spending money on the recurrent expenditure. I think there is need to improve the health services in this country. May the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace. I thank you.

4.06
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am grateful that I have captured your eye and you have allowed me to pay tribute to our dear fallen colleague. There is no doubt that death has robbed us of a very capable Member of this House; a very honourable gentleman who suited the title of an “honourable” Member of Parliament. 

Hon. Okulo Epak was a very articulate and eloquent debator, who with confidence spoke facts rather than fiction. He gave his views candidly without fear or favour. This is a tribute that many of us lack. He was a very objective Parliamentarian whose contributions echoed national concerns rather than tribal sentiments. We are very grateful for that. 

The late hon. Dr Ekulo Epak was a very friendly gentleman and was always approachable. He did not hesitate to give information or professional advice when approached. The late was one of those few Ugandans who did not equate political competition to enmity. 

It was through interaction with people like the late hon. Okulo Epak that I got more and more convinced that there are good people around us and that they are not only confined to the areas that we know very well, not around the cultures that we are brought up in, not to the political affiliations that we belong to, but in all places. It is, therefore, important that we recognize the strength of such people regardless of their political ideologies, religion or places of origin.

On behalf of the people of Nyabushozi County, I wish to extend our sincere condolences to the family of the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak, the people of Oyam South constituency and the people of Lango sub-region, on the very unspeakable loss of a capable leader and family member. 

Mr Speaker, we join you in mourning the loss of this great son of Uganda. May the Almighty God rest his soul in peace and may God comfort you as you go through this painful period. Thank you.

4.09
MR OWORI OTADA (NRM, Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute. I remember hon. Nasasira one time told us here that as Members of Parliament we should make life easy by leading a certain lifestyle that can enable other people to find it easy to get time to stand and talk about us. I am very happy to note that the late hon. Okulo Epak led that kind of lifestyle and that is why it has been easy for me and all other speakers to talk about him and to very ably elaborate on his life.

Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Kibanda County, I would like to pay tribute to our fallen comrade and in a very special way, to thank the people of Oyam County South for sending us somebody who could receive the kind of applause that this House is giving to him. For your information, Kibanda County shares a border with Oyam County South constituency.

It is always difficult to talk about people especially when their actions do not befit the words. I would like to concur with the Rt hon. Prime Minister on the statement that the late hon. Okulo was an unpredictable person and a very rare commodity to find in this country. For the new colleagues who were not in the seventh Parliament, this corner where hon. Sarah Nyombi is seated is very famous for having been hon. Dr Okulo Epak’s seat. Also, for those who were not here in the last Parliament and do not know him very well, allow me to reaffirm and put on record that he was one of the brilliant brains of Uganda.

I was raised in Lango and I want to inform honourable members that the late hon. Okulo Epak was, has been and will remain a household name in Lango. When I visited him at his home in Naguru in 2004, Dr Okulo Epak was weak because he had just come out of his first operation. However, when he heard that I had gone to visit him, he told me in Luo, “Otada Ibino nena” to mean, “Otada, you have come to see me?” He then added, “I am not well at all, but I believe the Lord will deliver me.” Mr Speaker, the Lord has indeed delivered him. 

The late hon. Okulo Epak was an eloquent speaker because he spoke facts with a passion and love for his country. Whenever he spoke, one would really see that somebody was debating on issues. He would actually not debate on all issues. The late hon. Okulo Epak sometimes would choose to debate some and not to debate other issues. However, when he stood to speak, you would read him as a person speaking from the bottom of his heart.

Somebody senior in this government told me that His Excellency the President appreciated hon. Dr Okulo Epak in his personal capacity, and that it is because of that that the initial cost of the late’s treatment was first met by him. I would like to thank the President for that good gesture though this brought three issues into my mind. One is the issue of entitlement to Members of Parliament. The other one is the issue of entitlement to the people who serve this country. I appeal to this House to try and put this in perspective so that it is no longer a debatable thing. 

I would like to expand on this by recalling a very ugly campaign exchange in the last presidential elections when somebody stood up and started recounting how one of the presidential candidates had received treatment at some point in time and was trying to make it political capital. I think that this was quite really below the belt, if I may say. I would, therefore, like to say that we should put this issue into law so that an entitlement to a senior citizen should not be a matter of debate. 

I raise this matter because of the words from one of our colleagues who said that many people after receiving treatment still come and oppose government. I find this extremely unfortunate. I believe that we are all Ugandans and so the issue of entitlement should not look like a favour. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I would like to thank Dr Okulo Epak for clearly putting it on record that you can receive all the treatment and still remain politically principled.

When I visited him in 2004, I wondered where Dr Okulo Epak would get the strength to run for and win the next round of elections. However, he went for them and got elected to this Parliament as a representative. This should be a lesson for all of us that as Members of Parliament or as politicians, we should be in charge of our constituencies at all times no matter whether we are sick or bedridden like he was. I am sure had it not been death robbing him, he would still come back to this House elected genuinely as a Member of Parliament representing his constituency in the next elections. 

I support this motion by thanking this Parliament very much for the generosity as mentioned by the Lango Parliamentary Group. I would also like to personally thank our Clerk for being such a dedicated civil servant. When I paid a courtesy call on him, I found when he had just finished talking to one of the attendants to the late Dr Okulo Epak while he was in South Africa. I think these are the type of people who we need to serve us. 

I would also like to thank Dr Ekulo’s wife and the children for standing by him at his hour of need. 

Many people have talked about Mulago Cancer Institute. I would like to say that Dr Okulo Epak failed to get a good diagnosis even from other places where he initially went. It is our Mulago Cancer Institute, which we are ignoring, that made the right diagnosis about his condition, so we have capacity at the Mulago Cancer Institute. It is only the infrastructure that is missing. 

I believe that we also need to listen to Dr Jackson Oryem, the Director of Mulago Cancer Institute in his crusade and advocacy for the improvement of Mulago Hospital infrastructure. 

Mr Speaker, Dr Okulo Epak advised those who cared to listen. He showed that politics was not about revenge or hatred. He showed that Uganda is for us all and that is why he did what he did during his term of office as an honourable member. 

The empathetic part of him, however, is what colleagues were saying that after realizing his cancer condition, he stood to do a detailed research on this disease. In his research, the late found out that asbestos was one of the causes of cancer. He did this because of his empathetic nature; he did not want others to die of cancer. He accordingly brought a good motion to this House and I am happy that the Government has started picking up on it. 

When he came back from the operation, the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak personally wrote a letter urging government to levy a tax component on tobacco. According to him, tobacco was one of the greatest contributors to cancer. I am sure the late hon. Epak did this because he wanted the victims of tobacco to be taken care of by the people who get a lot of revenue from it. He clearly knew that after all not all Ugandans could afford to go for further treatment. That is why he proposed something that would help all of us. This was the beauty about him. He would not just propose something and leave it there. He would propose something and suggest a way forward. I think this was so brilliant of him. I will not talk about other things like the motion to remove graduated tax to which he greatly contributed during its debate in this House. 

However, in conclusion, let me make some observations. For those of us who are Christians, Romans 8:28 says, “All things work together for good for those who love the Lord ….” I think that it has worked for him. He has gone to be with the Lord. For us who are living, he has worked for us because he has given us an opportunity to come here and do some revision about our way forward. Again I want to inform Christians that John 3:1 is also clear. It is a command that you must be born again. I am very sure that the late has fulfilled that command.

With the challenge that he has availed to us, I propose that we draw certain lessons relating to the way forward on the question of putting our houses in order. Whenever I asked the late about his way of doing things the way he did them, he would say, “I do not think that I will live on long.” In that respect, therefore, I would like to urge all of us politicians to try to put our political houses in order. Remember the significant statement that was made by the Rt hon. Prime Minister? I would also like to urge political parties to try to put their houses in order. The question of succession must be clear and debated -(Applause)- this kind of situation should also help us as people but especially as politicians to tone down on our egos; to be aware of the facts of death. People should not behave as though they are going to live on forever. It should help us to realise the facts of life. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, the hon. Nsaba Buturo made an important point in his statement. He said that the late Dr Okulo Epak believed in the politics of persuasion and not coercing one another. That was significant. Allow me to leave that puzzle to this House to fill it. 

Finally, I would like to request that this House debates the late’s report on classified expenditure. I would like to pray that we bring this report here and we dissect it –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, the agreed procedures will not allow that.

MR OWORI OTADA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. Finally I would like to pray that may the Almighty God grant him eternal peace and may He sustain the bereaved family. I support the motion, thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I must say I get elated when I hear you quoting from holy books like the Koran and the Bible as has been exhibited here. It gives me evidence that you appreciate the gist of the motto of our country: for God and My Country. Proceed. (Applause)

4.24
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for giving us as Parliament an opportunity to reflect on the life of my brother, colleague and friend, Dr Okulo Epak. When I was thinking of how to make a contribution in paying tribute to Dr Okulo Epak, I thought I would start by thanking him for uniting Parliament and the country. I was extremely happy that his friend Prof. Nsibambi was the one who moved the motion. I think Dr Okulo Epak would have wanted Prof. Nsibambi to move the motion. (Applause)

I am extremely happy that the Leader of the Opposition seconded the motion. Dr Okulo Epak spent the best of his life struggling to make sure that we achieve a multi-party democracy, which has now separated the House into two. I am extremely happy because Dr Okulo Epak has gone when he has achieved something.

The second thing that went through my head is that Dr Okulo Epak is a silent participant in this debate. If the Speaker had an opportunity of making him speak, what would he say? First of all he would crack a joke and say, “Mr Speaker, who told you I am dead?” That is the first joke he would crack, and I am sure it would send the Prime Minister running -(Laughter)- Dr Okulo Epak was a very unpredictable man as you have already said. I was with him in the last few days of his life, and he was indeed very unpredictable. The doctors had told us that the last stroke had made it impossible for him to speak because it affected that side, which controls speech. The only hand he had was also incapacitated. We were, therefore, surprised on Monday when we were able to talk to him. 

The doctor said he could hear familiar voices although he could not speak. So we spoke to him and I told him that I had spoken to the Deputy Speaker, the Rt. hon. Rebecca Kadaga, who had sent her greetings to him. I had also spoken to the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. Unfortunately I did not find him, but I was told that everybody is praying for him. We were all surprised that he was able to nod his head and move his hand for the first time. To me that showed that there was extraordinary strength in Dr Okulo Epak that none of us could understand. He defied the authority of medical science. He was unpredictable indeed.

We spent the night in the hospital by his side and for a couple of days we made sure that we spent the nights with him. On this particular day, Dr Okulo Epak wanted to communicate to us, and that was indeed unpredictable. We left the hospital at 6.30 in the morning, after spending the night with him. The hotel where I was staying with his wife was just across the road. At 7.00 O’clock we got a telephone call informing us that he had passed away. When we went to the ward, we were told that he had passed away at 6.45 a.m. This means that he was tactfully waiting for us to depart in order for him to depart. He cheated us, but that is the unpredictable character of Dr Okulo Epak up to his last moment.

Mr Speaker, it is very difficult for me to talk about Dr Okulo Epak at a forum like this. It needs time because I spent most of my time with him. He was a husband to my elder sister, Martina Okulo, who is the first born in our family. Dr Okulo Epak and I were indeed very close. We were very close friends, we were colleagues and we shared many things together. We cried together, we laughed together, and we struggled together. We have been very intimate indeed. It will be very difficult for me to speak about him and what he has been able to achieve and where he lost out in his life.

Allow me on behalf of the family to thank this Parliament, to thank you, Mr Speaker, the Deputy Speaker; the Office of the Clerk, colleagues and Members of Parliament. We may have differences with some of the people who serve us, but I think whoever has differences with the Clerk to Parliament needs to realise that we have one of the most competent clerks in this country. (Applause) It is very rare for me to compliment a person in public but I felt compelled to do that –(Laughter)- it is part of my discipline.  

I spoke to your Deputy, Rt hon. Rebecca Kadaga and I told her that Dr Okulo Epak was not doing well, and that the family had run out of funds. Hon. Kadaga asked me to put the papers together, which I did because the hospital was expecting a deposit of 100,000 Rand from me the following day. We had already managed to pay 25,000 Rand and there was no way we were going to raise that money within minutes. If we did not pay that deposit the following day, the hospital was definitely going to disconnect the gadgets and hand us Dr Okulo Epak back. 

I was surprised that when the papers were sent to the Office of the Clerk at 3.00 p.m. South African time on Friday, which is 4.00 p.m. Ugandan time, by Saturday 11.00 a.m., I want to confirm the money had reached South Africa -(Applause)- and because of that we were able to pay part of the deposit. The consultant had told us that they were not sure about the outcome of the operation, so it would be better to pay in bits as time went on. We had hoped that he would be revived and then we would move him to a cheaper hospital and probably friendlier environment but it was not possible. 

Mr Speaker, uncle Joe, my dear brother who is departed, and the family were very appreciative for what all of you had done. Many people rang him. He also remembers when His Excellency the President visited him in his ward at Mulago Hospital a couple of years ago when he was suffering from the same problem, with the late Adonia Tiberondwa. He remembers that with a lot of affection, and I want to thank you for that.

When Dr Okulo Epak suffered the last stroke, I think it sent many of us thinking what life is all about. A very brilliant man, a very strong man who had to die, it touched many of us. It was very difficult for the family to accept that doctor was going to die. We knew that it is difficult to fight cancer, but at the same time we had faith that a miracle would come out of that. Unfortunately we fought a losing battle and we lost doctor last Wednesday. 

I would want to share with Parliament just a few points. I do not think I am able to reflect better on what I can share with you about Dr Okulo Epak. Allow me to say that as a legislator, Okulo Epak was a leader who impressed me with his fusion of great intellect, wisdom and total human involvement. I think I want to summarise it that way. The way he blended his intellectual ability, his wisdom and the human involvement in whatever he did impressed me. His enormous knowledge of development economics, distinguished power, he was a distinguished planner of philosophical brilliance that he always demonstrated, made him an unchallengeable originator of many ideas that some of us may never live to discover.

Hon. Ogenga Latigo has just told you that he was part of the originators or the architects of the FDC, but he should have gone further to say that he actually authored almost all the documents of FDC, but he refused to accept to be a leader of FDC. He offered his intellectual ability and expertise and left it to them to either bring it to realisation or mess it up. So, if you can bring Okulo Epak’s ideas, ideology, and philosophy to realisation, you would have achieved something from his brilliance and intellectual ability. If you mess it up, you would have broken his heart. That is the advice I can give the FDC.

Dr Okulo Epak originated many ideas and he never put his labels on them. All he wanted was to achieve what he wanted to achieve for the greater good. He never wanted to put his label as hon. Dr Okulo Epak who originated this idea. I think the Rt hon. Prime Minister will remember that in the Constituent Assembly we fought very hard for the regional tier in the decentralisation concept, and we were flatly rejected. Our ideas were not embraced. Dr Okulo Epak originated that idea. Recently when the idea become alive in the Seventh Parliament, the Rt hon. Prime Minister, came to Dr Okulo Epak and to me and said, “you must support me” –(Laughter)- Dr Okulo Epak was very diplomatic, but I was not diplomatic enough. I told hon. Prime Minister that we were very happy that he was supporting our idea, and that he has finally been converted to our side. That is what I told him.  Hon. Okulo Epak was very diplomatic.  He knew how to communicate with the professor, maybe at a professional level. He never said anything, but I answered mine there and then –(Laughter)

Hon. Dr Okulo Epak was a rural mobiliser. He was a commander. He was a man who led by example. I want to share with you that when you see Parliament now seated on two sides, with the Opposition and the Government, I can say that Okulo Epak had the right to seat on either side. Okulo Epak could have been on the Front Bench of the Movement Government or on the Front Bench of the Opposition, but he chose to be a political refugee on principle. As long as he was able to achieve for the greater good, other people would seat in front and he would seat at the rear, but see democracy realised and felt by all, he was happy –(Applause)

He was a leader of the winning team. I want to tell you that I am not trying blow my horn, but I want to say that whatever we did together as a team, made up of Dr Okulo Epak, Ben Wacha, Patrick Mwondha, that team, we always won. (Laughter)

Allow me to honour my brother with what he would have wanted to be seen realised in our democratic work. Hon. Dr Okulo Epak struggled a lot. We suffered a lot together but we were able to achieve multi-party democracy, which was so dear to our hearts. Hon. Dr Okulo Epak was our expert on land issues and I am very happy that today indigenous Ugandans own Ugandan land. That is the only destiny we have. That is the only inheritance we have: land. I hope nobody will ever forget Dr Okulo Epak for that. When he was in Pretoria, the son of Henry Makmot visited him in hospital. He told him how the demonstration was going on about Mabira and what have you. His response was, “I am very happy that Ugandans are waking up to protect their interests for their destiny”.  I think one day the son of Henry Mackmot will share this witness. So I want us to remember what Dr Okulo Epak initiated. 

Dr Okulo Epak wanted democracy for Uganda, but hon. Dr Okulo Epak also wanted democracy within political groups. We cannot talk with competence that we need democracy for Uganda when we cannot practice it in our individual parties. Democracy must be vibrant in the various political groups so that the same democracy can be vibrant in the country. Some of us want to criticise democracy at the upper level and we forget about the internal lack of democracy in our own institutions. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, I just want to end this tribute. I support the Prime Minister’s motion by saying that in our sorrow, let us remember the plight of the ordinary person who could have been having the same problem that Dr Okulo Epak suffered and died before probably he even reached Mulago. As we are remembering Dr Okulo Epak, let us remember that putting in place simple health care facilities will save many lives. You will never know that those simple facilities will save you, your wife, your husband or your child. We are very quick to approve budgets for aeroplanes, for bullet proof - these are realities. It does not matter who you are! 

I saw my dear brother, a prominent Ugandan, very powerful man, naked at the mercy of ordinary doctors in South Africa! He should have died in the hands of fellow Ugandans with love and care. When he eventually passed away, the wife and I sat there. We did not even know how to mourn our loved ones because we had a big problem to solve, where to take the body; those hospitals do not have mortuary facilities; those hospitals do not treat bodies. So when we asked the hospital authorities what to do to facilitate the treatment of the body, they simply told me, “Our work is finished”. I did not understand why they said that. They said “Excuse me, Madam I am trying to tell you that we deal with people who are still fighting for life. When the patient has died, it is not our responsibility.”  I said, “Fine, I am just asking for mortuary facilities”, they said they did not have them. 

The first thing I had to do was to look for anyone who could help us to take care of your brother before we brought him before you like this. It was a serious matter. But if doctor had died here, definitely we would not have gone through that hustle. That is why I am saying that you need all those things you want to have. That is all vanity. You may live in a palace with everything with gold, you may fly in these aeroplanes, but it is all vanity. We must do something for the ordinary Ugandans. (Applause)

Two years ago, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa came and helped me to bury one of my nephews, a distinguished banker, Willy Ogule. Willy Ogule died because the kidney machine had failed. It was not functional in Mulago. They could not make it to Nairobi. A simple kidney machine had failed to function. In Uganda, a country of golden opportunity, a country which is going to host the Commonwealth, a country which is gorgeous, we cannot afford to maintain a functional kidney machine!

Mr Speaker, I had the opportunity of talking to some of the doctors who were experts in dealing with Dr Okulo Epak’s problem. They were called neurosurgeons and neuro-physicists. Some of them were Ugandans; one of them was a Nigerian. When I talked to them, they were ordinary doctors. Some of these Bazungu are not very sharp up here, you know it. I am sorry to say but my cry is to do something and it does not matter, for us to continue coming here to mourn our dead, to continue coming up with proposals and we do not do anything about it.    

I want to summarise by saying that if you loved Dr Okulo Epak, I want to say my brother Dr Okulo Epak who died serving Uganda; he was the first chief planner to take over from a Mzungu, a distinguished Ugandan with exceptional premiums and intelligence. He was the first African to take over from a Mzungu as a chief planner; a distinguished debater and I think you all noticed that whenever Okulo Epak stood in that corner - before the Movement took over his corner - Dr Okulo Epak would make a speech for 30 minutes or so without a piece of paper in his hands, and that was him. I want to talk on his behalf that this Parliament must put in place  death gratuity for members of Parliament. The only way you can put in place the death gratuity not only for him but for everybody who has served Parliament, is by following up the issue of the Pensions Bill. It must be put in place for everybody, not for any particular individual, for Dr Okulo Epak or for the few people. We want it for everybody. Any Member of Parliament who has served this country as a Member of Parliament must have a package and that package must include death gratuity. We have lost many people and it always breaks our hearts when these people depart, they leave with our families, we meet them on the streets and we pretend as if we do not care. Let us put in place a system that will take care of the families of our departed friends and colleagues. 

I would want us to say farewell to Okulo Epak - if we can come to this Parliament and say, “We ban the use of asbestos and any asbestos related material”, it is very important. I will want us to mourn him by even putting in place a consumer protection law that will legally protect the right of the consumer. Consumers are being persuaded to take some products, which eventually turn up to kill them.

Mr Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity. I also testify that my brother has gone to be with the Lord. We saw the peace, which was in that ward. We saw how he went; he went in his sleep. He was so peaceful and that is why you see me peaceful. That is why you see my sister peaceful because we know we are going to meet our brother if we all resolve to follow the Lord. We shall meet him in heaven. May God bless you all. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: That is another chaplain -(Laughter)

4.55
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker- (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: In the interest of giving many time to contribute – you know we have to conclude- I have to limit the time one spends on his/her contribution. There is a lot to say about Hon. Okulo Epak but since many members from various parts of the country want to speak, please let us curtail our contributions to five minutes? [Hon. Members: “three minutes”] Alright, three minutes.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for having accorded me this opportunity to add my voice after the many eloquent voices of other Members especially, hon. Otada and hon. Ogwal. 

The late Dr Okulo Epak used to sit next to where hon. Okupa is sitting. And specifically I am very privileged; you have accorded me an opportunity on behalf of those who may not get the opportunity. Those of us who used to sit close to Dr Okulo Epak were so inspired by him. 

I have been consulting with hon. Nandala-Malabo and I believe I was one of the last people to talk to him inside Parliament and he spoke to me in the local language. He calls me Otto, that is how most of my colleagues from my area call me and that is how it should be called. He told me, “I felt I should not be home. I will get wasted home alone, at least let me be here and try to do something.”

Mr Speaker, it is not very easy to talk when someone passionate is lying speechless right in front of you. But I get strong inspiration from being a Christian. I am called Samuel and I have been very reluctant to make people even know that is my Christian name, but today is an opportunity for you people to know that I am also an ex-seminarian -(Laughter) If I had not joined this trade by now I would be ordained a priest- (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You missed becoming an ordinary priest of a diocese -(Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes. So, it is a very touching moment and I want to give just three of my personal experiences with Dr Okulo Epak. In 2001, hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. Mao, hon. Okupa, the late and myself were in London and that was the time we were launching the initial campaigns for a peaceful resolution of Northern Uganda conflict. At that time the country was very hostile. The moment you talked of peace talks, they would ask, “What is this collaborator saying?” So we had to take our battle to those who were non-nationals. 

In one of the meetings, Mao made a submission that said, “For us in Uganda, most of us are generations who have emerged after independence. We do not have any personal problem with President Museveni. We are post-independence leaders. We have just come to say we need peace in Northern Uganda.” 

So when we came out of that deliberation, hon. Okulo Epak walked to me and told me that the difference between an elder and a young man is that an elder would have experienced almost everything the young man is yet to experience. He made this in relation to one of the statements that came out from one of our listeners.

Mr Speaker, hon. Okulo Epak was not only transparent but he was also not a thief. He made a statement in this Parliament. If I may quote him- I did not have the time to get the Parliamentary Hansard. He said at one time he was in charge of all the land in Kampala. He could have owned the whole of Kololo if he had wanted but he did not have even a single piece of land there. How many people have got that opportunity in this country, an opportunity to own the entire Kololo and they come out without anything? (Laughter)

This casket is leaving here for Naguru, not Kololo. Hon. Okulo Epak’s death should teach us to be selfless. It should teach us not to be so greedy. Hon. Okulo Epak was passionate. He is one of the MPs - I am sorry to say this - standing where hon. Sarah Nyombi is sitting, when we were debating the motion on Northern Uganda, he broke down in tears. I also broke down in tears because culturally in our society elders are our fountains of honour. The debate degenerated in this House until hon. Dr Okulo Epak had to make his contribution by shedding tears. How many of MPs have that kind of passion?

Hon. Okulo Epak was not a sycophant. In this Parliament, in the same area where Hon. Sarah Nyombi is sitting, he cautioned one MP, and it is in the Parliamentary Hansard that he was the only MP that sang the UPC song in this House. And he said, “Honourable member - I do not want to mention names - today you are here but I want to inform you that you sang the UPC song loudest and then you went ahead to sing “eh, eeeee maama” in this house.” These are the limits in which hon. Dr Okulo Epak could push debates.

Mr Speaker, I want to thank your office. Yesterday we were from Kapelebyong for a fundraising. We were about seven MPs and one MP got an accident. The car rolled about three times and one person died instantly. The MP is hon. Charles Ekemu, MP Soroti municipality. He broke his thigh and the collarbone. One thing ran into my mind. We were only MPs, totally helpless and the only person we could think of calling first is the Speaker of Parliament. Why can’t we institutionalise Parliament, so that every time we get a problem we do not have to overwhelm someone? Why can’t we institutionalise mechanisms of attending to MPs? 

We had a very bad experience in Soroti. It took us four hours to get an ambulance. The MP was crying like a baby in his constituency. By the time the ambulance came, there was no money for fuel -(Laughter)- and we were just from a fundraising, we had spent all the coins we needed. We were just on a return journey to Kampala. We started to run around another forty minutes to get some 100,000 to fuel the ambulance to carry this MP and the other person to Kumi hospital. 

As hon. Otada has said, Mr Speaker, we are very grateful for all the assistance you have always given us but we do not want to overwhelm you. In an event some bad thing happens to over 20 MPs, you may end up being the 21st person because you will break down with all this kind of midnight calls. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No. At this juncture I have to give information on what you are saying. I was supposed to inform the House after this item is cleared. It is not true that it is only the Speaker who got to know this information. Dr Epetait rang me when I was coming from a function from Nakawa side. He told me that they had got involved into an accident and somebody had died, and another one had a fracture of the collarbone and they were taking him for treatment but that they would keep me posted. They got in touch with the Clerk about the same matter. The Clerk is the Chief Executive of Parliament, being the accounting officer. He was informed and it was agreed that they would keep us informed about what is happening.

This morning again, I got hon. Elijah your neighbour; he also briefed me on what is happening.  So, there is a system, the Speaker is there, the Clerk is there; the Clerk may not be in Kabelebyong but once with the modern systems of communication we get on the spot when necessary. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.  Lastly, with all due respect, Mr Speaker, I want to urge members of Parliament that Dr Okulo Epak’s death must be a strong foundation of tolerance in this country.  Thank God Dr Okulo Epak died of natural causes but we have seen situations where Members of Parliament get subjected to cattle discipline. 

Mr Speaker, we have seen situations in Entebbe Municipal, in Kampala where Members of Parliament are beaten; thank God such beatings do not result into death because we would be totally speechless and helpless in this institution.  So, I really pray that this Parliament would exercise a culture of tolerance and we urge all Ugandans to ensure that as this country heads to get a strong foundation on multiparty politics we should be strong and firm as members of Parliament.

Lastly, to the son of Dr Okulo Epak whom I know very well, my age mate, Mr Otim Lameck, I encourage you to be strong.  In Acholi they say, “kal ka dong otui pe lworo ceng” and in English they say, “Once a millet has germinated it cannot shy away because there is sunlight.” We shall engage you at different levels and we want the legacy of your daddy to reign on in this Parliament.  

As I sit down, I am glad tonight that NTV would be able to show the whole world the kind of discussion we have been having in Parliament as it relates to Dr Okulo Epak.  So, may we write it clearly on rock that this country should ensure we have freedom of the media because next time you are the victim, there may be no media house to report about your death. So, I thank God, NTV is going to be open. I want to thank the Prime Minister and we shall continue to have such kind of cooperation.  Thank you, so much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  We have agreed it is three minutes.

5.10
MS BETTY KAMYA (FDC, Lubaga Division North Kampala): Thank you, hon. Speaker. Maama Okulo Epak and the family, the friends of Dr Okulo Epak, relatives and Members of Parliament, I rise on behalf of the Buganda caucus, which I serve as the Vice Chairperson and the people of Lubaga North to convey our deep-felt condolences at the death of Dr Okulo Epak and also to pay tribute to this great son of this country. 

Mr Speaker, all the people that have risen to speak this afternoon know Dr Okulo Epak very well, but I did not know him that well personally.  I stand to speak of him as I know of him because I know that you do not need to know a great man to know him; you know him because he is a great man.  So, I will speak of Dr Okulo Epak as I know of him just like I did not know him that well, neither did I know Martin Luther King, Mahatma Ghandi, Nelson Mandela, but I pay tribute to them and I take glory in their lives. So I do with Dr Okulo Epak.

Mr Speaker, Dr Epak’s long and distinguished carrier. We are all gathered here this afternoon to weave the fabric of this complex man who has been a mentor, a teacher, a father, a friend, an arbiter and husband to many people.  But, most important, Dr Okulo Epak’s calibre reveals a man of excellency that lies before us and the silence around him speaks volumes: volumes of courage, volumes of great abilities, volumes of dignity, of humour, of wisdom, of passion, of perseverance, of wit and charm. He leaves behind sorrow, tear and heartbreak but most importantly he leaves behind a legacy, and for that he will never die but leave on as part of the gloried history of our country Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, to Dr Epak’s family and friend, we grieve with you and for you, but as you love him and as you will certainly miss him, you must let him go, for he will never die but live on through his distinguished carrier. 

Finally, to Dr Epak’s sons, daughters and colleagues, the lovers of democracy, the lovers of justice and the lovers of freedom, for everybody, as we mourn his death, we must celebrate his life by praying for courage, strength and wisdom to carry on his legacy. Only then shall we make his life’s work truly a model.  His great words of wisdom as said by hon. Rebecca Otengo, were not only for the people of Lango. They are great words for every Ugandan, certainly for the Buganda caucus here and we shall certainly emulate them and take them deeply to our hearts.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I join my colleagues to call upon this Parliament and this country to pay serious attention to our health sector.  I shall only read you a saying by Louise Mark, who lived in the 17th century. He said, “The dead cannot cry out for justice, it is therefore the duty of the living to do so for them.” 

Finally, as a well-spent day brings happy sleep, so life well spent brings happy death; those were the words of one Ronald Devine who lived in the 17th Century.  May the spirit of Dr Epak rest in eternal peace.  Thank you.

5.13
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (FDC, Mbale Municipality Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I respect and appreciate the opportunity.  I stand here with a heavy heart this evening to mourn the demise of the late Dr. Okulo Epak Yefusa.  Mr Speaker, in the Seventh Parliament I used to sit next to Dr Okulo Epak in the corner where hon. Nyombi Sarah is seated; that is where Dr Okulo Epak sat –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: And for your information, in the Sixth Parliament before I became the Speaker, I was sitting next to him.

MR KAJEKE:  I was sitting next to him. Therefore, I will speak on behalf of the back row in the Seventh Parliament, and that includes members who are not even in this Parliament. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, before I stood to say anything on the Floor of this House, I would always consult hon. Okulo Epak. On many occasions, he told me not to say what I wanted to say. He said, “You are a young man, I understand, but please do not say that.” I would always obey and sit down. 

Hon. Okulo Epak taught me many values among which was honesty. “You must be honest as a young man if you want to be a respected person in society,” he said. He also emphasised patience, and respect for elders. He would say, “You must respect elders and you must respect yourself before you demand any respect from anybody.” So, Mr Speaker, as I mourn, Dr Okulo Epak, I appreciate those values he instilled in me. 

Dr Okulo Epak was an honest man. He was very honest in whatever he did. He also taught me to treasure my past. “Never forget where you came from,” he used to tell us. One time when he was contributing on the Floor of this House, hon. Otto alluded to it. Hon. Kefa Sempangi was on the Floor and he spoke ill of Uganda People’s Congress of which he was a minister then. Hon. Okulo Epak stood up and said, “Hon. Sempangi, you are one of the persons who used to sing loudest, “oh ohooo mama.” You sang on the Floor of this House and now you are talking ill of UPC.” So, he taught me to always respect where I came from.

I am going to speak on behalf of AMANI Forum Uganda, of which Dr Okulo Epak was a member. For us in AMANI, we have lost, and we shall miss Dr Okulo Epak as a negotiator of peace, and an advocate of peaceful resolution of conflict. We shall miss him in that respect because as AMANI Forum we stand for peaceful resolution of conflict. 

Mr Speaker, I will also speak on behalf of the Bugisu Parliamentary Group, of which I am the Vice Chairperson. I want to say to Dr Okulo Epak Yefusa, “You fought a good war and may the Lord rest your soul in peace.” 

I also want to interest hon. colleagues of Parliament on the provision of the Parliament Enumeration of Members’ Act, 1981, Cap 259, Section 2, the Right to Gratuity. Specifically I want to read Section 24, which states, “The gratuity payable on the death of a member entitled to it shall be the sum amounting to one year’s basic salary payable to the Member of Parliament in respect of the office he/she was holding at the time of his/her death.” I would like to ask members, as they read this provision, to also reflect on the Pensions Bill of Members of Parliament. I believe this law is still in our law books and is definitely still in force. We should apply it.

To the family of Dr Okulo Epak, I know you are going through a trying moment; you have lost your dear one, but I want to ask you to take heart, these things happen. This is especially to the children: you should thank God that you are able to see the body of your father, and that you will be able to bury him. These days in Uganda and in the world, many children die before their parents. So we should thank God that you will be able to bury your father.

Finally, Mr Speaker, we may have all the powers in this world to do anything; we may have the power to move mountains; we may have the power to cut Mabira down and plant another Mabira; we may have the power to change anything in the Constitution, but we do not have the power over death. So, while we are still alive, we should conduct ourselves in a manner that shows that we know that there is death coming our way one time. Thank you, Mr Speaker. May the soul of Dr Okulo Epak rest in eternal peace.

5.18
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Omara Atubo): Mr Speaker, my colleagues, Members of Parliament, the widow and children of the late Dr Okulo Epak, I rise to pay tribute to my friend and colleague with whom I have shared life for close to 40 years. 

As a student at St Mary’s College Kisubi in the 60s, and also as an active student leader at Makerere in the 60s, we used to enjoy the invitation extended to hon. Dr Okulo Epak to interact with us both in Kampala and in Lira. At that time, we used to have the Lango Students’ Association. Dr Okulo Epak was a young graduate and was very engaging in debates. What Dr Okulo Epak was to us 40 years ago, has had an indelible mark on my mind. 

Dr Okulo Epak was in planning, when we started working after graduation. After Amin’s coup, an incident took place, which possibly shaped our lives, and we continued to share it for many years until his death. Amin was scheduled to visit Lango and the people of Lango could find no better person to draft them an appropriate memorandum to give to a deadly person like Id Amin. I was a student at Makerere University and I acted as a secretary to Dr Okulo Epak. 

In addition to that, between 1971 and 1979, during Id Amin’s regime, it became extremely difficult to work and live in Kampala, more so, if you were a Langi or an Acholi, who were targets at that time. You could not imagine holding a public office, being a government planner; a senior state attorney, Omara Atubo, a city advocate. How would you survive in a situation like that? We therefore had to design methods of survival by some way of intelligence. Sometimes you would not sleep in your house, but thank God our wives used to understand; they were not as selfish as women of today -(Applause)- they used to allow us to hide.  These survival tactics helped us a lot.  

 When Archbishop Luwum was killed, it became very difficult for us to live in this country. We went into exile together to Nairobi and I proceeded to Tanzania. When we came back to Uganda in 1979, we met. From 1980 to 1985, Dr Okulo Epak, as you have been told, was the Director or the boss of the Reconstruction and Development Construction. However, our lives were again shaped by the coup of 1985. 

As if God arranged it, Tito Okello was to visit Lango. I do not know whether the Langi remembered what happened in 1971 but Dr Okulo Epak was again asked to draft a memorandum to give to Tito Okello, and I was asked to be the secretary to that committee. We did our best. Tito Okello did not come and we presented that memorandum to Brigadier Toko in Lira Hotel, which was thoroughly looted. Nevertheless, it shaped the future relationship of Lango and the coup makers at that time. As you know Lira and Lango became a very deadly front. 

Again from that time onwards, the politics of survival and the politics for our people became uppermost. Dr Okulo Epak left to work for the UN in Ghana and I became a Minister of State in the then government. When Dr Okulo Epak came back, we joined hands in coming back to the Constituent Assembly. That became the period of a very active and rich political life for Dr Okulo Epak and me. 

We struggled together for multiparty politics and for whatever we could in the Constituent Assembly. Some were successful and some were not but as mature politicians, we agreed on one thing, which was that the Constitution that we made was substantially good for Uganda. Whatever we did not achieve we agreed to continue struggling to achieve, not through violent means, but through persuasion. Through consistent struggle and the commitment to multiparty democracy by Dr Okulo Epak, myself and many others in this House, it came to pass that even that obnoxious provision, Article 269, which banned political activities was removed.

In Lango we were deeply involved in UPC politics. Dr Okulo Epak was the chairman of the UPC Adhoc Committee in Apac. I was the chairman of UPC Adhoc Committee in Lira and our activities maintained a very lively political life of multiparty politics in Lango. We struggled and we succeeded. Unfortunately to some extent we became the victims of our struggles but that did not kill that great belief that Dr Okulo Epak and I were in multiparty politics because we believed that the most peaceful way to struggle and ascend to state power was through organised political parties. That is the only way. 

We believed that the way to stop people from taking up arms and resorting to violent means was if the government would open up and allow people to organise themselves. This would reduce violence substantially and even eliminate known violent methods of ascending to power. We of course became victims of our own political struggle but we never gave up. 

Dr Okulo Epak and I again stood as independents because our party had locked us out. Dr Okulo Epak and Omara Atubo as independents continued to share in this rich life. The last time I saw Dr Okulo Epak was when he came to my office on the 8th of March to pick copies of the Draft National Land Policy and to share with me on a number of issues. I had visited him a week before at his house and when he asked about these documents I said I would take them to him at his house. Dr Okulo Epak insisted that he would come to my office. Indeed he came to my office and we had a wonderful time. 

I am relating this because one of the problems that African leaders and Africans face is what we call dependable friendship in public life. Dependable friendship in public life does not mean that you agree as husband and wife on everything. In fact you may even quarrel and you may even beat each other but the fundamentals of our belief, the good of our people, peace for the people of Uganda and especially the North, which Dr Okulo Epak and I shared and the good of the people of Lango continued to be the driving force in our life. 

I am very proud that although Dr Okulo Epak is dead, substantially most of the things that he struggled for have been achieved. It remains for you and I to ensure that this great legacy, the legacy of principled leadership, of dependable friendship in public life and incorruptible leadership is maintained. 

Hon. Otto stole a word that I was going to use. Dr Okulo Epak told me when he came to my office that, “Hon. Minister of Lands, do you know that at one time I was the Chief Government Planner and I planned for all the land in Uganda but I did not plan for myself? I never got a plot.” In fact he told me that that plot where we are taking the body, which he got about ten years ago, was not easily allocated to him. It was a struggle. 

I am mentioning this because too many leaders in Africa and all over the World tend to misuse the public offices in which they are. I am very proud that Dr Okulo Epak had the opportunity to allocate himself plots of land in Uganda and today he would have been possibly the richest person in this country. However, Dr Okulo Epak did not abuse the public office that was given to him.

I conclude by quoting from the Bible in Ecclesiastes. Three things delight the life of a person. One is concord among friends, friendship among neighbours and a husband and wife living a happy life. Dr Okulo Epak was a friend, a man I shared concord with. He was a neighbour in terms of Biblical neighbourhood and he was a person like a husband and wife with whom you could have a very happy life indeed. May his soul rest in eternal peace and may the legacy of Dr Okulo Epak continue to inspire and shape the life of this country. I thank you all for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: We are definitely going to end because you can see now that the House is becoming empty. I think there is a consensus on the motion but let us be a bit representative. I would love for UWOPA to be represented for example. 

5.32
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Dr Okulo Epak. It is indeed very sad that this week we have lost our intelligent Member of Parliament. I can describe Dr Okulo Epak as an intelligent and seasoned politician as well as a well-organised leader. 

When I first came to Parliament, he was among the people I admired and tried to emulate although I have not reached his standard. He was a person who would talk sense and who knew what he was driving at. Whenever he would talk even if you had a different view, after his talk you would change your mind because he had made sense and changed your opinion to his side.

Mr Speaker, Dr Okulo Epak was a very organised person. When he was chairing PAC there was a lot of work and some reports had not been debated for years from 1992 to date but within six months he had organised his committee and most of those reports were debated. That was a big achievement. He was somebody who would ensure that he realised results out of his efforts. 

Mr Speaker, the late Dr Okulo Epak was a person with disability and he was a model to us. He showed the world that disability is not inability. In fact a person commented that nobody noticed his disability because he was more capable than some people without disabilities. Even though he was not representing persons with disabilities, he made sure that he supported us. We searched for his advice and we would call him for our meetings especially when we were passing very important Bills like the Persons with Disabilities Act, the one concerning UNISE and many other Acts. He supported us strongly on the floor of Parliament especially when we were trying to raise our number from five to eight, and I am sure that people with disabilities have lost him greatly.

Mr Speaker, I was attending a workshop this morning and women with disabilities together with the National Union of Persons with Disabilities asked me to convey their sincere condolences. They asked me to inform the House that they have lost him and that they will live to remember him.

Mr Speaker, cancer has become very common. In the past it was considered as the disease of the rich and of developed countries but now it has come to us in Africa, it is a silent killer and it is finishing us. I was listening to a debate on TV last night and the doctor said that cancer can be detected at early stages and it can be treated but at the stage when you start to feel some pain, it has gone beyond. Therefore, it is upon us who are alive to ensure that we check ourselves for cancer, both women and men. 

Mr Speaker, I am really sorry for the family of Dr Okulo Epak and for the people of Oyam South. We are with you on this sorrowful day. May his soul rest in peace.

5.37
MS MARGARET MUHANGA (Chairperson, Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues and talk about Dr Okulo Epak, especially the way he supported the women cause. I came to know him personally during the Constituency Assembly days and most of us who were working on the affirmative clause remember very well that we were attracted to him because of the support he gave to make sure that affirmative action is put in the Constitution. 

He was very intelligent and attracted us because of his intellect and wisdom. That is why it is very important that we get this opportunity to really thank him as women for all the assistance that he has given us especially in directing and guiding us on the several provisions that we have had to review and retain. 

I would also like to thank the Office of the Clerk for giving me the opportunity on behalf of the women of this Parliament to lay a wreath on the body of Hon. Okulo Epak, because I think that is the best gift we could give him to respect and say farewell to him. 

I have visited Hon. Okulo Epak several times in Mulago. Actually at one time in 2005 most of us who went to Mulago to see him thought that he was going to die then. However, somehow he was a very courageous man and kept on. He recovered and I happen to be on the PAC with him and we have had trips together. Every time you travelled with him, even when he was already sick, he was strong and showed a lot of courage. He demystified the disability that he had on his body because you would imagine that he needed help but he could always help himself. So we have really missed a strong man.

I visited him before he went to South Africa at his home in Naguru the last time, and one of the issues that I thought I would raise at this point in time is that you would always find a Bible on the stool that was in front of the chair where he used to sit. 

At the same time he had a great respect for his wife. He would always call her “mummy” and you know that is a great thing that we want to put forward. The moment the wife is loved and respected in a home then you know that even the home will develop and be a good home for others and also for yourself. I thought this is something I should talk about so that all of you who are listening to us get to know that we should respect our wives.  

The late hon. Dr Okulo Epak worked very hard in caring for his family. In fact the last time I visited him at his home in Naguru, we talked about the pending Domestic Relations Bill. His advice on this was, that we needed to divide the Bill into small sections so that we can look at each legislation separately.  I hope that when this Bill comes back on the floor of Parliament, members will be able to utilise the late hon. Okulo Epak’s opinion as mentioned above instead of just throwing it away, because that was his will and it is good that I have talked about it here.  

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I pray for the family of the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak and friends during this difficult moment. He has been a close friend to some of us and as a believer I am sure we shall meet him somewhere.  I thank you. 

5.41
MR OGWEL LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On behalf of the people of Karamoja, those of Moroto Municipality, and my on own behalf, I would like to join the rest of my colleagues and the rest of Ugandans in paying tribute to the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak.  

My first sight of Dr Okulo Epak was between 1994/5 in the Constituent Assembly. As a young man then, I knew I had met a man who was rich in knowledge; however, in the midst I saw a section of people like him, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Awori and so forth, who believed in democracy; I knew I had gotten myself a fountain of knowledge. 

The contributions of Dr Okulo Epak in the Constituent Assembly were such a good bunch of ideas to reckon with.  I remember whenever he went to the caucuses he would shake other debaters. During that time there used to be a caucus of the Movement and that is where the first vocabulary of the word “Caucus” emanated onto the political scene. 

I want to emphasise that when it came to the issue of land, there were no caucuses whether from the Movementists or Multipartists.  We handled the issue of land with Dr Okulo Epak without political bias. 

I remember when the motion could come, the late hon. Okulo Epak would say, “Land belongs to the people.” Later on Dr Okulo Epak explained that phrase to me and said that it meant that Land must belong to the citizens of this country. 

The second time I met the late hon. Okulo Epak was in the Seventh Parliament. I remember he used to sit in that corner. Whenever he stood up to contribute, all of us could pay maximum attention. He diffused political beliefs and gave credit where it was due. If it meant giving credit to the government, he would do so.  If he saw anything wrong, he would say, “That is wrong.”  

In this Parliament, there is the habit of referring to members by what goes on in their constituencies. Believe me, Dr Okulo Epak never called any of us from Karamoja, a cattle rustler.  Hon. Okulo Epak had never branded us Karimojongs. He lived and respected Karimojongs as people of this country.  

The contributions of Dr Okulo Epak in this House are highly rated. If all Ugandans could debate like him, we would be living in a better Uganda.  

When I arrived in this Parliament this morning to pay last respect to him, there was a recording of his voice being played.  He talked so much about Karamoja.  That means he loved the people of Karamoja and he always wanted them to be part of this country. He advocated for development in Karamoja like any part of Uganda.  I pray that all of us in this august House emulate him so that we can have Uganda at heart and work together for the betterment of the future of our people.

Finally, Mr Speaker, during my early age, Mulago hospital was a paradise to whoever had complicated diseases. Any patient would be transferred to Mulago. I remember the late Dr Obote was one time admitted there after an assassination attempt and he was treated from there. In the same vein, the late Idi Amin was also one time treated in Mulago. Today, this is not the case. So, we must in one of the financial years restore the glory of Mulago.    Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  I hope Members of the Committee on Social Service have heard. One of the important subjects you have to consider in the process of dealing with the budget should be this issue of Mulago Hospital Cancer Heart Institute. You should make a report on this -(Mr Kubeketerya rose_)- I know you wanted to make a contribution but honestly, I am constrained with the numbers. You have not only heard, but also benefited from the contribution of other members. When you chair your committee, please consider this matter because it is of great concern to the entire House, if not the entire country.

5.48
MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya East, Mayuge):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On behalf of the people of Bunya East and the old boys of Busoga College Mwiri, I would like to pay tribute to the late hon. Dr Okulo Epak. The late has been an old boy of Busoga College Mwiri where I also taught for 9 years before coming Parliament. We have actually been referring to each other as “old boy”.  I think the last time I spoke to him was at the reception of the northern wing. At that time there were no signs of him being weak. However, it is unfortunate that we have lost him.  

One thing I know about the late Dr Okulo Epak is that, he has been a very, very open-minded person. I remember in the Seventh Parliament there is a time he fell sick and he was admitted and Government footed his bill. When he came back, he stood on the Floor of this House and appreciated Government for that, which is rare with most politicians, be it in the opposition or Government. Many of them keep it as a secret. 
Lastly, Mr Speaker is that the late Dr Okulo Epak wrote a paper to our committee making suggestions on how the Mulago Cancer Institute should be revamped. This morning when I interacted with Ministry of Health officials, some of the pertinent issues we talked about were: the Heart Institute; Intensive Care Unit and the Cancer Institute. The officials also said that the ministry should set up the kidney institute. 

About a month ago, His Excellence the Vice President inaugurated new machines. So, Mr Speaker, the Committee on Social Services is very cognisant of the pressures and we have had better responses.  We are hopeful that there is going to be an improvement in the next budget. May the soul of the late hon. Okulo Epak rest in eternal peace. 

5.58
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Dr Okulo Epak was the former Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee. He has been a member of PAC in this Eighth Parliament. I came from Busoga College Mwiri and I am standing here to mourn an OB. You all recall in 2005, we lost a very big OB. He was also here. Now, we have lost another big one. Mwiri, you are the big losers.

Mr Speaker, many people have talked about Dr Okulo Epak. They have said he was forthright, intelligent, and an eloquent debater. Indeed that is who he was. He was one of the rare upright politicians. He was my mentor. 

There are four issues, which Dr Okulo Epak should be remembered for among others. He is the one who challenged Government to produce the classified expenditure for auditing, and this one he won. In fact, when classified auditing was opened, it was found that there were payments to utility companies in billions, which were being treated as classified expenditures. That was another conduit for siphoning money. We want to thank Dr Okulo Epak for that. 

Secondly, you all recall that in the Seventh Parliament, he talked about the independence of the Auditor-General. I am one of those who supported him but we were floored. The reason for the independence of the Auditor-General is quite important because the Auditor-General is the watchdog of all your public resources. If you do not have a very good watchdog that is independent, then you are in problems. Maybe the dog could participate in eating the resources he is supposed to watch. He has left us, but this has not been accomplished yet. We are waiting for the Audit Bill from Government, which will address the issue of the independence of the Auditor General’s office.

Thirdly, he played a leading role in the formation of the Association of East African Public Accounts Committees. He was the first Chairman. All of you know that East Africa comprises five countries. This association promotes sharing of knowledge, skills and their application in the management of public resources. The association is moving on and this year, Uganda will again take the chair of that committee.

The fourth thing that I recall is Save Uganda House. In 2002, when we were thinking about how to move, many of us who were the young ones in Parliament under the leadership of Dr Mallinga, who was then Chairman UPC –(Laughter)- and Aggrey Awori, I could quote some of them: Okupa Elija, hon. Amuriat, hon. Epatait, decided that we go and attack Uganda House. We had the support of Awori, but he was going to kill us. Dr Mallinga said we should go, but Dr Okulo Epak said, “Hold it. Let us discuss”. He is the one who told us, “Please, we need to negotiate”. He is the one who moved us to the next step. He is one of those people who have preached peace.

Mr Speaker, people have quoted the Bible, the Koran, but they should not quote it for others, they should practice what they are quoting. Finally, -(Interjection)- yes, that is a serious matter. Do not tell us you are saved when you are not saved in reality. 

As Public Accounts Committee, we have lost a member. We have lost an OB of Mwiri, the family, relatives and friends have lost their loved one. Of course, we shall miss him, we all loved him; we can only pray for the family that God gives them strength. May the Almighty God give him eternal peace. 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. This ends the debate. The Speaker does not participate in the debate but for your information, this information should go on record. 
I last saw hon. Okulo Epak on 28th March when he came to my office. The purpose of his visit was to inform me that he would be travelling to South Africa for consultations with his doctor the following day. He said that his wife and one girl were going to accompany him. He told me that he believed he may come back on 5th  May, that was his plan, but all of a sudden he said, “Maybe I may come back on the 5th.” That statement clicked in me. 
Later he said, “You are a lawyer”. He pleaded with me saying, “Mr Speaker, I want to plead guilty for not having been able to sit in the House to represent my people for a long time.” I said, “I knew you are on bed rest on the advice of a doctor, therefore the question of pleading guilty does not arise because it was not your cause.” 
The impression this statement created in me was the conclusion that hon. Okulo Epak had a high sense of duty. He felt guilty as a Member of Parliament for not carrying out his duties. I knew that even in sickness he was working. As I had told you, he had presented to me his report on classified expenditure. As he was leaving, owing to those statements he had made: “guilty I may”, “I may not”, I asked him to sign my visitors’ book. He said, “I am sorry I cannot sign. I cannot make any signature. Maybe I will just put a stroke on it.” This again registered on me. When I opened the door for him to go, I was worried whether I would ever see him again. I am sorry I have not been able to see him again other than seeing him lying before us. 

This gentleman who has gone was intelligent, objective, and balanced. He was always candid whenever he gave you advice. I believe the Okulo Epak you saw during day, is the same Okulo Epak that existed at night. We are missing him. Honourable members, the debate has ended. This was not part of the debate, it is just information. 

I now put the question on the motion tabled by the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, Leader of Government Business, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, in respect of our friend who has passed away, Dr Yefusa Okulo Epak. The motion is in the terms as read out and supported by the various contributions. I put the question.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. In respect of hon. Ekemu, who had an accident, Doctors have attended to him. Reports I have received indicate that there is hope that in two weeks time, he will be able to walk on crutches. We pray for him.

In respect to the details given to us about the burial of our friend, Parliament is organising transport for those who may want to go Loro in Oyam. Transport will leave at 6.00am to 7.00a.m.  All those who intend to travel should be here between that time and ensure that they register at the reception so that we can absolutely proceed to the place where we are going to lay our friend.  

I want to say that I have been impressed by the general debates from the Bible and Quran. As you heard, hon. Cecilia Ogwal sounded like a pastor in her concluding remarks. I will task the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges to study the situation and determine whether it is necessary for us to every day have a Bible or Quran reading in this House.   Let us conclude.

National Anthem. (One verse)

(Exit of the body of the late hon. Okulo Epak from the Chamber.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you must have received the programme for the burial of our friend.  Today, the body is being taken to the home. Tomorrow morning at 10.00 p.m. it will be taken to All Saints Cathedral, Nakasero for requiem service from where it will be taken to Oyam for burial. I hope many of you will be able to attend one service or another. I thank you for having come for this particular function.  

We had adjourned the House to enable the committees complete the Budget process, and I hope they are continuing with it with the exception of tomorrow, which is a public holiday. We shall continue with the adjournment up to next week, Tuesday, when we shall reconvene for some business originating from the committee on National Economy.

MR KADDUNABBI: Mr Speaker, I have three reports ready with me.  I will be able to present them any time.

THE SPEAKER: That is okay, but as I earlier on indicated, your report is related to the ongoing budget process. The purpose of those reports is that they should be submitted to the President so that the content therein can be integrated in the budget before it is read.  If we delay, they will be useless documents because they will not have been taken to account.  Maybe it is better we do it so that there is no excuse for not having finished the work in one committee or another. This will enable our sitting of Tuesday, 8 May 2007 take place. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 6.07 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 May 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)




