Thursday, 26 April 2012

Parliament met at 2.36 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As you are aware, under our Rules of Procedure, on Thursdays we give the first few minutes to Members’ business. So, we shall devote 30 minutes, but I only have matters from five Members. 

2.38
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): I rise on a point of national importance. In Busoga, I got information yesterday that Stanbic Bank is mobilising the district youth chairmen to go around collecting Shs 20,000 from each youth for them to get the youth fund. I am told in one sub-county that is Bukaboli, they collected Shs 20,000 from each youth and the total number of youths was 250. The worry is, how sure are we that Stanbic Bank will be able to give all these youths this money? And if it fails, then it will most likely backfire on us the politicians and even the Government.

I am very sure that the money cannot cover all these youths. For those who will miss the money, they will castigate us the politicians. At the end of the day, Stanbic Bank will have done business because for it, it is collecting money for opening bank accounts and ATM cards.

A youth in the village is selling a goat to open a bank account and you have not put any measure to ensure that this youth will be able to maintain that account. I want to request that the government takes necessary measures to ensure that these youths are not exploited. They will extort money from them and they will not get this money. That, I am very sure.

Madam Speaker, through your office, I request that you instruct the Government to take up necessary measures to sensitise the youths. Banks should also sensitise the youths before they take the money to the bank accounts.

2.41
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): I rise on an issue of national importance, and this is to do with the national census which is due on 16th to 25th of August this year. The census activities have already been planned for in the financial year 2011/12. The activities that were planned for are on course except that as Parliament, we had requested the Minister of Finance to give UBOS at least Shs 46 billion to start with the preliminary activities prior to the census. But after appropriation as usual, there was a shortfall in funding and Ministry of Finance accepted that they can only fund Shs 19 billion and we also directed them to give the same amount to UBOS to start the prior activities to the census.

But Madam Speaker, as I speak, this is the fourth quarter and we are left with only 2 months. Even out of the Shs 19 billion that we appropriated, the fourth quarter release has already been made, but only a total of Shs 13.5 billion has been released and there is still an outstanding balance on the monies that we appropriated of about Shs 5.5 billion.

We have been meeting UBOS at the national budget framework paper discussions that we have been holding. We have been meeting them and this is one of the issues that they brought to the committee, that they are now stuck. The census activities need to run in time so that other activities that take place like the school terms are not interrupted. Now, with this shortfall, they are stuck and they cannot move. They cannot carry on with the activities that they had planned for so that they are also on schedule with census activities.

The census is very important; it is one of those key areas that even we Members of Parliament - the formula used to allocate money to constituencies depends on population census.
If this activity is being delayed, it means we shall still continue to be cheated because the planning figures which are being utilised are for the year 2002. 

Even planning for health - importation of vaccines and immunisation kits, depends on the number of children that are there based on the census. We now depend on approximated figures and that is very dangerous.  We really want this census to take place on time, and for it to take place as planned, UBOS should be facilitated. It is a programme that takes place once in 10 years, and I pray that it is treated as a project.

My prayer is that let the minister confirm to us that the Shs 5.5 billion, which is not yet released, will be released before end of June. 

The funding gap which they had requested to be covered should be cleared. 

The shortfall of Shs 27 billion which was not given should come in the next Supplementary Schedule No.2.

I also want to request that, because the census is a very important activity that we cannot forego, that Shs 27.5 billion be provided for in your second supplementary so that the activities move on course. But for now, the assurance I want is from the minister that the balances on releases amounting to Shs 5.5 billion be released before the end of the financial year, so that activities for the census go on as planned.

2.47
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (IND, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): I rise on an issue of national importance. The constituency I represent contributes to 99.9 percent of all the problems that we have in Uganda. On top of all the problems that I have heard since I joined Parliament, it is the beginning. So, you can add all those up and others that you have not talked about and all that takes place in Ntoroko.

In the year 2009/2010, Ministry of Works allocated Shs 80 million to build two health centre IIs; one in Itojo and the other in Butungama sub-county. I followed up with the ministry, and this money was released to Bundibugyo. As we talk, there is nothing on the ground. We have caused meetings with the CAO of Bundibugyo to come and meet us in Ntoroko. We have also gone to the ministry requesting them to give us information, but they have failed. If you look at a district like Ntoroko that has only three health centre IIs; a whole district. There are also only two health centre IIIs and only one health centre IV that has a theatre that doesn’t even function on top of having no doctor nor an ambulance, yet it covers an area of around 1306 square kilometres. This is a serious problem and I call upon this House and the minister in charge, to either deduct this money of Bundibugyo and re-allocate it to the people of Ntoroko, so that they can have the services they were supposed to get.

The second issue is with the health sector, when I was in the constituency, I did a tour in several schools and what I discovered there was really disappointing. There were so many buildings that were incomplete yet money was allocated still under Bundibugyo. I am wondering, because these buildings have been there for over two years and they are incomplete. They should be either broken down or given to private people. Government can also come in and help finish the structures so that we can have enough room.

Ntoroko is one of the districts where students are still studying under trees. In some classrooms, you would find one class of P.2 has two classes seated inside; say P.5 and P.6 in one classroom. So, what the teacher does is to divide the blackboard into two. He first   teaches P.5 and when he is done, he tells them to keep quiet and then the P.6 teacher teaches. So, you can imagine such a scenario. There are some schools that I visited and I have pictorial evidence of what I am talking about; even those with incomplete structures. Some teachers have refused to go and teach in some schools because of the problems in the schools.

You can imagine one of the schools has no latrine for even the teacher. I asked the teacher to stand next to the latrine he was using and it even had no pit. I know he was using the bush.

I want to ask the minister to really help us and come to the rescue of the people of Ntoroko.

Finally, we have talked about the issue of people in Ntoroko having nowhere to bury the dead. 

I would like to thank the minister of Tourism because sometime back, we moved with him and by bad luck there was a child who had died and he had spent around two days in the house because they had nowhere to bury him.  I took the minister where they were going to bury this child, in an old pit latrine. That was the only piece of land that was available for this child to be buried. Unfortunately, when Semuliki Game Park was de-gazetted, the people were given what they call a sanctuary, but this land was given to a few people illegally who are not even from Ntoroko, yet it was meant for the community.  I even wrote to the Minister of Lands trying to find out how these people got the titles in this area. I want to ask the various committees to work together because the land is there, but it was taken up by a few people for their personal interest.

I want to ask the line minister and the House to come together about this issue. It is the worst when people do not have where to bury their dead. By the time you throw the body into the lake or keep it in the House for several days, it is the worst scenario we can have in this country. I want to call upon the House to come and help put things right in Ntoroko.

2.52
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West Constituency, Kalungu): Thank you Madam Speaker, this is also a matter of national concern. It is from the Ministry of Education and I am happy that the minister is around. There is an organisation called JICCA from Japan, which started a project here defined as SESMAT (Secondary Science and Mathematics Training of Secondary School Teachers.) What does this SESMAT do? It trains secondary school teachers on methods of teaching science to the extent that it even provides laboratory equipments, and supervises them in secondary schools to see how they teach these subjects. 

But here comes a problem from the good SESMAT; after training and doing everything, it has begun charging secondary school students money. They pay Shs 1,000 every term. That means in a year every student must pay three thousand shillings. 

Because of that, they have written to UNEB stopping students from registering to sit exams if they have not paid money for SESMAT. Where do we find the problem? It is charging money from private and Government secondary schools.  

Government has Universal Secondary School Education where students are not supposed to pay any money. When you look at the budget of Ministry of Education, this money is not there. What is paining people is; “Where this money is going; it is not known. 

Secondly, private secondary schools are paying this money, but when they are giving laboratory equipment, they give only Government schools. They leave out private schools.

We are asking, Why do you charge money and then when you are giving equipment, you leave them out?  This money is not known by the Ministry of Education and I am going to lay on Table a circular they wrote and you will prove whether it is known or not. 

Private secondary schools are seeing it as a way of bringing back taxation on secondary schools, because if a school has 1000 students and every student is paying 1000 every term, how much does he pay in a year? It is known that private schools have the biggest number of students. How does a student pay a registration fee and then you stop him from registering because he has not paid Shs 1,000 for SESMAT.

A student in senior four might have paid SESMAT early enough, but because his school has not paid that money, they come and say, “You will not register.” This is a matter of national importance because registration is ongoing and if it is not carried out as fast as possible, students are going to miss registration and you will find strikes in schools.

But accordingly, private schools are also complaining that it is another advantage for the teacher because these people go out to universities; they look for their teachers and when they get their teachers, they take them to their private secondary schools, but then under the SESMAT, which is charging money, when teachers go for training in private schools, in one way or another Government looks at those who are better than the rest and takes them to the Government schools and the private schools lose their teachers, yet they fish them from good areas, which is very painful. 

So, Madam Speaker, I am asking the Ministry of Education to tell us the authenticity of this money. What is the purpose of this money and can parents here afford to pay this money, yet you promised the students to have free education? Madam Speaker, I want you to allow me lay on Table, for the first time, this circular. 

THE SPEAKER: How does it feel to stand there? (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: I pray that the Leader of the Opposition will see me one time -(Laughter)- Madam Speaker, this is a circular letter from the Ministry of Education and Sports, No.08 of 2012, and the reference is to only teachers in preparatory schools and Government schools. 

“Certificate of remittance towards SESMAT Programme and NASHU subscription” and this was signed by Dr Y.K. Nsubuga for Permanent Secretary and references and copies were given to the Secretary UNEB, the Resident District Commissioner, Chief Administrative Officers, Uganda Education Officers, and District Inspectors of Schools without the Ministry of Education. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ssewungu.

2.59
MRS SANTA ALUM (NRM, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. On the 24th of this month, a woman was taking her twins for immunisation in Amavi Parish, Kambini Sub-county Oyam District. This woman was killed by a buffalo. The incident happened when she was carrying her twins, and she met a buffalo which was charged. The Wild Life Authority officers had fired at the buffalo either to drive it to the park or to kill it. The animal became very cruel fighting everybody it came across. When it met this woman, it first threw away the children and turned on the woman. It started fighting her, and removed her two eyes. The buffalo then dug the ground and buried the woman there and covered her with grass in a swamp. Yesterday, the Police removed the body and took it to Gulu for a postmortem and as we debate here, the burial is going on. This was not the only incident in the same sub-county and five other people are nursing injuries in the hospital, including the twins. 

Another incident was on 7th March this year. A group of elephants escaped from the park and moved 30 kilometers into another parish called Otini. They stayed there for a number of days affecting the community. The communities could not go on with their daily livelihood. The Wildlife Authority did not do anything, not until the community started using the local FM radios to really beg them to come and drive these elephants away. They came and drove the elephants away, but by then, the children had not been going to school, and the women could not go to the gardens, nor could they go to look for food and water. 

Madam Speaker, the same incident also happened on the eve of last year’s Christmas. Again, a buffalo met a woman who was going to draw water from the well. She was riding a bicycle. On meeting the woman, it charged. The woman threw the bicycle towards the buffalo and it caught the next. It started fighting the bicycle and the woman escaped and that was her luck. Again in the same sub-county in Pukicha Parish, we had a similar incident –(Interruption)

MS LILY ADONG: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue of the wildlife hurting the population is also being experienced in my district. Madam Speaker, you remember I came to you one time and I had planned to bring a motion. Unfortunately, we went on recess without that motion being discussed. In Nwoya District, the season has started and people are preparing to gather their properties and go back to the camp because of the wildlife, particularly the elephants and the buffaloes. In Nwoya District, we lost two people because of the elephant incursion. One woman from Nebbi who lived in Pakwach town council crossed to Nwoya District to get grass for thatching her house and that was towards Christmas last year. She was killed by an elephant and she was expecting. Again, another man was peacefully sleeping in his house. Later, an elephant came at night and attacked him. He fortunately had about six dogs and those dogs rescued him from the elephant. 

However, you will recall that Nwoya District failed in PLE last year because of the elephants. The children go to school at 10.00 a.m. in the morning because they cannot leave early to go to school because of the elephants. They leave at 4.00 p.m. and you can see how it is affecting the lives of our people; and in both Oyam and Nwoya districts, people have been in the camps. They are just rebuilding their lives and they depend on farming, and the elephants eat everything except red pepper and tobacco. So, I think something should be done because they eat everything including cotton and it is making our people poorer and poorer. So, we need UWA to help us. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: You have successfully smuggled it.

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. I was saying that on the eve of last year’s Christmas, a crocodile killed one person and also broke the legs of another. My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that these are our voters. These are the people who really increase productivity in agriculture. Who will vote for us if the animals finish our people? Through you, Madam Speaker, I now ask the minister in charge of tourism that, first of all, the woman left behind orphans, young as they were. She was doing her motherly role of taking the children for immunisation, something that we are crying for in this country. 

Secondly, if the Ministry of Tourism is not aware that we need help for all these things that I have stated, I am sorry; next time we are going to use other means because even the LC IIIs and the LC V councillors at the district tried to take the Uganda Wildlife Authority to court, but of course they are poor people; they have nothing and they just failed. 

So, though you, Madam Speaker, I seek the intervention of the ministry and Government. Our people shouldn’t suffer as if we have no Government. We put you into power. Thank you.

3.07
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County, South): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Fire gutted and destroyed Nkokonjeru Town Council last night. All the administrative offices such as the office of the mayor, town clerk and other important offices with records were gutted by fire, which destroyed everything. In a little bit of background, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House that there have been a lot of wrangles within this town council, between the elected mayor and the town clerk, who have been suspended by the CAO of the district. 

However, he kept on in office and working amidst a lot of fights and quarrels for his coming back. This situation got to the Office of the Inspector General of Government, who according to the CAO, directed that the town clerk is reinstated to his job. This decision was received with a lot of apprehension. 

On Sunday, I went to Nkokonjeru Town Council because we anticipated that the town clerk, as directed by the CAO, would be reinstalled on Tuesday this week. But as I said, there was a lot of apprehension. My being there was about to seek the authority of Government, especially the Ministry of Local Government, to intervene in order to prevent a quarrel that would even cause bloodshed.

I had been informed that on that Sunday, the office of the mayor had been locked up by some unknown people. Those very people also locked up the rest of the offices. And last night, the experience was about fire gutting this place. Madam Speaker, whereas there have always been suspicions whenever fire guts certain installation points, to say electricity or candles, in this particular place, I can inform to you that there was no power in Nkokonjeru last night. This has caused a suspicion that this fire was not as a result of an electric short circuit. I request the Minister of Local Government to quickly intervene by ensuring that –(Interjections)– I will take the information.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you asked for a short time and now you are causing a debate. We have only 30 minutes for this.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is okay, let me complete my statement. You know, when you are being tickled –(Laughter)– not physical tickling, Madam Speaker.

Anyway, as I was saying, it is our humble request that the Ministry of Local Government intervenes in this issue by bringing the warring factions together to help the town council move on, but at the same time, to ensure that the destroyed property is replaced as urgently as possible. 

I also implore the Minister of Internal Affairs to cause an investigation into the cause of this fire, which we suspect could have been ignited by the warring factions at the council. This is because there had been a call for an investigation into illegal expenditures that had seen a lot of money being spent unlawfully at the hands of the town clerk and certain other persons who have been running the council. So, there is already a suspicion that such persons, because of the fear of being investigated, could have ignited this fire. The investigations should not only cover the fire; they should extend to the monies that had been wasted at the hands of a few people at the town council.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the Minister of Local Government to respond to the distribution of assets between Bundibugyo and Ntoroko districts. Thereafter, can we have the Minister of Finance respond on the collection of money from the youth in Mayuge and the census funding?

3.12
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank hon. Mugara for raising these very important issues. The issue of sharing out assets and liabilities between Ntoroko and Bundibugyo is a matter I will bring to the attention of the honourable Minister of Local Government so that clear solutions can be found. 

Similarly, the problem of too much land having been assigned to the game park is an issue I will have to bring to the attention of the Minister in charge of Tourism and Wildlife. But it is also a matter that we shall have to discuss because it apparently also involves land utilisation in the area. You have brought this mater to my attention before, I sent out a team, but I am yet to receive the report on what they found on the ground. Madam Speaker, I am going to take up the issues that hon. Mugarra has raised. As for the education issues, we have the minister responsible and I am sure he will be in position to provide feedback on the issues you have raised.

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issues raised by my brother, hon. Mugarra Bahinduka from Ntoroko are very serious in nature. I would like to say that as a ministry, we are trying our best to do what we can to sort out some of these issues. But you know that when a Member of Parliament points out such issues, we take them very seriously. Yes, I cannot say that all he is saying is true, but let me assure him that we are very much concerned. 

On that note, Madam Speaker, allow me thank him for giving us this very important information. But I also would like to assure him that immediately we get back to the office, there will be a team deployed to go to assess that situation. I want to promise that we will report to this House as soon as the team comes back. 

There was an issue raised by hon. Joseph Ssewungu from Kalungu about SESMAT. Madam Speaker, it is true the circular came from our ministry about the improvement in the teaching of mathematics and other science subjects. You are all aware that Government has put a lot of emphasis on the teaching of these subjects.  I want to note that this is another very serious matter. However, Madam Speaker, given its magnitude, I pray that you allow me time to make consultations so that I can come back with a comprehensive report about SESMAT and the state of the classrooms plus the teaching –(Interjections)– just one week.

THE SPEAKER: That is an assurance. I hope hon. Odonga Otto is listening. (Laughter) Okay, how about the crocodile and the buffaloes?

3.16
MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr  Daudi Migereko): The issue of wildlife in the various parts of the country is a matter we need to take up with the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife so that we can be in a position to see how we balance the interests of our people. But also, there have been discussions in regard to fencing off some of these areas so that we can protect the lives of our people. I am going to raise this with the line minister and I am sure within a week, he will provide a comprehensive response. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, on the census and the money collected from the young people in Mayuge.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Government is aware of the importance of the national population and housing census. We did fix dates on which it was supposed to be conducted and so far, certain activities have been undertaken to ensure that the census is done. For example, to date, Shs 20.1 billion has been spent on census mapping, questionnaire development and conducting of a pilot census in 2001. Further, financial commitments in census procurement amounting to Shs 27.5 billion have also been expended, bringing the total cost of expenditure so far to Shs 47.6 billion. Among those funds is a contribution from our development partners of about Shs 5.2 billion. 

But while that was being done, there are some constraints in funding this activity to ensure that it is done according to schedule. To that effect, consultations are being carried out. We have met with the Prime Minister to bring out the importance of carrying out this census in time; we have also brought it to the attention of His Excellency the President so that funds are availed to carry out this census. We are committed to carrying out this census. We require that we give our final position on this after we have completed our consultations with these authorities within a maximum of two weeks.  

Regarding the youth fund, Madam Speaker, you are aware that money has been put aside in the banks to facilitate the youth venture fund.  Guidelines were presented to this Parliament. Consultations have been made at different levels with the youth leadership. Amendments to these guidelines have been made and the banks have issued guidelines on how they will implement this programme.

We are not aware of some of the complexities which the youth are meeting as the honourable member did point out. But we are ready if there are any complications or if there are any irregularities that are being committed by the banks that are making it difficult for these funds to succeed; these issues can be brought to us, then we can rectify them by discussing with the banks to make it easy for the youth to access this funding. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think his worry was that several young people have been asked to pay Shs 20,000 by Stanbic Bank and there is no guarantee that each of those who has paid will get the money. That is his worry.

3.22
MR ACHIA REMIGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you honourable minister. I also want to seek clarification from the minister as to when the census is going to take place. Because the practice has been that it happens around October/November. In my area, that is the time when people take their cattle to the neighbouring districts or even across the border to Kenya because of drought. They often end up not being counted. 

You are also aware that pastoralists are the first East Africans. In Kenya, there are elections coming and they might go across to vote. So, we need consultation on all those issues. We want more information on when the census is going to take place. 

THE SPEAKER: Answer the question of hon. Waira, about the money.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I did say that we are not officially aware that some of those demands are being made on the youth. That is why we have said that if there are any that arise, they should be brought to our attention so that we can rectify them by discussing with the banks, especially if they are outside the guidelines. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, the Member said Stanbic Bank is the one collecting the money. It has come to your attention. Do you want another letter? He has spoken about Stanbic Bank collecting the money. Can you undertake to find out? He did not talk about any other bank.

Honourable members, Parliament has organised an ecumenical service for Wednesday, 2 May 2012 in the conference hall. The Inter Religious Council wants to pray for the Parliament of Uganda, especially to conclude the first session, and to also pray for us for hosting the IPU conference successfully. 

I also wanted to let you know that I am considering putting off the Plenary next week so that Sessional committees can complete their work on the policy statements and report by the 15th May. So, since everybody is here now, I want you to be on notice that we must finish whatever is on the Order Paper today so that next week you finish the other work of the budget committee. 

3.25
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, arising from that communication, I have some observations to make on the Order Paper. By the end of session yesterday, we had agreed that we would have the Public Order Management Bill today, and the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010. Next week we may put off Plenary and yet I see on today’s Order Paper that the very effort that the Deputy Prime Minister made to have it pushed has now taken the day and yet the ruling by end of yesterday was that we would have the Public Order Management Bill for debate today. May I know whether this now is one way of pulling it off Parliament business? 

Secondly, we are concerned about the poor attendance by the ministers on the government side. It is very painful –(Interjections)- This is a plenary; you don’t have to heckle. Learn how to conduct business. When a lot of issues are being raised, the Chief Whip is at pain and says, I will communicate to the relevant minister. At the end of the day, a number of issues remain unanswered and yet time is running out and people are suffering; wild animals are killing people and there is no proper guidance on what the next intervention is. Can the Leader of Government Business try to persuade ministers? Most of these ministries have a number of ministers; more than one minister in one ministry. If one Cabinet minister is busy, can’t a minister of state at least come to represent the docket in the House? That is why we have more than 67 ministers, but when it comes to attendance, you find about five or ten coming to the House. This is a point of concern and it is a genuine one. Take it in good faith.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you are working out the Order Paper, you must determine how much time each item is going to take. I looked at it and found that we cannot do both Bills today and finish them. So, we start with one, finish it and then we do the other.

STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR NEXT WEEK

THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I am not ready with the statement of business by the Leader of Government Business because our office is yet to harmonise on these rules by the Vice President, who had a different view on whether we should comply with these rules or not. This is because he has objected to it twice; so we are still harmonising and that is why I am not ready today.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, I am the Speaker of this House and those are our rules. This is not Cabinet; they are the rules of the Parliament of Uganda. So, we shall expect you to comply with the Rules of Procedure of this House. You can do the other things there, but here, you will comply.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PROHIBITION AND PREVENTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday the report was presented and you listened to it. I told you to come back today with your Bills. Who will bail the cat? Any contributions? This is a Private Members’ Bill. Honourable members, the report was presented yesterday. That is the last business we handled. Are you in agreement with the report?

3.31
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I think all Members of Parliaments seem to agree that torture is a bad thing and any law that prohibits torture should be supported, probably even without debate because no one wants to be torture whether in private or public. So, in the circumstances, I beg to move that the question be put and we go to committee stage. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PROHIBITION AND PREVENTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are the ministers going?

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. An issue has just been raised that at a time when we are discussing serious issues, our ministers are not there. When you came in as Chair, most of the ministers were just going out as if the matter is not very important to them, and yet we believe that they are the ones who are going to execute matters therein.

Madam Chair, we are worried as a Parliament that issues of this House are not being taken seriously by the Frontbench. We are concerned and I just wanted to air out that concern and to say that the ministers should really -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is it that they do not want to support the Private Members’ Business? Are they walking out on the Private Members’ Business?

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chairperson, going out of this House is normal and is sometimes organised. Many times people have walked out of this House almost in exodus and nobody raised fingers. There are many reasons why somebody may be forced to go out say, to answer to nature. You cannot say he cannot go because - (Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Madam Chairperson, I wish to respect the Prime Minister’s way of putting things. The Prime Minister has just said that there are specific reasons why people must move out of this House in exodus and he was kind of insinuating that the Members who were moving out did so in an exodus and were going to answer to the call of nature. 

Can I say there is an epidemic in this House that the Members must move in exodus to answer to the call of nature at a go? Is it, therefore, in order for the Rt Hon. Deputy Leader of Government Business to create an impression that there is an epidemic that has caused the Frontbench to move in an exodus to go and answer to the call of nature, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I hope that they are consulting in that room and that they will come back. (Laughter)

LT GEN.(RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chairperson, I am also aware people understand situations differently. I am not going to blame the Leader of the Opposition for not understanding what I said or for misunderstanding it. I am not saying that the ministers who move out in exodus – or I said they are going to answer the call of nature. But sometimes here, I have seen people opposite me walking out in exodus. So, you cannot blame anybody. For that reason, I think there is no rule against going out of the House and coming in. I believe these people have not committed a crime; they will go out and answer nature’s call or make consultations and come back. Thank you. (Laughter)

Clause 1

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes two amendments to this clause. (i) Immediately after the definition of “currency point” insert a definition for “deadly weapon” to read as follows: “‘Deadly weapon’ includes any instrument made or adapted for shooting, stabbing or cutting, and any instrument which when used for offensive purposes is likely to cause death.” 

The justification is to provide a definition for deadly weapon. (ii) Immediately after the definition of the word “spouse”, by inserting a definition for “Superior Officer” to read as follows: “‘Superior Officer’ means a person in a higher position of authority than the officer alleged to have committed torture.” Torture is missing in the report. The justification is – 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I would like the committee chairperson to help me – because we have just started – the report I have shows that we are starting from the “long title” whereby they had proposed an amendment. Is it coming after or do I have a wrong document?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is the last item.

MR BAKA: The justification for the second amendment is to provide for a definition for a superior officer for purposes of clause 10.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the proposal to include the definition of “deadly weapon” is okay, except that this definition is narrower than the definition which is in the Penal Code Amendment Statute of 2007. We broadened that definition and it reads, “‘Deadly weapon’ includes (a)(i) an instrument made or adapted for shooting, stabbing or cutting and any imitation of such an instrument; (ii) any substance which when used for offensive purposes is capable of causing death or grievous harm or is capable of inducing fear in a person that it is likely to cause death or grievous bodily harm and (b) any substance intended to render the victim of the offence unconscious.” So, this is broader and is in good spirit and I propose that we adopt that definition. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the committee chairperson have any objection to lifting that definition from the Penal Code?

MR BAKA: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR  BAKA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes amendments to clause 4 as follows: (a) by inserting a new sub-clause (ii) to read as follows: “A person shall not be punished for disobeying an order to undertake actions amounting to torture, cruel or inhuman treatment.” 

Justification is to provide protection to subordinates who decline to execute orders that would result into torture (b) by renumbering the sub-clauses under clause 4 in light of the new insertion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes amendments to clause 5 as follows: By substituting for “Section 5” with “Section 4”. The justification is to address the typographical error.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 6 on page 7 as follows: (a) In sub-clause (1) by redrafting the entire sub-clause to read as follows: “The court may, in addition to any other penalty under this Act, order for reparations, which may include - “. Justification is to align the clause with Article 14 of the Convention Against Torture. (b) In sub-clause (1)(b)(v) by deletion. The justification is that enforceability is difficult. 

(c) In sub-clause (3) by deleting the entire sub-clause. The justification is that it is against the Bill since it is trying to water down the personal liability that is provided for under clause 3(2)(d). Liability in criminal matters is personal and as such, you cannot hold Government criminally liable when it has not been offered a chance to be heard.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.
Clause 9

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes – clause 9 is on page 10 of the Bill – in sub-clause (3) by deletion. Justification is that the sub-clause insinuates that the spouse cannot aid and abet torture.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I agree that the proposal by the committee is reasonable, but I would want it to recast in terms of section 393(2) of the Penal Code, because it is broader and it gives a clearer picture as to why and how a spouse - or the circumstances under which a spouse may or may not be an accessory of the fact and it reads, “A wife does not become an accessory after the fact to an offence of which her husband is guilty by receiving or assisting him in order to enable him to escape punishment by receiving or assisting in her husband’s presence and by his authority another person who is guilty of an offence in the commission of which her husband has taken part in order to enable that other person to escape punishment, nor does the husband become an “accessory after the fact to an offence of which his wife is guilty by receiving or assisting her in order to enable her to escape punishment.”

So, my proposal is that we apply this particular one because it is a tested provision rather than actually saying in broad terms that a spouse cannot be an accessory after the fact.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman, do you object?

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, before I concede, let me read for the benefit of the House. This is clause 9. “Accessory after the fact to the offence of torture,” and No.1 reads, “A person who receives or assists another who is, to his or her knowledge, guilty of an offence under this Act in order to enable him or her escape punishment becomes an accessory after the fact to the offence of torture.”

(b) “A person who is or becomes an accessory after the fact to the offence of torture commits an offence and is liable on conviction to imprisonment not exceeding seven years or a fine not exceeding 168 currency points or both.”

My considered opinion before I concede is that if you read part A, clause 9(1), you can really see that a spouse can aid and can assist the husband or the wife to escape. On this matter, we thought as a committee that we would make the spouse liable for that commission because it is really possible. I do not know whether the House would have to look at it before we dispose of this particular issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the operative words are “...to his or her knowledge.” If a man returns home after committing torture and the wife does not know, she cannot lock him out. She assists him to pack his clothes to go to another village. She does not know?  

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I even have problems with the sub-heading, “Accessory after the fact of the offence,” because this clause 9 pre-supposes that if I escape from prison and I come and ask my wife to pack for me clothes because I am going to Sudan, you are making her an accessory after the fact of my escape. I do not know where we would put the principle of competent and compellable witness because my wife may be competent, but whether she can be compelled to testify that she actually packed my clothes - I think emphasis should be on those who should stop me from escaping and not when I have escaped then you start descending on my family because your wife honestly speaking would still pack for you or your husband will still help you to get out of the country. Now, you do not give them sanctions for another seven years. I do not feel very comfortable with that.

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You concede to the Attorney-General’s proposal? 

MS BAKO: I have an issue with that explanation because if my husband has been convicted and has been in prison and he escapes from prison and then he has asked me to pack his clothes, I should be fair enough to justify that I actually packed his clothes, because unless he was legally released from prison, he is still a convicted person. So, why wouldn’t I help to be a witness in that regard? I find it disturbing? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should take into account the timeframe. Part III of this Bill reads, “Other parties to the offence of torture.” If hon. Otto has been in prison for some time or he escapes and then the wife packs some clothes for him, I do not think she is an accessory to torture because you have served part of your sentence, and you are already convicted. This thing relates to that time of the commission of the offence. If you have gone through the process – 
 
MR ODONGA-OTTO: Just for the record. Madam Chairperson, I would appreciate your guidance because the way this provision is drafted is like, even before I reach prison, there is someone to assist me to escape. It does not pre-suppose that I was already in prison. So, if that is the spirit, then I would comfortably agree with the Attorney-General’s proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Because you see, you could commit an offence and then for three days she is hiding you in the house. When the Police comes she says, “I do not know where that man is.” But you are in the house. The husband could also be hiding hon. Nambooze for three days and each time the Police comes he says, “The teacher has gone to work.” (Laughter)

MS KAMATEEKA: I am a member of the committee but allow me to say this, that also after the man has committed the offence, for example, the wife could wash his clothes to disguise that the offence was not committed. Supposing he committed murder and he comes home and the wife washes the clothes and hides the fact. That way she has aided the offence but – (Interjections)– but at least the section in the Penal Code gives protection to the wife in those cases where she may be forced by the husband to do it. That is why it should be better than the one which is here.

MRS OSEGGE: Thank you so much Madam Chairperson. My problem is how to verify and how to prove that this other partner was in the know. The example hon. Kamateeka has just given, maybe he was involved in an accident or he was saving a victim in an accident and he stained his clothes with blood, and that is the story he tells you. The offence has already been committed. He comes to me, his wife, and says, “I was helping some people who had an accident. Please wash my clothes.” I wash those clothes and then you come and accuse me for having been an accomplice. I think it is going to be difficult for us to prove whether this person was in the know or not and it is going to be a complicated situation.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but it is a question of evidence. He who alleges will have to prove.  

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, I conceded to the proposal of the Attorney-General which is contained in the Penal Code. One, it is in the Penal Code and it has been tested, but also, the consideration could be social because the alternative would be that as soon as the spouse sees you with blood he or she runs to Police and reports that the husband or wife -(Laughter)- so, maybe that is why it has been entrenched in the Penal Code to the extent that it would – because if you have to run up and down informing the other people that your spouse came back and escaped from prison, it could cause a breakage of marriage. So, for those considerations, I think we should go on with the proposal of the Attorney-General because the provision is already catered for under the Penal Code. It would almost cause a conflict.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you differing, hon. Nankabirwa?

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are talking about torture. Torture is mostly committed by men -(Interjections)- I said, “Mostly.” The honourable members who are men, might be afraid of my statement, but I am saying torture is mostly committed by men.  Even women do, but the degree differs. It is mostly committed by men. I want you to assume a woman and I want the honourable members to know how much powers you have given to your wives back home to take caution when you are back home on a certain mission or a long working day. There is a man who comes back and he tells the wife, “Can you please pack my clothes; I have a trip”. This woman packs the clothes not aware that this man has committed an offence or a crime and the issue is the degree and how would you verify that this woman was innocent. By the time it is proved that she was innocent, the whole family is in disarray and she has suffered most. I would think this section would largely affect women. I, therefore, would like to agree with the proposal of the Attorney-General that perhaps it will make a better meaning.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I want to believe that this will not be implemented in the blue. I want to imagine there are institutions that are technical enough in investigating. By the time you bring in other parties, there must be some clues, and even if the clues may not have been there and they have assumed; there must be a process of verifying whether they were involved or whether they had an idea. Therefore, these other fears should be covered by the process of investigation and verification. I would only appeal that when it is put into force, people remain professional.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the Attorney-General

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR BAKA MUGABI: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 10 in the introductory provision by substituting the entire clause with the following: “A superior officer is liable for any act or omission of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and punishment by a subordinate under his or her effective authority and control as a result of his or her failure to exercise control over such a subordinate where...” Justification for clarity.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I have noticed that not only in this provision but in others in this Bill, there tends to be a paradigm shift on matters of criminal liability. To some of us who have intensely studied some of these principles and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is doing the same now, in criminal liability you must prove two important ingredients; mens rea and actus reus. In other words, criminal liability is personal. 

I have heard you here debating effectively that criminal liability is personal. The moment you overstretch criminal liability to superiors; then you are going into civil liability, vicarious liability and the rest. Therefore, I am uncomfortable with the entire provision, actually, to say the least. I am entirely uncomfortable with clause 10. 

I may be inclined to accept a position where it can be proved that the subordinate officer acted on the orders of a superior person and there is evidence to that effect. There I would be inclined to accept, but when you see the phraseology of the current 10, whether the superior knew or consciously disregarded information, which clearly indicated and so forth, then you are entering into another drab other than criminal responsibility. I do not know what the mover of the Motion or the Bill says on my thinking, but I am uncomfortable with that provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chair, you know you are introducing that principle of vicarious liability in criminal law. I want to give you an example. We are here with the Sergeant-at-Arms. He is here in the Chamber, but he has got his team outside there. Supposing as we are sitting here, one of those small people is torturing somebody outside. The Sergeant is here carefully doing his work then you say, “You are the superior, you must answer”. That is what you are saying. Why don’t you leave the provision as you had originally?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chair, if clause 3, which we had just passed, if we could get back to it-

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are on No.10.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, the same principle the Attorney-General is raising, we had already passed it where they said, “The following shall not be a defence to a charge of torture” and under (d) they say, “An order from superior officer”. That is clause 3(d).  So, you cannot raise a defence if I am charged. So, in clause 3 we are saying you cannot put it as a defence that I, Odonga Otto, was ordered by my boss, the Speaker. 

We have prohibited that which means if I am charged for torture, it is personal. So, in other words, we would be contradicting what we have already passed under clause 3. 

In the circumstances, I would agree with the Attorney-General. Rather than deleting it, we should even state that for the avoidance of doubt, the person who commits an act of torture carries individual responsibility so that you do not say, I was deployed here by the Sergeant-at-Arms when you are busy torturing people. So, we would just abandon the committee position all of a sudden and we make people take individual responsibility for the actions they do.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable Members, if you were listening to the report yesterday, one of the things the report said was that in many instances, there are people who say that, “We had orders from above”. That is why we did a, b, c. You know, if you remove this, it means “above” can order safely and nothing happens.

MRS BAKIREKE: Madam Chairperson, I do propose that we retain this clause as it was provided for under the Bill, because under the Bill, it is qualified and it shows circumstances where the superior can be held liable under a, b and c.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t you retain the original proposal?

MR BAKA MUGABI: If the original is acceptable, I think we would maintain the original.

MR BABA: Madam Chair, I am here as a paralegal. First of all, I would be very comfortable if the provisions of clause 10 are assumed under clause 8; I think that is the intention there.

Secondly, I would not have any objection to a superior officer being liable, but not for torture by acts of his subordinate. He can be liable under any other laws or under clause 8, for example. He can be liable under provisions of clause 8, but he should not be liable for torture; for not exercising authority over his subordinates. 

So, like the Attorney-General, I am not comfortable with clause 10 because we will have problems with our DPCs, Regional Police Commanders and so forth, who are in charge of hundreds of Police officers below them –(Interjections)– he should be liable for another offence, but not torture.

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, the reason why we must maintain clause 10 is because under the same Bill, we have put it as an obligation for anyone – if you know that there is an act of torture taking place and you do not report it, you will be liable under the same Bill. So, it goes without saying that even the superior officers who know of cases of torture by their subordinates and they do not report should be held liable.   

MR ACHIA:  Madam Chair, I have seen a story of disarmament in Karamoja. For example, the lowest unit, is a detach, which is often 30 or 40 kilometres away from the battalion where the battalion commander is. Now, from the battalion to the brigade may be about 70 kilometres. 

The immediate supervising officer of the detach is a major at the battalion. He sends them there with orders to do the right thing. And if they commit acts of torture while 40 or 50 kilometres away, under what circumstances can he be held personally liable for the torture done by an errant officer who was 30 or 40 kilometres away?

MR JAMES OKOT: I want to give the honourable member some information. Whenever there is a detach, there is a commander. For every 11 Army officers or section, there is a commander. That means you will have full authority to command for the torture to take place. 

For me, I agree with the original Bill; let it remain as it is. Let the superior take full responsibility to restrain their subordinates.

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, the danger we have is that Members do not have a copy of the Bill. Let me go through clause 10 for you; it goes as follows: “A superior officer is liable for any act of torture committed by a subordinate under his or her authority and control where, 

a)	The superior knew or consciously disregarded information which clearly indicated that the subordinate was committing or about to commit an act of torture. 

b)	That that the acts committed by the subordinate concerned activities that were within the responsibility and control of the superior.

c)	The superior failed to promptly investigate, and diligently pursue administrative and disciplinary measures to prevent re-occurrence, and cooperate with the judicial authorities to prosecute the offence”.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, the submission is good, but we are talking about criminal liability. For example, if you look in the Constitution and see under what circumstances you could be punished, first, that offence must be certain; it must not be retrospective, and so, many other ingredients of an offence must actually come to reality. 

If this knowing - consciously believing applied to the offence committed by the same person, then I would agree; but we are talking about an offence committed by another person –(Interjections)– you listen to me, hon. Bihande; let me finish my submission; I am about to finish.

We are applying circumstances of commission of an offence of a subordinate to a superior. So, my view is that clause 8 is sufficient because it talks about the orders – if it is an order – that to me is sufficient. But you are now going to bring in: “He consciously knew”. Since it is no offence, it must be certain. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, I need one clarification from the Attorney-General. I have a political assistant who sits in my office in Kanungu. If he calls me and says, “There are young men here who are disturbing me” and I say, “Beat them up”. If he injures them and there is evidence that I have told him to beat them up and he tortures them, as his superior, shouldn’t I be liable for contributing to the torture of those young people? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable Attorney-General, I want to remind you of the memorandum of this Bill. You or your predecessor must have acceded to all these human rights instruments and this is where the principles are coming from. These are your treaties; what this Bill is seeking to do is to bring it into domestic law. You are bound and these are your treaties. 

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Thank you Madam Chairperson. Honourable colleagues, when you look at clause 8, it is clear. The only problem is with “B” where our chairperson did point out the example of our Seargent-At-Arms’ hand being here and his officers out there committee torture. Remember, they are still under his control. So, when you consider “B” you find it very problematic. It will actually render officers like our Seargent-At-Arms who is here liable for acts out there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I reminded you that there were reasons why these conventions were enacted by the United Nations; torture had not been captured.

MR BWAMBALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want the Attorney- General to make some clarification. Charles Taylor is today receiving his sentence in the International Court of Justice. 
One of the crimes that he committed was that the people under his command raped women. Do you think Taylor raped a woman himself? [HON. MEMBERS: “That was torture.”]- That was torture –(Interjections)- neither did he witness the rape but he has been sentenced and we are following those international conventions. He has been imprisoned under an international convention because people serving under him committed those crimes of torture and he is going to serve the sentence.

MR RUHINDI: I would like to re-inform and to emphasise the point that is being raised by my honourable colleague, hon. Bihande. You see, under international conventions, you have –(Interjections)- it is okay and we have ratified many - legal jurisdictions or systems differ. We have the Common Law -[MR WADRI: “Clarification.”]- let me first finish please before you clarify. You cannot actually seek clarification before I even say a tenth of what I am going to say. How can you seek clarification? [MR WADRI: “It is part of the subject matter.”]

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Wadri?

MR WADRI: I thank you very much. I wish to thank the peoples’ representative of Nakawa for accepting this clarification that I want to seek from him.

When you ratify a treaty as a country, you ratify it wholly and not in parts. You do not come up to say that for this particular provision, I accept, but for this one, I do not. You either ratify it or you don’t. Once you have ratified an international treaty as a country, you are expected to come up with municipal laws to domesticate it. 

So, how then will we as a country operationalise and implement this international treaty to which Uganda is a signatory if we do not make provisions in our own domestic laws, which are in consonance with the contents of the treaty? That is the clarification I want you to give me before you go ahead to talk about the different judicial systems. I thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Hon. Kassaino Wadri, I respect your views even on that. I want to inform you that when you sign a treaty or a convention, you ratify and domesticate it. You cannot call this one domestication. This is a law to operationalise a ratified convention. Now, when you ratify, you ratify the entire treaty. Take an example of the ICC Statue. We ratified that statute in 2002. In 2010, I was on the Floor here having a law to domesticate it; a law to enable its implementation within the circumstances and legal framework of our own country. Therefore, when you are having a law like this one, based on a treaty or convention, you have actually acceded to a treaty; you have ratified it and then you – actually, this is for purposes of its enforcement within your own legal jurisdictions or constitution and so forth. 

So, all that we are saying is that under our criminal jurisdiction, for instance, hon. Bihande, you very well know that in civil law countries, a person is guilty until proven innocent. Here it is the reverse. Are you going to say that here, for instance, if there is a provision which is a universal provision under the United Nations, we can import it wholesale; that even here in Uganda, a person should be innocent until proven guilty.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Attorney-General, if there were areas that the Government of Uganda did not agree with, you enter reservation and that is the practice under international law. Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 11 do stand part of the Bill – the chairperson?

MR BAKA: The committee proposes that we delete sub-clause 3 and the justification is that it is catered for in other laws of the land.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Pardon?

MR BAKA: Sub-clause 3 of clause 11 should be deleted because -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why?

MR BAKA: It is catered for in other laws of the land.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Pardon?

MR BAKA: The clause is that if a person arrested and detained under sub-section (ii) is not a citizen of Uganda, then the person shall be assisted in communicating as soon as legally possible with the nearest appropriate representative of the State of which he or she is a national or if the person is a stateless person, with the representative of the State where the person ordinarily resides and this is already provided for in our laws.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What harm does it do if it remains here? Supposing you get a Congolese who cannot speak Lusoga?

MR BAKA: There is no harm leaving it there, but we just thought that if it is already catered for –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Nalubega.

MS NALUBEGA: My concern on clause 3(xi) – well, I would not mind if it is deleted, but if it is going to be retained, then it should not only cater for foreign nationals, but also Ugandans because there are circumstances where a Ugandan is arrested and has no contact with the family. So, if we only do it for those who are not from Uganda, then it will be limited in a way that the Ugandan will not be assisted to contact his family. If it is retained, it should cater for both.

MR BAKA: As I said, this is already provided for, but if it is the wish of the House that we leave it here, there is no problem. It is already catered for.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What about the issue raised by hon. Nalubega?

MR BAKA: The one of including Ugandans? Madam Chairperson, I did not understand it very well and she may, therefore, wish to clarify it further.

MS NALUBEGA: The way clause 3 is stated refers to a person who is arrested and detained, but not a citizen of Uganda – I am asking and wondering what happens to a Ugandan who is arrested and detained and has no contact with the family? He needs to contact the family - why are we segregating this Ugandan? They should all have the same right and treatment. So, I am saying that, “any person arrested and detained -” – so it can include a Ugandan, Congolese, Sudanese or whatever.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now honourable Chair, the title of Part IV is confusing me. Part IV says that use of information obtained by torture – then you have got the right to complain - I do not know if this is the right heading. Part IV of the Bill – they are not coming together.

MR BAKA: Part IV of the Bill – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: On page 10.

MR BAKA: The use of information obtained by torture – we are prohibiting the use of that information in Part IV starting from clause 11. What is the problem there, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I cannot relate the heading to the clauses and maybe you can think about it. Are you agreeable to hon. Nalubega’s proposal?

MR BAKA: It is acceptable, but it will need re-drafting the entire clause. 

MR MWIRU: No. I think the question that the Chairperson is asking is that when you go to clause 14, hon. Baka Mugabi, I think there is a problem. I think on part IV, the heading seems to have come immediately after or maybe before clause 14 because clause 14 relates to the subject matter, but otherwise it is not proper where it is. 

MR BAKA: Yes, we move it just before clause 14. It is understandable; that will just be re-alignment of the head notes of the sections. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, the heading of part IV should move to just before clause 14? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, we have a proposal from the committee that we delete the entire clause and the justification is that the provision is already catered for under section 42 of the Magistrates’ Courts Act Cap. 16 of the Laws of Uganda, and section 10 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you are assuming that everybody will have the Magistrates’ Court Act, they will have the other one and the others and they will start looking at them. So, how do I proceed? I thought you had simplified life for people. To take a victim on a fishing expedition – you are assuming everybody is a lawyer or everybody has the law.

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, there is absolutely no problem with retaining these provisions because we did not have any problems with them. We just thought that they are provided for, but since we are creating a one-stop centre, I am obliged, Madam Chairperson. We will leave it as it is. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR BAKA MUGABI: Madam Chairperson, on clause 16, the committee proposes that immediately after sub-clause 1(a), insert a new paragraph reading as follows: “(b) transfer, detain or order the transfer or detention of a prisoner or detainee to a non-gazetted place of detention.” The justification is to reflect and uphold the constitutional guarantee in Article 23(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and (b) in paragraph (1)(a) by deleting the word “or” which is the last one such that it is not either or and each sub-clause stands on its own. The justification is for clarity.

c) By re-numbering the paragraphs. 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the new insertion under the new “(b) transfer detain or order the transfer or detention of a prisoner or a detainee to a non-gazetted place of detention.” I just want to ask the chairman; What if the prisoner or the detainee is actually being transferred for his own safety away from other suspects? -(Laughter)- No, supposing there were other hostile groups detained in those non-gazetted places and you want to transfer him to that place. How safe can that person be? I am just asking. We need to look at all the possibilities. You could be transferring such a person for his own safety. 

MR OKUPA: Suppose that person is also transferred for further torture? We have examples and I am a living example of that case, where I was transferred to another destination in 1988 for further torture. The honourable member here from Mukono is a living example, and there are many even on that side. So, what will happen?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, my reference was for safety and not for more torture. I did not have that in mind.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But if you read the head note, “No transfer of persons where a likelihood of torture exists” –

MR BAKA: And Madam Chairperson, talking about this particular topic, some of us have lost our relatives in places that are not gazetted and they are not few. They are very many. So, even our emotions get invoked if you attempt to - but what is wrong with gazetting areas which are safe because the minister seems to say that for safety, they have to be taken to areas where there is a likelihood of torture because that is the head note here. The head note is “No transfer of persons where likelihood of torture exists” that is the only problem. If you can guarantee that they will be transferred to gazetted areas where there is no likelihood of torture, then that wouldn’t be a problem. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, just for drafting purposes because the draft says: “A person shall not…” and then it brings (a) and (b) and it brings the reason at the end, having grounds to believe the prisoner or the detainee is likely to be tortured. Probably, we should then say, “A person, having grounds to believe the prisoner or the detainee is likely to be tortured, shall not…” then we retain that (a) and (b) because if you read 1(a) alone, “a person shall not release or transfer…” suppose he does it? I think what we are trying to protect ourselves from is taking that person to a ground where he can be tortured. So, I was thinking that for better drafting, that would stay, “A person shall not, where there are reasonable grounds to believe that a prisoner or detainee is likely to be tortured, release…” then we retain (a) and (b).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any objection?

MR BAKA: No objection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR BAKA: I dropped the amendment because it was a repetition in my report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR BAKA: Clause 18 is one of those clauses that are already catered for. So, there is no amendment. We had proposed that we delete the entire clause because the bail issue is already addressed under section 75 of the Magistrates Court Act and so, let us leave it as it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.  
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose an amendment of clause 20 after considering that clause 8 on the other parties to torture; a person who fails to report is not one of them. In other words, it is not an offence for a person to fail or refuse to report torture. And for that reason, I beg that I introduce it in clause 20 or else I will call for a re-committal of clause 8.

In that regard, I suggest that we include, in clause 20, which then becomes clause 21(1) and (2) to read that, “Where a person, having knowledge that an incident of torture has taken place, but deliberately refuses to report torture, commits an offence and should he held liable for that. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, say that again.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chair, what I am saying is that in clause 8, the Bill lists the other parties to the offence and those who fail to report torture are not part of that list. So, I am seeking to make failure or refusal to report torture, an offence. And I want to say that in clause 20, where the Bill makes it a duty for someone to report torture - we introduce clause 21 to read as follows –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t that catered for under clause 9 on accessory after the fact?

MR LUBOGO: I don’t see it being catered for under clause 9; it is not well brought out. Anyway, if it is already catered for, that is fine.

THE CHAIRPERSON: When you look at clause 9(2), it reads: “A person who is or becomes an accessory after the fact to the offence of torture, commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to imprisonment.”

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, I am wondering whether a person who fails to report a torture incident can be called an accessory to that fact. If not, then we need to bring that out clearly in this law. Thank you.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I think hon. Kenneth Lubogo’s concern is very serious. Other than just making it a duty for someone to report torture – for example, if someone hears a person screaming in some room – this provision says that you only have a duty to report such torture. But hon. Kenneth Lubogo is saying that we should not leave this at only a point of someone having a duty; we should make it an offence for anybody who hears or sees a person being tortured and they just go on with their business like the other priest in the parable of the Good Samaritan. What he is saying is that something must be done to such a person. 
I actually agree with him because such an act cannot fall under accessories because such a person may not have participated in the torture. It only takes care of those who may get to know of the torture acts but decide to keep quiet. Yes, let us make it an offence but with a light penalty. It can be a one-month imprisonment or some fine. Otherwise, you cannot get to know of someone being tortured and just leave it at that. That is not being patriotic.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but you need to qualify it. For instance, you recall a man called Kooky who killed his wife. Before the killing, he used to beat her with the neighbours hearing the beatings – should such people be held liable because they kept quiet?

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chair, I would like us to, for instance, consider a situation where I am being tortured and somebody comes around, witnesses that torture, but decides to keep quiet. But later when I report the incident and try to say that so and so witnessed this incident, but did nothing about it, such a person should be held responsible for concealing information about an act of torture that could otherwise lead to the death of another person.

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Chairperson, from your observation, in the UK and other developed countries, when a neighbour hears, even just the child crying, they call Police. So, even if a neighbour fights or tortures his wife – like those neighbours to Mr Kooky should have been arrested – maybe that will help instill discipline in people to start caring for their neighbours. So, I think we should accept this amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, if you live near a safe house and you keep quiet, we catch you.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I think that will be overstretching the purpose of this law, which we all support. I am saying this because – I think as you had guided – the circumstances that were being described should maybe fall under clause 9. But to impose a responsibility that, for example, when you are by-passing people who are fighting – and you may not even know what is happening – I think that will be overstretching –(Interjections)– yes, because we are talking about torture – the purpose and principle of this Bill.

MR LUGOLOBI: Madam Chair, there is the issue of capacity to report. I may not have the capacity to report because there are situations where the Police or any other relevant authority might be located so far away from the point of torture. I might not have the capacity to move to such places at night. So, what do I do under such circumstances? Should I be held liable?

MR  AYO: Thank you, Madam Chair. So, many people have suffered torture but with people who get to know about it keeping quiet yet also they may not be having the capacity to raise it. That is why it is good for a person who is in the know to raise it. For example, let us look at Mr Kooky’s case. If the neigbhours had alerted the Police or the local authorities about the numerous cries in that house, efforts to save the lady’s life would have been made. Even during the colonial times, no person would keep quiet when they heard a person make noise. A person needs to alert the rest of the people to help rescue such a person. We need to maintain this amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but you know that the duty to report is here – I have still not got hon. Kenneth Lubogo’s proposal because clause 20 talks about the duty to report.

MS KABUULE: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I would like to agree to what hon. Stephen Tashobya has said. If we had taken this as it is – it is a responsibility, yes, but when we put it into law, we will be overstretching it. How will someone prove it in court that I heard somebody being tortured, but failed to report? This is going to be very difficult to prove in court.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I really want to think that this will help to have community policing. I am saying this because where we have reached in this country, it is very clear that people are so individualistic. That is why you see domestic violence being committed, but with nobody caring. By the time a person dies in a home after being beaten, a neighbour must have heard something. I don’t think that this Bill proposes that even a passerby – because I might leave Kyaliwajala for Kampala, but along the way, I meet a man beating his wife in Kiira. You cannot hold me accountable for failing to report that. But a neighbour has to be responsible.

Also, I want to believe that at every level of society, there are local centres of leadership. If you access the lowest level of administration and report such a matter to say, the LC I Chairman – I think that will help us curb crimes and other things that are happening. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is covered under clause 20. Maybe you need to draft your amendment so that I can look at it. Could you kindly put it in writing?

MR SSEWUNGU: Actually, I want to give live examples. Recently, on Agataliko Nfuufu, a news programme on Bukedde Television, there was a footage of a woman who had been undressed in a bar, but with the bar attendant watching. When the Police came, the one who had brought the woman and the one who beat her had ran away. So, Police picked the bar attendant and those who were around because they witnessed the incident. 

Another example; along Masaka Road, what happened to Kashooma when he killed his eight children? Didn’t the children scream? What did the neighbours do? So, this is very important, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Lubogo, can you read your amendment again. I want to capture it so that I see how different it is from the one in clause 20.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Under the circumstances that we have been going through as a nation, I think it is very important that we have this included in our law. We have had children who have been tortured – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read it.

MR LUBOGO: I move that the amendment should read: “Any person who deliberately refuses to report an incident of torture commits an offence of concealment of torture and is liable…” we now transplant what comes from clause 8, “Imprisonment not exceeding seven years or a fine not exceeding 150 currency points.” 

MR BIRAARO: Thank you. Hon. Lubogo’s idea and objective is very right. I have a problem in putting a liability upon a person who has failed to report. Take for example a housewife who is maybe torturing an adopted child or a step-child, and in the same house there is a housemaid who is employed by the same woman. The housemaid fails to report. You are now putting a heavy punishment on the person who fails to report out of fear. The majority of cases are like this. For example, these people we hear killing children; or even in the house, the spouses may be torturing each other and there is a housemaid. So, how does the housemaid come to report? That is why I have a problem with that proposed amendment. For someone who is an accomplice, that is okay, but to go to a person who probably does not understand what was going on is not okay.

Secondly, there are people who may be shouting over and over again. When you ask them what was happening the other day, they say it was their game, and someone might not be able to understand what was going on. 

I have a concern and a limitation to apportioning liability against persons who might have heard, but not properly interpreted or who could not have accessibility to reporting the incident.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am trying to understand what hon. Lubogo is saying. Supposing we have the Central Police Station and torture takes place there regularly and the junior Police officers come to clean everyday and find blood; they find teeth; they find broken nails; and they keep quiet; and this goes on. I think that is what he is trying to say. You know it is happening but you just come and clean and go away.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Chairperson, I am buying the proposal and I want to second the amendment, but I want to add the issue of capacity; someone having the capacity to report so that it clears the issue he is talking about.

A child in the house or a maid, like he was stating, might not have the capacity to pin the boss down, and so the issue will be covered. But a mature person like me – I see my neighbour punching either the husband or the wife, and I just say it is their internal matter, I should be made liable.

We want to create a society which caters for everyone. A society that is responsible. During the time when some of us were growing up, the bringing up of a child was not my parent’s affair only. If our neighbours found me misbehaving, they had the right to punish me. That is how some of us grew up, but currently, the right to punish is now restricted to the parents. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I propose. “Any person having the capacity to deliberately refuses to report an offence of torture…” etc. Wouldn’t that capture what you want?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you. I think if we do it that way then people will use capacity as an excuse. We should leave it open and the judges will determine who has capacity and who doesn’t without putting it down that the people should have had capacity to report. I thank you.
 
MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The issue of forcing somebody or arresting somebody because of somebody’s fault is not fair. For example, I have about five neighbours in my area. If my husband is beating me and my neighbours have refused to report, are you going to arrest all of them and you punish them. That cannot work. 

If there is a crime committed, Police have the capacity to call anybody they want to give evidence. So, I think we should not arrest such people. They can be invited to give evidence, but not to be punished for somebody’s behaviour. Thank you very much.

MR RUHINDI: I now confer upon hon. Baba Diri a degree of Bachelor of Laws. (Laughter) I think she has put it smartly. We are not going to get witnesses in these cases. We are going to intimidate them. How else can you be a witness when you are actually a potential suspect?

The whole matter really goes to section 8. We should deal with accomplices to the commission of the crime and not those ones who would ordinarily know of a particular matter because those are potential witnesses. Section 8 is sufficient, Madam Chairperson. 

Look at section 8, “A person who whether directly or indirectly procures, aids or abets, finances, solicits, incites, recommends, encourages” your concealment can even come in there, “orders, harbours” –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: With all due respect to the Attorney-General, I just want him to help me. I remember when we passed the Anti-Terrorism Bill, there was something similar to what we are discussing now about people knowingly having an idea about the people who are planning the terrorist activities and keeping quiet. How did we handle it? I think if we borrow from that, it will be able to help us on this matter. Should we move it to the level where it says, are you going to arrest all the neighbours in Nakawa because these guys who were planning terrorist activities were from Nakawa and the people of Nakawa were keeping quiet? How did we handle it? I think that would help us to address this issue, which has been raised here.

MR BAKA: Madam Chair, I don’t know whether it is procedurally right. We would then re-commit clause 8 and improve it to include such -

THE CHAIRPERSON: We recommit at the Third Reading.

MR BAKA: Okay.

MRS BAKIREKE: Madam Chair, the clarification I am seeking from the Attorney-General  is, we were all persuaded by the submission of hon. Baba Diri, but then why should we protect people to enable them testify without encouraging them to give information before a crime has been committed? Of what purpose would it be to give testimony about my death when you could not give information to protect my life? For that reason, I want to support the proposal of the honourable about concealment of torture so that we can encourage our communities to bring information to prevent rather than bringing information to pin criminals.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want to encourage the honourable to accept concealment to be introduced in number eight when we recommit. Would that help? Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 20 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I don’t know if the definition of torture includes those kinds of things like those done by the Lords’ Resistance Army. If a member of LRA can commit torture in the definition we have just passed now, because if the answer is to the affirmative, they are still entitled to amnesty. So, I don’t know how we can save people from getting amnesty after torturing people, and then legitimately also protect those who are in captivity and who actually need amnesty so that they come back home. Mr Chairman of the committee, I don’t know how we can strike that balance because if it passes the way it is, then probably someone in the bush would say, no, since I tortured people, there is no provision of amnesty for me. I don’t know if it does not contradict the Amnesty Act in any way.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, didn’t we have a timeframe for the application of the Amnesty Act - 24th of this month? For how long - another two years?

MR OKOT: I want to be guided. My understanding of amnesty was for the people who take arms to fight Government and then return to be a treason case; but this is torture, which could be either in the family, society or by security personnel doing it within the system - something like that. How can we relate the two then?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I would think that we have a law on amnesty called the Amnesty Act. If I am arrested this evening in Namasuba for torture, it is up to me or my lawyers to advise me whether I can apply for amnesty, which is plausible, I cannot. So, the Amnesty Act would relate directly to those kinds of people like the rebels. I would even think that clause 23 should be deleted because the amnesty law specifically provides for circumstances where amnesty should be granted. You cannot be accused of torture and then you apply for amnesty tomorrow. I don’t see it happening in the normal civilian environment we live in here.

MR BAKA: The honourable member for Agago has put it very clearly. Amnesty is for those people who have picked up arms to go and fight Government. The acts they commit there are even beyond torture; they actually kill. So, when there is amnesty granted, it means and includes everything they have been doing there. So, the provision should remain, I think.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. This is really weighing on two options of evil. When amnesty is given, the person who committed an act of torture, including killing people, comes home and stops killing or torturing people more. Now, when the avenue of stopping such activities is closed by saying no amnesty, it means we shall have no attraction for the person to come home and the likelihood for torture continues. This is basically the problem we are facing with the Lords’ Resistance Army because some of them feel that even with the existence of the amnesty law, even if they come home, they are likely to be punished.

So, Madam Chair, for the interest of preventing the continuity of torture, we should not move against the Amnesty law and this should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, is it going to operate in retrospect really?

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for the guidance, Madam Chair, but with due respect, are we going to say that the people who can torture or the last people to torture or who can torture are the Lords’ Resistance Army? What if somebody comes today, tomorrow or in the future? This law is to help prevent torture in the future. Someone who has done something bad can ask for forgiveness and then he comes home. Amnesty is about a crime, which is supposed to be punished, but you say okay, you have done wrong; you have accepted now come, we have forgiven you. This is very good and has more impact in preventing activities of torture. Thank you, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but honourable members, we have recently had a very disturbing example, where a convicted murderer was given a prerogative of mercy - Kooky; and the women of this country were complaining. So, we cannot say that because there is an Amnesty Act, we should not touch anything concerning amnesty. We are now saying that even Kooky can get amnesty.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Just one rebuttal. My concern is this; if I am a rebel in Garamba now, what is the impact of this provision on me as it is? It means the moment I come out, I can be charged with torture. So, it now serves as a demotivation for me to come out of the bush.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that is why I asked, is this law going to operate even for the past 20 years or from the day it takes effect? It is not retrospective, but will take effect from the day it becomes law.

MR RUHINDI: Article 28 -

MR ODONGA OTTO: I understand.

MR RUHINDI: You understand? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR BAKA: Madam Chairperson, we propose an amendment to clause 24 by substituting for the word “after”, the word “before” and for the words “laid before”, the words “tabled in”. That is in sub-clause (2).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read the sentence as you want it to appear.

MR BAKA: Clause 24(2): “The Minister shall, as soon as practicable, before the publication of a statutory instrument under this section cause the instrument to be tabled in Parliament for approval.” “For approval” is missing in the Bill but it should be added there.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, like I have done before, I also stand now to object to that amendment because there are certain matters – you see, Parliament delegates powers – and remember the debate we had here on creation of a committee for subsidiary legislation. It wanted all subsidiary legislation to be brought here for laying and approval. But I can tell you that there will be no work done – the bureaucracy will kill this country. As long as the instrument is laid on the Floor of the House, that is sufficient. And if any Member has any objection, that can even be formally raised; but to bring it here for approval means we are going to debate the way we are debating this Bill. And where shall we end? Are these the type of regulations to be brought to Parliament for approval? My answer is, “No.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have given the power to the minister; why do you now want to micro-manage with him?

MR BAKA:  Madam Chairperson, I concede.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, we had a nasty experience with the statute on public order management, whereby the drafting done by Government is such that substantive issues are not put in the Bill but are expounded in regulations and subsidiary legislation. And I recall that in the last Parliament, when the Minister of Internal Affairs brought a statute on public order management, there was uproar. In fact, we rejected it. I thought that the spirit of the committee was that the issue of torture is something pertinent and so the minister should not sit there and provide regulations and guidelines which are going to be extremely offensive given the sensitivity of torture. And it is not a blanket recommendation that all regulations must be approved; the committee is being specific here. As much as the committee chairperson is conceding, I thought they had a very strong view which we would support.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I think you realise that, that would mean that if it is laid here, we must debate it in order to authorise the minister to publish it. That is what it means.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, my concern is just about the time. The wording here is that “the minister shall as soon as practicable…” it is not specific. Why don’t we put a specific timeframe because with the current wording, the minister can say it was not yet practicable even after two or five years. So, let us put a timeframe, for example, “From the time of assent to this law, after six months or one year, the minister should lay the instrument on the Table.”

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, making regulations is not a one-off activity. Today you may make regulations, but tomorrow you may find that you still need other regulations. After another year, you may find that you need regulations in respect of the same Act, for its proper and effective administration. Now, if you put a timeframe, you are constraining the minister’s work.

MR OKUPA: I do not think the Attorney-General has understood me. When we give you a timeframe within which you should lay this in the House, it does not mean that you cannot amend those regulations. We are only proposing to give you a timeframe for the first regulation that you are going to lay here and I propose six months. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want you to read clause 24(1); it seems the regulations are not mandatory. It says that the Minister “may”, not “shall” make regulations. I think the presumption is that he may even actually not need the regulations. First, he must see whether it is working, then when he sees a loophole, he can then decide to make regulations. In itself, I think this is probably complete.

MR OKUPA: Then I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Title

MR BAKA: In the long title, which is on page 3, the committee proposes an amendment by inserting the words “preventing and” before the word “prohibiting”. It would, therefore, read, “An Act to give effect in accordance with Articles 24 and 44(a) of the Constitution to the respect of human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment by preventing and prohibiting any form of torture…” The justification is to put it in tandem with the short title of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.16
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.17
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Bill, 2010” and passed it with amendments to clauses 1, 4, 5, 6, 9, 11, 16 and the long title. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.18
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County, North Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (MR Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to recommit clause 17 of the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: I thought we agreed to start with clause 8. 

5.19
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Madam Speaker, I beg that this House recommits this Bill for purposes of consideration of clause 8 of the Act. I beg to move. The justification is that the Bill has left out an important component on the other parties to the offence and by recommitting it, we shall be able to include, as an offence, the concealment of information of torture. Thank you.

5.19
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker, I would also like to recommit clause 10 of the Bill. The justification is that whereas Members of this House, our constituents and many people in this country may have undergone one type of torture or another, passing this section as it was amended that a superior officer shall be liable for an act of torture committed by an officer under him directly will be overstretching the law. We may be enthusiastic, but it will be overstretching the spirit of this Bill, which is to prevent torture. Just as we agreed with hon. Baba Diri about the five neighbours, in the same spirit we should reconsider an officer who is in charge of 1,000 men and women or 500 men and women or 100 men and women, that if anyone of them commits an act of torture, the officer who is in charge of all these people is directly - 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member. This House agreed that the circumstances under which one is liable have been qualified under a, b and c. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be recommitted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (MR Freddie Ruhindi): Clause 17, Madam Speaker, is in respect of the Uganda courts in relation to the offence of torture. It says that the chief magistrates’ courts of Uganda shall have jurisdiction to try the offences described in this Act wherever the offence is committed and in relation to the circumstances under which the offence may be committed. Now, the committee made a very serious proposal, which was adopted, to the effect that, notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, all persons charged with offences under this Act shall be tried in a chief magistrate’s court.

To me that may also be considered unconstitutional because even the Constitution prescribes other modes of dispensation of justice, for instance, courts martial. And I really need to know why, because why would you - because fundamentally, this clause gives you the jurisdiction. In other words, the jurisdiction is laid out; go to the chief magistrate as a competent court of jurisdiction. Why would you actually object to a person being taken to a court martial and punished there? Why, when it is an established court? You are actually excluding its jurisdiction under this Act. 

Madam Speaker, I think that is not proper. This is why I intend to recommit that provision for debate. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Attorney-General, I have not understood your rationale.

MR RUHINDI: I am comfortable with the provision the way it stands in 17 because jurisdiction is provided for. They are telling us that this matter can be heard by a chief magistrate’s court. That does not exclude jurisdiction of a military court martial, for instance. Does it? Yes, if it is a creature of statute, honourable colleagues, why do we exclude the jurisdiction of - for instance, these people are easily dealt with by the military court martial. You know that very well -(Interjections)- if there is anything I can speak for in this country and I must be firm on this, is that really, this Government has had a firm grip on its Army more than any other Government we have ever had. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Attorney-General, why do you want to remove the soldiers from our jurisdiction? How do I have access to a court martial? Why do you want them to get out of our jurisdiction?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, as I persuade the Attorney-General to abandon his attempt to ask this House to recommit clause 17, there are two scenarios you should look at. One, your amendment by implication can mean a solider goes and tortures civilians in a market and runs away to his or her justice system in the barracks. We are not debating whether their justice system is effective or not. And in any case, your suggested recommittal would contradict clause 10, the responsibility of a superior officer. It says, “...where a superior officer fails to promptly investigate, diligently pursue administrative and disciplinary measures...” So, if superior officers fail to discipline, we have already passed that provision to discipline and pursue disciplinary measures. There is nothing that should stop the civilians from getting to the chief magistrate’s court. So, there is already a provision under 10(c) which allows a superior officer to investigate, to pursue administrative and disciplinary measures, and to prevent the re-occurrence. But in an event that it does not happen, the doors of the civilian courts should be open because I cannot be endlessly waiting for the Court Martial to Act. 
 
For example, the last time I was in the Court Martial with hon. Lukwago and hon. Sam Njuba, the lawyers ended up in the dock because those courts were not amused with the way the lawyers were arguing. They ended up together with the accused in the dock and they had no lawyers. (Laughter) So, not everyone is very comfortable with those efficient courts you have been persuading the House about. So, I persuade you to abandon that attempt to persuade to recommit.

5.27
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Baka): Madam Speaker, the provision as it is now in the Bill, the soldiers who torture fellow soldiers would have to have their cases heard in the Magistrate’s Court. So, I think soldiers who torture soldiers under the current provision as it is in 17, their cases would still come to the Magistrate’s Court because we are withdrawing the jurisdiction of torture from the Court Martial. I think what the Attorney-General is trying to do is to create a situation where the civilians can have their cases heard in the Magistrate’s Court and the soldiers have theirs in the -

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR BAKA MUGABI: If that is not acceptable then the provision has to remain as it is and this would mean that the soldiers who torture soldiers would still have to come to the civilian court.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I put the question that clause 17 be recommitted.

(Question put and negatived.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PREVENTION AND PROHIBTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010

Clause 8

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I beg to move an amendment on clause 8 by introducing (k) after (j) to read, “conceals information”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Procures, aids, abets, finances, solicits, incites, recommends, encourages, harbours, orders, renders supports or conceals.” Okay.

MS OSEGGE: Another amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You did not raise it. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.31
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.31
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has reconsidered clause 8 of the Bill entitled, “The Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Bill, 2010” and inserted (k). I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.32
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)


BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PREVENTION AND PROHIBITION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010

5.32
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Bill, 2010” be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that, “The Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Bill, 2010” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PREVENTION AND PROHIBITION OF TORTURE ACT, 2012”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I must congratulate our Ninth Parliament for the first Private Member’s Bill. Congratulations. (Applause) 

We also commend the Clerk for learning fast. (Applause)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW $150 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE UGANDA MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (USMIDP) IN SELECTED MUNICIPALITIES.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. We have just passed the important Bill from the private Member’s side, but I wish to raise my concern. We are moving in a modern world and there is modern technology. These Bills were distributed to us - I do not even remember, but it was long ago. We normally get our Order Paper everyday, and at times, we get it when we are committed in meetings, which are also important. Some of our offices are not in this building where you can easily rush and pick the Bill. They are located faraway in Bauman House. 

We are going for budgeting and we have a Ministry of ICT. Is it procedurally right for us to continue using these papers when we can get to the modern technology of having laptops or ipads where we can follow systematically? When the Order Paper is out, we follow and know what we are going to have and we come prepared. Is it procedurally correct now that we are even going for our budget? Is it possible to be put in the budget that we get those accessories? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the Clerk has been very efficient in sending information out about the Order Paper. All these Order Papers are sent everyday on the Internet –(Interjections)- they are sent every single day. I know that and also honourable members, if you read today’s Order Paper, it will show you the business to follow and I bought you a “no problem” bag where you should be putting your –(Laughter)- yes, I even gave you another from IPU that you can even roll.

MS KABASHARIRA: I appreciate that the Order Paper is even put as early as 8 O,clock. But today, we were in a meeting from 10 O’clock here in this building - actually from 9 O’clock because there are other meetings and then you go on up to 2 O’clock. Then you come and get the Order Paper here. So, it does not cost much to buy every Member of Parliament a laptop or an ipad so that even when we are in a meeting, we can know what is on the Order Paper. And at times, the Order Paper changes; if you looked at it today, by tomorrow it may have changed. 

THE SPEAKER: I think let us ask the Parliamentary Commission to think about that issue. Let us hear from Commissioner Baryomunsi.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much. We strive to facilitate Members to be able to work and we have taken note of the concern and the Commission will take appropriate action. (Laughter) 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance because as a committee, we are having a lot of difficulties because our rules are very restrictive that assurances come from ministers. So, in the circumstances, I do not know what you would advise us to do with hon. Dr Chris for the assurance he has made right now. Could you allow us to capture it and pursue him up to the end? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, you should not capture it because I have not yet budgeted for it. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, I started by saying that the Commission has been striving to facilitate Members. Actually, some of us have ipads. I bought mine personally.

Two, when it is hard for you to access a copy of the Bill, once a Bill is laid on Table, usually our library has copies. You can go to the library and get a copy of the Bill. But I was just assuring Members that the Commission will continue as usual to strive to facilitate Members. So, this matter will be handled in the Commission. 

5.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, over the years, municipalities and urban authorities have been facing insurmountable challenges in infrastructure development and, therefore, Government has agreed with the IDA to borrow $150 million to finance municipal infrastructure in 14 municipal councils in Uganda. 

This is because the rate of urbanisation in Uganda is very high; it is 5.1 compared to the population growth of 3.2. This has created a very high demand for services in our urban centres and municipal councils. And these urban centres are the centres of major economic activities such as industrial services and commerce, and these activities account for 72 percent of manufacturing output and over 60 percent of the national GDP. With this contribution, we are not able to finance them sufficiently because they only receive about 3.4 percent; that is about Shs 40 billion of the total Local Government budget of Shs 1.3 trillion. 

Therefore, Government decided that since this urbanisation is continuing, we need to address it by enhancing funding through this loan of $150 million. It will address, among others municipal infrastructure improvement, institutional support at national level, and it will also address monitoring and evaluation and project component support in order for this loan to succeed.  

We presented this loan to this Parliament and it has been discussed by the Committee on National Economy, which has evolved a report to this House. I, therefore, request for the support of Parliament to pass this resolution so that this loan can be –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, the details of this loan are going to be in the committee report. I am just giving the highlights. These are highlights and the details are going to come and we can discuss them thereafter. I beg to move. 

5.44
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Frederick Mbagadhi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to present a report from the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow $150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Uganda Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme in selected municipalities. 

The report that I am presenting today has two reports in one. That is because during the execution of our mandate, we had a Member who had different views from those of the majority Members of the committee and he was accorded the opportunity to present a minority report. So, with the report that I am presenting on this Floor, we have attached a minority report. 

On page one, we have the introduction and in it, Government proposes to borrow $150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme in 14 selected municipalities.

Methodology 

The committee held meetings and interacted with a good number of stakeholders: We interacted with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; we also interacted with the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Minister of Local Government, the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government, and the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

The committee also studied and made references to the following documents: The minister’s brief on the loan request; the project concept note on the proposed credit; and the project certificate of financial implications. 

We also had another document that we referred to from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; that was the preparatory advance letter of the request from the World Bank. 

We also have a copy of the responses to the concerns that were raised by honourable Members of Parliament and members of the committee, and we have a copy of the responses – a 12 page document with 34 issues that were raised. We also have the World Bank Mission Aide Memoire on the project. I would also want to mention to this honourable House that among the documents that we have and that will be laid on Table at an appropriate time, are the minutes that gave rise to this report that we are presenting right now.

On page 2, part three is the background. You will allow me not to read word by word in the interest of time. I will be picking out the most pertinent issues that form the gist of the matters of concern –(Interjections)- no, on that one, I requested that I will have to lay these documents at an opportune moment and they are here. (Laughter) I mentioned to this honourable House the various documents that I will have to lay on Table and among them are the minutes. 

On page 2, we have the background that says Uganda has a high rate of urban population growth which stands at 5.1 per annum while the current level of urbanisation is still low at about 12 percent. Uganda has one of the highest population growth rates standing at 3.2 percent per annum and it is projected that by the year 2035, Uganda’s population will be 68 million and 30 percent will be in urban areas, which is putting pressure on the demand for land, housing, water, health, education, jobs and municipal services as well as expected impacts on the environment.

On the last paragraph on page 2, Uganda’s population is urbanising at a fast rate and it is estimated that about 50 percent of Uganda’s total population will be living in urban areas by 2050. Urban areas are already constrained as a result of a high population that is not commensurate with the infrastructure, service provision and employment question. Nearly all the urban centres are characterised by serious urban sprawl, poverty, informality and environmental degradation. 

In the financial year of 2007/08, Government undertook the preparation of physical development plans for the 76 major urban centres including the 22 municipalities in Uganda. However, most of the urban councils do not have adequate capacity to ensure effective implementation of the development plans. This has of course resulted into uncontrolled urban sprawl, deteriorating of existing basic urban infrastructural services such as roads, drainages, street lighting, solid waste management, water and sewage facilities, mushrooming of slums and informal settlements in all urban centres, environmental degradation, creation of a large informal sector due to high levels of unemployment and underemployment, leading to urban poverty.

The investments in urban infrastructure and services have not, therefore, kept pace with the growing demographic and the growing importance of urban centres resulting in the growth of unplanned settlements, urban poverty, inadequate basic urban services and a deteriorating urban environment. 

The programme overview

The proposed Uganda Support to the Municipal Infrastructural Development Programme is to be implemented in a phased approach and this first phase of five years will have 14 participating municipalities and these will include the municipalities of: Arua, Gulu, Lira, Soroti, Tororo, Mbale, Jinja, Entebbe, Masaka, Mbarara, Kabale, Fort Portal and Hoima. Thereafter, the programme will be rolled over to the other remaining eight municipalities. 

The table below summaries the programme phases. We have the column for programme phases; we have Phase 1 running from 2012 to 2017. Then we have Phase II and of course this is a scaling-up phase that will be running from 2017 to 2022; and then we have Phase III in which we shall be looking at consolidation and deepening of this very programme, and that one is 2022 onwards. 

I want to mention to this House that this Phase III will be looking at consolidating the urban financing and management for local economic development. 

On page 6, we have the access criteria which talks of the minimum conditions and performance measures. We also have the benefits of implementing the programme. The proposed programme is intended at supplementing ongoing infrastructure development programmes in the urban centres focusing on expanding the infrastructure services in the 14 municipalities as the core starting centres of urban development. On this one, we are talking of 14 municipalities and emphasis shall be on providing resources to the municipalities to implement their 10-year structural plans. 

The programme will also contribute to an increase in urban productivity investment, delivery of urban services and value- addition on properties which will boost the tax base, especially Property Tax.

The technical assistance to be provided will enhance urban planning, training of technicians to operate and manage the infrastructural facilities that would have been built, provision of equipment necessary to manage and operationalise, and other development studies and programmes will promote a holistic approach in the improvement of the urban infrastructure in municipal councils. 

The programme will also enable municipal councils to undertake the necessary infrastructural development and improvements in their respective areas of jurisdiction based on their local needs in line with the national priorities. 

We have the programme outputs as laid down. We also have the linkages of the programme to Government strategic objectives and initiatives. The implementation of the programme is linked to the implementation of the National Land Use Policy 2007, and the Physical Planning Act of 2010. The implementation of the programme is also linked to the National Development Plan of 2010/2011 to 2014/2015.

On the last paragraph, we have the programme objectives. The long-term project objective is to transform the urban sector into well planned modern cities with better infrastructural services, competitive urban economies, affordable decent housing and a safe attractive environment through improved municipal management and delivery of urban services. 

The specific objective of this project is to enhance financing and management capacity in the 14 municipalities to address infrastructural development and capacity building gaps. 

On page 9, we have the programme component. The first component of municipal infrastructure improvement supports the improvement of the existing municipal infrastructure services as well as developing new ones based on the municipal structure plan, including the upgrading of services in slums. It will cover development and improvement of urban infrastructural services. 

The menu of infrastructure investments for municipal councils will include the following: The roads, drainage, street lighting, water and sewerage, solid waste collection and disposal facilities, local economic infrastructure like industrial parks, markets, bus stands, lorry stands, etc., and urban beautification infrastructure like public parks, play grounds and many others. 

On page 10, we have component 2 – Institutional Support to Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which is estimated to take US$ 2 million. Madam Speaker, just to take you a little back, the first component is expected to consume US$ 130 million, that is municipal infrastructure improvement, and this second component is estimated that it will take US$ 2 million. This component will strengthen the capacity of national institutions for urban development and management. The component will support the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to build its capacity in three areas:

i) 	Systems development,
ii) 	Retooling, and 
iii) 	Strengthening the capacity of the National Physical Planning Institute. 

Institutional support to participating municipalities

This is expected to consume US$ 13 million. This component will strengthen the capacity of the participating municipalities for urban management and investments, and operation and maintenance of urban infrastructural services. It will cover four areas, namely: Planning, municipal development strategy, integrated urban planning and management, physical planning and surveying; and two, finances enhanced revenue mobilisation from property tax, local service tax and hotel tax, and management including a possibility of introducing new revenue sources, taking into consideration the political economy and drivers of the policy changes within the sector.

Improvement in management of municipal services 

Project management, design, procurement, implementation and supervision of projects, operation and maintenance of infrastructure investments both existing and new ones, and environmental management, that is solid and liquid waste collection and disposal, and planting of trees. 

The fourth component will be the monitoring and evaluation of project implementation support, which is estimated to consume US$ 5 million. This component will support project implementation, including monitoring and evaluation functions for the projects encompassing report, fiduciary and other tasks, outcome and impact evaluation, project audits, qualitative inquiries to inform Government policies, project implementation support team and the design of the subsequent phase of the project. 

Madam Speaker, this one is really very important. During the first two years of phase I of this programme, all the remaining eight municipalities of Mukono, Busia, Iganga, Masindi, Ntungamo, Rukungiri, Bushenyi, Ishaka and Kasese will be prepared to put them at a level where they will be able to receive funds for infrastructural development. During phase I, the following activities will be carried out in the remaining eight municipalities: 

1.	Diagnosis studies to establish mints and capacity gaps;
2.	Preparatory studies to come up with engineering designs for investment sub-projects in the eight municipalities; 
3.	Staff development programmes to equip the staff with necessary skills for project implementation;
4.	Updating of property registration with a view of increasing on-source revenue;
5.	Harmonising of physical development plans with the five-year development plans and annual budgets;
6.	Capacity building workshops for political leaders;
7.	Creation and operationalisation of municipality development fora; and 
8.	Sensitisation of stakeholders about the Uganda support to municipal infrastructural development programmes.

Madam Speaker, I stated it clearly that this part is really very important because outright in this report, we are clearly stating that these funds are going to work on 14 municipalities, but the remaining eight will have to be prepared during the first two years of the first phase.

On page 12, we have the project financing and in table 2; we have the project assessments by component. One, municipal infrastructural improvement will consume US$ 130 million and the percentage will be 86.7; the second activity will be institutional support to Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development of amount US$ 2 million, which is 1.3 percent; the third activity will be institutional support to participating municipalities, which are 14, which will consume US$ 13 million and the percentage is 8.7; then monitoring and evaluation and project implementation support which is US$ 5 million at a percentage of 3.3, which comes to a grand total of US$ 150 million, which is 100 percent. 

On page 13, we have table 3 on the municipal infrastructural improvement indicative five-year total allocation per benefit municipality under phase I of the programme -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Can you help us because we want to do some analysis on those figures. I see two graphs superimposed on one another. We can’t easily pick. I don’t know whether it is only I having that problem because it looks like one graph is superimposed on the table and I am finding difficulty in getting the correct figures. That is on page 13, the first two-in-one graphs. Can we have a better copy? 

MR MBAGADHI: Well, this was a printing problem, but the amounts are still clear and where you get problems in identifying the actual figures, I can still read them using this very one. Surely, you can even share. But I am sorry it was a printing error. 

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow him to finish and then we can go back to the table?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, we are all interested in this, but the actual table where it shows the figures of the municipalities is the one which is corrupted and it is the heart of the entire presentation. I don’t think it is a coincidence that the page where the figures are is the one which cannot be read. We need to be helped by your office. It can’t be a coincidence. 

MR OKUPA: We have US$ 5000 for Gulu; then there is one which is superimposed there and we can only read US$ 4400. What is it?

MR MBAGADHI: For Gulu, we have –

MR OKUPA: Read the whole thing. Mr Chairman, don’t labour so much. Just ask someone to reprint for us and bring a copy here as you proceed. You can’t stress yourself. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I would like to implore colleagues that it is the lower chart which has been superimposed on the figures, but if you check keenly, I agree with hon. Okupa that the two should have been separated. But the figures are supposed to be on the upper and the lower one is the chart. But clearly, the information is still available, but we are going to try and see if we can get a copy. But it is better that we allow him present the report and at debate stage, we can correct it. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, you correct it and I think as you present, can you indicate that for Gulu it is 21; Hoima it is 20; so that it is captured on the Hansard while they correct it. Let him complete, but chairperson of the committee, ensure that we get the other copy. 

MR MBAGADHI: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I think let me start from where I had stopped. On page 14, we have the terms and conditions of the loan and implementation plan. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is the executing agency for this entire programme, on behalf of the Government of Uganda. It will, however, work closely with the Ministry of Local Government and other Government agencies in the selected 14 municipalities.

The beneficiary municipal councils will be responsible for undertaking the implementation of the infrastructure component in line with the provisions of the Local Government Act, Cap 243, while the user communities will be responsible for the continued sustainability of the project. It will be the responsibility of both the Ministry of Lands and the implementing municipalities to ensure community ownership of the project.

On page 15, we have the observations and recommendations. The committee was petitioned by the new municipalities that were of the view that this programme ought to have started with the new instead of the old municipalities that enjoy better capacities in the delivery of services than the new ones.

The committee visited a sample of some of the new municipalities of Bushenyi, Kasese and Masindi that are not catered for under the first phase of this programme, and found urgent need for infrastructure and institutional capacity development in these new municipalities.

The committee also observed that all the eight new municipalities should be brought on board during the phase two of this programme. However, in the first two years of phase I of this programme all the eight new municipalities will benefit in terms of preparing them in order to put them at a level where they will be able to receive funds for infrastructure development, by carrying out the preparatory activities as highlighted on page 11.

The committee thus recommends that though all the eight new municipalities would benefit from institutional capacity development under phase I of this programme, the Ministry of Lands should solicit for more funding to urgently support infrastructure development in all the eight municipalities.

Two, the committee observed that though a legal framework for local governments to be financed from grants, unconditional, equalisation and performance-based, local revenue projects and borrowings exist, local governments have become increasingly dependent on the central government transfers and the physical decentralisation strategy is not achieving the intended objectives of devolution. Most municipal infrastructure developments are being financed through projects due to the absence of capital market-based options based on international experiences. More so, significant challenges still remain in the physical decentralisation reform process in Uganda.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Lands expeditiously develops a comprehensive strategic investment plan that will guide the soliciting of adequate resources to support new municipalities and town councils.

The committee observed that there is a weak institutional, policy and legal framework for urban development in Uganda. Although urban development planning and management is a decentralised function, many local governments lack physical planners for preparing physical development plans and guiding developers.

The committee observed that there is lack of a national capacity to enforce compliance to plans, standards and regulations. Additionally, there is no existing national urban policy. The existing laws do not give powers to the urban councils to plan for the distribution of land in those urban areas. Such powers are vested into the district land board with not jurisdiction over the urban land affairs. This is causing a lot of tension between the town and district authorities in regard to proper allocation of land for investment.

The committee further observed that the time to prioritise planning and urban development is long overdue since there is clear evidence that more people are moving into urban areas. Resources need to be made available for planning and ensuring the efficient use of the limited land. Urban land should not be left to the market forces.

We observed that the present land tenure regime in the urban areas is one of the major obstacles to orderly urban development. Besides, given the high levels of poverty, housing also cannot be left to the market forces. There is need for direct Government intervention, especially in social housing programmes, in order to tame the uncontrolled urban sprawl and expansion of slums and informal settlements.

On that one, the committee recommends that Ministry of Lands speeds up the development of the national urban policy, which will guide the urbanisation process in Uganda. In addition, the Local Government Act should be amended to provide for the creation of urban land boards so that land allocations for investment are carried out in a planned and professional manner.

The committee observed that out of the $150 million being requested for borrowing, a total $7 million will be retained by the Ministry of Lands to be used for mainly institutional capacity development at the ministry, monitoring and evaluation of the project, implementation support and project auditing.

The committee recommends that though this amount was 4.67 percent of the funds to be borrowed and below the stipulated minimum of seven percent, the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Governments should oversee these funds to save them from misuse.

The committee further observed that there is inadequate human resources in all the beneficiary municipalities. It was observed that all the core staff are not in place. It was also observed that the issue of salary scales in line with the requirements for engineers in local governments, needs to be addressed for the effective implementation of the project.

There is need to harmonise with the level of district engineers at U1 from U2 for engineers in municipalities. The committee recommends that Ministry of Lands together with the Ministry of Local Government should quickly ensure that all beneficiary municipalities have the necessary core staff in place before the actual implementation of the project begins. In addition, Government should address the issue of salary scales in line with the requirements for engineers in local governments for effective implementation of this project.

The committee also observed that each participating municipal council will prepare a prioritised list of sub-projects from the agreed menu of investments as highlighted under component I of this project, having taken into consideration the mandate on functions and services to be provided by municipal councils and their divisions as per the provisions of the Local Government Act.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in the preparation of the prioritised list of investments, the Ministry of Lands should strongly advise municipal councils to be selective for the maximum impact of the resources that will be made available to them. Functionality of selected investments should be insured and the practice of spreading out thinly across several activities should be avoided.

Given that the first priority of the participating municipalities is rehabilitation and opening/construction of new roads, it is very important that the Ministry of Lands emphasises more of road rehabilitation in the municipalities than opening or construction of new roads. That might exhaust the allocated funds for infrastructure development unless in the circumstances where the situation becomes unavoidable.

The committee also observed that there will be physical works under component I of this project and will require land and possible re-allocation of some homes and businesses, which call for timely preparations and implementation of the resettlement action plan in the participating municipalities, and the need for a national resettlement framework. Besides, municipalities lack adequate resources and capacity to meet the costs that could occur in relation to land acquisition and compensation for property that will be affected. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the strategies for timely and prompt land compensation, re-allocations of utilities, people on the sections of the areas that might be affected by the infrastructure development in municipalities, be handled swiftly in order to pre-empt any contractor claims for costs and time, due to lack of complete access to the sites. 

The committee observed that the local governments are not properly guided in the planning process of the project. In addition, there was limited awareness about this programme among all stakeholders in the beneficiary municipalities. 

On this observation, Madam Speaker, the committee recommends the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to guide and regularly monitor the urban authorities in the planning process of projects to ensure timely implementation and efficient allocation of resources to the selected prioritised projects. 

In addition, the ministry must ensure that extensive public awareness of the project is undertaken, especially with all stakeholders in the municipalities to avail more information and guidance on how the project funds will be utilised so that they are able to participate in guiding the selection of priority projects that will be funded. 

Lastly, the committee also observed that the financial impact of the project on Government spending for urban local governments will be felt mainly in terms of additional resources for maintenance of upgraded infrastructure facilities and repairs, and replacement of equipment in the municipalities. For example, an average municipality receives about Shs 700 million per year for road maintenance. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should scale-up its budget for financing maintenance of infrastructure in urban local governments if the project benefits are to be sustained beyond the project life span. 

In the long-term as well, the municipalities too should improve on their strategies of enhancing their own source revenue mobilisation.

In conclusion, over the years, municipalities and urban authorities are facing insurmountable challenges in infrastructure development. Besides, urban centres have not implemented physical development plans which were prepared in 2008. 

The government has developed this programme to support municipal infrastructural development, which is intended to support sustainable, integrated and coordinated municipal infrastructural development, thus, to facilitate effective and efficient service delivery in the 14 selected municipalities in Uganda. 

This programme will strengthen and consolidate linkages of initiatives in the urban and local government sectors that have been ongoing since the 1990s. 

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government to borrow an amount of US$ 150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing support to the Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme in 14 selected municipalities. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this part of the report is signed by 17 out of 32 Members, but there is a minority report. Let me invite hon. Nambooze to present it - I understand that hon. Ssemujju has delegated to her.

6.20
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for hon. Ssemujju Nganda, who wrote this minority report. I wish to read his statement.

He said, before we approve the US$ 150 million municipal loan, we should consider the following: The government is seeking parliamentary approval to borrow US$ 150 million to improve infrastructure in 14 municipalities. This amount translates into about Ugshs 360 billion. 

The line ministry, that is, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is the executing agency for this entire programme. I submit that this ministry with its current leadership and staffing is incapable of executing such a huge responsibility. 

On Tuesday, May 10 2005, this Parliament authorised Government to borrow US$ 66.4 million to finance construction of regional land offices and construction of an industrial business park at Namanve. This ministry executed the regional land offices construction, renovation, modernisation project, which cost us US$ 23.8 million. 

The industrial park at Namanve was supposed to have been constructed by the Private Sector Foundation. When the full story of Namanve Industrial Park is finally told, this House will be awed. 

The Committee on Infrastructure is investigating this whole project, and without prejudicing its findings, I want to report that it is messy. The regional land offices have cracked before occupation; furniture has not been delivered and it has not been handed over to the users three years after completion. Never mind the shape they are in. Some of the contractors even abandoned the site before handing over. 

Under this project, the ministry purchased 19 pick-ups meant for regional land offices, but simply abandoned them at Entebbe offices to rot. To date, they have never been delivered to the regional offices. 

Instead of giving it more money to waste, Parliament should order for an inquiry into the operations of this ministry. I have learnt that for several months, this ministry has had no land title cover, which means they have not concluded any land transaction. Let us sort out the ministry before giving it more funds.

Main objective of the loan

The main objective of this loan is to expand infrastructure in the selected municipalities to cater for the high rate of population growth, which stands at 5.1 percent. We are told by 2035, our population will be 58 million and about 20 million will be living in urban areas. 

In all the areas where we went, which included Soroti, Tororo, Jinja and Mbale, this money is not even able to restore one or two municipalities to their original colonial status, when their population was still small. 

In fact, in Soroti, Mbale and Tororo, the only paved roads had been constructed around the 1960s. The buildings, although now dilapidated, had been planned. The new structures constructed thereafter don’t seem to follow any pattern. They are just scattered there. We don’t have any approved physical and urban policy. We are just erecting structures as though they are crops to be harvested at the end of a given season. Besides, some of the municipalities selected to benefit from this loan are not areas of high population growth; that is, Moroto.

Jinja has a population of about 300,000 while Moroto has a population of less than 20,000. Mbale has a population of 200,000. If Government is to be believed, the loan should go to towns with a high population growth rate which has already created a crisis. If you want to deal with the fastest growing urban population, you don’t go to Moroto.

Municipalities need budget allocation not loans. The government rightly points out that urban areas are centres for major economic activities such as industry, services and commerce. These activities account for about 72 percent of the manufacturing output and over 60 percent of the national GDP.

Whereas the urban sector contributes 60 percent of GDP, it receives only 3.4 percent of the total local government budget, which is Shs 40 billion. The total budget is Shs 1.3 trillion. 

First it was a mistake to place urban centres under the Ministry of Local Government when there is a Ministry of Urban Planning. But the question we must ask is, “Why do we starve major areas of production well-knowing their multiplier effect? Why should you allocate Shs 50 billion plus Shs 92 billion to a residence of a president and you give 40 billion to urban centres?”

This is a budgeting problem and not lack of funds. Jinja, for example, is allocated less than Shs 10 billion in the budget, which is the reason its road network has broken down, yet traffic has increased. Instead of borrowing, we must increase the allocation to municipalities.

Creation of unnecessary project secretariat

The Ministry of Lands plans to create a secretariat to oversee this project. This secretariat will consume about Shs 17 billion. Mind you, this is a five-year project. What this means is that if Jinja is allocated Shs 20 billion, it will receive Shs 4 billion every year. This is the money Jinja will use to improve the infrastructure to cater for unanticipated high population growth. Even if the loan was to be approved, this secretariat should be rejected summarily.

Do you really need a secretariat to merely send Ugshs 4 billion to Jinja every year? If we must borrow money, it should go to the most competitive municipalities, including Mukono. (Laughter)

One of the objectives of this loan - Rt Hon. Speaker, I am very sorry, I was thinking about Mukono.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are importing certain things, which are not in the report.

MRS BAKIREKE: I was thinking about Mukono. For the record, that word Mukono is not indicated here.

One of the objectives of this loan is to stimulate production in order to generate substantial revenues and create more employment opportunities. The money allocated to Jinja, Tororo, Masaka or Mbale is not even enough to pay for a quarter of its roads. It is, therefore, a lie that this loan will stimulate production in the selected areas. It is another kind of tokenism meant to serve political and not development purposes.

My humble request is that if we must authorise this loan, it should go to one or two municipalities that will give the country quick returns. For example, if we invested this money in Jinja, Tororo or Masaka, you are sure of some steady and quick returns. We must not encourage this idea of throwing around public resources. If Jinja has the capacity to create 10,000 jobs as a result of this money through tourism, then let us deal with it first.

Public resources are not a reward. One will talk about equitable development, but it also follows an international pattern, the reason California is more developed than Vermouth. The minister has been very economic with information. By the time of writing this report, we were yet to receive a breakdown of the allocation per municipality. I invite you colleagues to reject this request until all details as to which municipality receives which amount are provided. We must know in detail what every shilling we are approving will be spent on - money for roads, recreation centres, health facilities, staff training etc. 

This was presented by hon. Betty Nambooze on behalf of hon. Semujju Nganda. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Can the chairperson give us the figures before we debate? And also, I want the presenter to rationalise the contents of page 12 item two with the contents of page 17 the last paragraph. Here you are talking about 1.3 percent and here you are talking about 4.6 percent. I want you to rationalise that.

But, Chairman, can we have the figures? If you look at page 12; your table on project financing; institutional support to the Ministry of Lands amounts to $2 million with a percentage of 1.3 percent, but if you look at page 17, you are talking about $7 million and a percentage of 4.3 percent for institutional support. So, I want you to clarify that before we start.

Hon. Chair, have you brought the right figures?

6.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Somebody is supposed to get us a soft copy because it was a printing error. The data on the graphs should have appeared as a separate graph, but while printing, they superimposed the two and unfortunately, the two officers of Parliament are not in office right now, but the commissioner is going to get a copy.

But if colleagues look at page 13, we did demand as a committee, why Gulu was getting more money than any other district. Clearly, what is being put here is to illustrate graphically that apart from Metropolitan Kampala and its neighbours, it is Gulu which is the fastest growing in the whole of Uganda and that justifies why they get close to $30,000. 

In terms of population, and I would like to request that because of that, when we got the minority report, the explanation required by the minority report is not for the committee. The minister has a response to the minority concerns because some of them are of a policy nature and the Committee of National Economy cannot decide to change this portfolio from Ministry of Local Government to where it is proposed. It is outside our mandate.

Also, in terms of the amount of the money, we cannot reject a loan because the money provided is little, because we are aware that this was conceived more than six years ago and when it comes - we cannot stop innocent municipalities like Gulu from getting money because of Private Sector Foundation mismanaging Namanve. So, we find there are areas, which are outside the committee mandate and I would like to request the minister to be the one to respond.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think the chairperson is not proceeding correctly. You did ask him to make two clarifications and he has made only one, and has now decided to debate and go to the minority report before answering the second one regarding pages 12 and 17 where we have $2 million and $7 million and then 1.3 percent and 4.7 percent. 

So, I thought he was going to respond to that before he goes into the issues of minority reports. Some of us who have handled - the issues which have been raised in the minority report are pertinent issues, and these issues are a reality, and we shall talk about them when we get to the debate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, I want you to harmonise pages 12 and -

MR MBAGADHI: Madam Speaker, on page 12 of the report, actually in table 2, we have item number two; institutional support to Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, which stands at $2 million and accounts for 1.3 percent. In item number four, we have monitoring and evaluation and project implementation support, which stands at $5 million. This stands at 3.3 percent. When you add up the $2 million to the $5 million, you get $7 million. The percentage when added together is 4.67 percent. That is the clarification I wanted to make on that.

I have been reliably informed that the table with the indicative planning figures is coming in due course.

THE SPEAKER: I have now understood. Okay, contributions.

6.37
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson and members of the Committee on National Economy for the work well done. I was in Mbarara town last week and the mayor was asking me where the money for roads is situated in Government. Let me tell you, Mbarara Municipality has bad roads. I was told that the money was in the Ministry of Lands and I am glad that finally they have brought it here to be approved.

On a selfish note, Mbarara Municipality is growing very fast; as I speak now, we have almost three universities and the number of people coming in is big. Currently, we in Mbarara are dreaming of a city for Western Uganda, and I have a conviction that $7.9 million will not be enough for us. They should have given us something bigger than this. Having said that, I was looking at the money that is going to be used for workshops and training and after calculating, it went to Shs 1.25 billion. I want to say that the money received to put up infrastructure should be put there and we should spend less money on training these fellows on how to eat it. What is killing Uganda is that whenever a loan comes, instead of it doing what it is meant to do, it is first eaten –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will give you half a minute.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a problem as far as distribution of this money is concerned. When I was young, there was a saying that, “Uganda cannot wait for Karamoja to develop.” Here, Moroto is given very little money. I am being honest and sincerely speaking, let us not forget our brothers in Karamoja. Let us give them the money even if it means cutting it from somewhere. (Applause) I was a bit selfish at the beginning, but here, Moroto needs more money than what it has been given. Thank you.

6.40
MR MUDIMI WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for its report and I support the proposal of Government to borrow. However, I have a few observations to make. This loan is basically to give a facelift to municipalities, but when you look at the composition, Mbale, Tororo, Iganga, Jinja and others are benefiting while others are skipped. If we had a visitor, it would not make sense -(Laughter)- I suggest that we look for money and work on all municipalities. 

The other thing is that there are roads which are under UNRA like it is the case with Mbale-Soroti Road. I do not know how they are going to handle it; is this money going to be under UNRA to take care of some of these roads? What about the supervision of this project? If this money is going to those municipalities, then there will be a big problem because of the politics and corruption involved in those municipalities. 

When we appealed to the President for these urban centres, he said there would be more money to benefit other growing urban areas like Kumi, Mityana, Mubende and Kamuli, among others. Let Government look for more money on top of this funding to help other urban authorities. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, maybe when the minister comes, he will tell us also what has happened to the Town and Country Planning Board because it seems to have died.

6.43
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this loan request and as the committee observed, I think biologically, it is always healthy to first feed a child before the parent. It would have been better to start with the new municipalities that need a lot of help instead of starting with the old ones which have some infrastructure at least for some time. However, I want to disagree with hon. Nambooze; I do not know whether she associates herself with what she has read on behalf of a colleague. If so, kindly change your mind and support this loan request because you have not yet been forgiven for denying us the buses which are not reaching Mukono. So, for this one, be positive so that our voters can benefit.  

Secondly, within this month, I have visited about six municipalities – 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, the people of Mukono petitioned this Parliament and they raised very important issues against the operation of the buses in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area. Their petition was received by this House and committed to the committee which is about to present its report. Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Muwuma to put it on record that the very people who gave me a petition to present to this House are annoyed with me for doing the work they sent me to do here, thereby trying to blackmail me into supporting a project which my constituents petitioned against?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to get involved into what the committee is going to report. So, I will not rule on that one.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That ruling has saved me a lot –(Laughter)– hon. Nambooze’s people always burden me to offer them a lift, but that is a different story. 

I was saying that I had visited six municipalities within one month and all of them have potholes. So, I highly support us approving this loan. That is why I was taken aback when my sister there said that a loan is useless if we do not have our own resources. If we do not have our own resources, but there is a helping hand, it is the way to go for us to resolve some of the problems –(Member timed out.)

6.46
MR SIMON ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Madam Speaker, I am very happy that the likes of hon. Ssemujju are not in decision-making positions. (Applause) 

When I read this report it is disturbing. Madam Speaker, the reason why Karamoja has remained where it is now is because of this kind of thinking. Moroto Municipality became a Municipality in 1974. Today, it is still the same. Why? Because the majority of Ugandans think in the same way that this minority report portrays. When you look at these indicative planning figures - where I join my brother and I am very grateful; I remember visiting the Ministry of Lands and I met the State Minister. I went with the Mayor and LC V. Our complaint was that what was the criterion of allocating? They told me there was a formula and I was wondering what formula is this that does not favour the disadvantaged. I asked the minister whether this formula was from heaven that human beings cannot address the municipalities that are still the least developed. 

On the basis of their explanation, Moroto Municipality is not five square miles. It is 21 square miles. The population is not 12.5 as indicated. It is now about 25,000 people. So, the basis of allocation alone was an error, which must be corrected.

Madam Speaker, it is true most of our municipalities speak for us and as we talk now -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute because you are the subject of the minority report.

MR ALEPER: So, why is the population of Moroto small? It is because the facilities that are supposed to attract a number of Ugandans to settle there are not in place, and that is the more reason why this loan becomes relevant to Moroto Municipality. Most Ugandans will now be very happy to settle in Moroto Municipality because it will have water, good roads and health services, which are not there now.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleague, for giving way. I stand to supplement my colleague’s submission. Recently, we moved as the Committee on Government Assurances. We were supposed to tour districts of the Northern Region from Katakwi to Napak, Karamoja and then proceed to Abim and Kitgum, but because of the poor roads and the poor Lope Bridge, which is almost five kilometres from Moroto town, we could not proceed. Even the health centre which we visited - there is a referral hospital in Moroto Town, but the condition of that hospital does not even portray this hospital as a referral hospital. So, the money which has been given here is not going to move this municipality any step. 

So, I am giving information that on top of this money they have given they would add on so that the money really develops the town.

MR ALEPER: Thank you honourable. As I conclude -(Member timed out.)

6.51
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee and I stand here to support the loan, but I have three observations to make. Although I come from Mbarara District, this is a loan that touches the whole country, so I will not be specific about the district. My interest is on in page 15, and I support the committee recommendation about the new eight municipalities. 

However, I wish to add that whenever we as a Government establish new municipalities, we should create a budget for them to have roads and water - basically infrastructure. Otherwise, as we are talking about a loan to develop this other physical infrastructure, as I speak, people are putting up buildings in unplanned areas. So that, by the time the loan goes to a municipality to improve it, it becomes costly because we have to break down commercial buildings and residential houses to put roads and sources of water. So, my proposal, as we plan new municipalities, is that if we do not have money to develop proper physical plans, we should halt the process because it becomes very expensive in the distant and near futures.

Secondly, on page 17, there is a recommendation made by this committee about the money. It recommends that 4.6 percent of the funds that are going to the ministry should be supervised by the Committee on Public Service and Local Governments because they fear this money might be misused. May I propose - because there is this fear - that the money should be put to other physical infrastructure instead of saying because you fear it is going to be misused let us put some guard and some Police to follow it up. That means the committee feared this money was going to be misused -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, please conclude.

MS BOONA: This is my maiden speech –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS BOONA: Thank you very much. I wish to support the recommendation that municipalities are going to be asked to make a list of sub-projects that they require. It is very unethical that the top decides for the municipalities. Let the municipalities come up with their projects where this money is going to go instead of somebody believing that Mbarara District needs this. If Mbarara Municipality wants a road, that will be the priority; not the loan to decide that the road should be here or water should be here. It is very important that we use a bottom-up procedure instead of an up-bottom process. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Just to consolidate what hon. Boona has said, last week we had a parliamentary outreach in the eastern region and one of the complaints of the local governments was that they do not own the plans. They are not consulted on what they really want. The plans come from the top and they were very unhappy about it.

6.55
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support this loan request because when you move to the various municipalities including Kabale and Rukungiri, which I represent for now, the infrastructure is dilapidated and, therefore, we welcome this request and we hope that after passing this loan request there will be an expeditious process so that we see the construction starting as soon as possible.

Madam Speaker, the Minister for Lands should actually answer the accusations put in the minority report like that project in the regional land offices. He should also answer satisfactorily to this Parliament.

I want to inquire whether before this project was costed, Government went to the various municipalities and quantified the magnitude of the problem and came up with actual costs. In other words, how much work will the money which is being borrowed do? Can we be assured that five years after the projects these towns will be shining as they were when they were constructed? So, how much will be worked on?

The issue I wanted to raise is that about six years ago, the President appointed a minister in charge of urban development. So, there is a fully-fledged department for urban development, but we have no policy on urban development. I do not know what ministers do. I do hope that with a new minister and also hon. Migereko, this time round, you would be able to develop a policy to guide urban development because when you look at population projections, a huge segment of the population will be in urban areas in a few years to come.

When you look at our urban centres, there are squalid conditions and the infrastructure is down and, therefore, we want a policy.

Lastly, we want to thank the leadership of Fort Portal Municipality because I think it is the cleanest municipality now in Uganda because they have put in place deliberate legislations at municipal level to really handle garbage management and hygiene and cleanliness. For instance, you cannot litter the town of Fort Portal. You will be caught by the law which actions are not being taken by other municipal councils, and I think other municipality leaders should borrow from Fort Portal Municipality, which we visited some time back.

6.58
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this request for the loan to support the municipalities because I recognise the inadequacy in capacity to ensure effective implementation of the plan and services. I also appreciate the inadequacy of funding to the municipalities. I would like to bring out the fact that there is a study now being undertaken by the Local Government Finance Commission on holistic funding in local governments and I am sure that municipalities are also part of this. So, my advice is that when this fund comes and it is being administered to the municipalities, it does not regard the finding of the study, which is undertaken by the Local Government Finance Commission now.

My second point is to support the institution of the urban land board because when you go to the towns and you are talking to them, they have demands of administration and management of land, which the district land boards do not seem to understand.

Many times they have a backlog of work as far as land administration is concerned. So, I really support that these boards should be instituted, especially in the municipalities. 

I would also like to ask; when we see the urban management moving to Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, what is the role of the Ministry of Local Government now? I would like to understand because the administration and management of urban centres has been under the Ministry of Local Government. So, what is it now? Are we transferring urban centres to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development? How will it be managed -(Member timed out.)

7.00
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan request because I believe it is long overdue, though I am not so sure about the packaging, whether it will deliver the results that it is really intended for.

Over the Easter weekend, I was in Kabale and I must say that this loan should have come yesterday, and I am happy that Kabale is one of the first municipalities to benefit. Looking at the amount of money and the menu on page 9, the US$ 130 million if you convert it is about Shs 450 billion. If you are looking at roads, drainage, street lights, water for all these municipalities, Madam Speaker, I am just waiting and I will be there at the end to assess the impact.

I think like point No.7 on the menu of urban beautification, public parks and play grounds, I do not think we should really be borrowing money to take up such and somewhere they are even saying tree planting. I believe there is some freedom as it is below for these municipalities not to take on some of these - I call them, petty activities.

As hon. Muwuma said, Masindi Municipality was really expecting this loan and we had thought that we would be helped in physical planning to ensure that it does not become a slum like other municipalities. I hope as you said, you will be there, but the activities of preparing the municipalities, capacity building for political leaders -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No, half a minute.

MS KABAKUMBA: My last point is on the minority report. I do not want to judge my colleague, but I think he was not been sincere on page 5, second line: “The money allocated to Jinja, Moroto …” is not enough to pave a quarter of its roads. Down here he says, “We have not received a breakdown of the allocation per municipality”. Which is which? He had the information, but he is trying to manipulate the figures not to give us a clear picture. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity.

7.04
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the loan for these reasons. The new municipalities which were created are really very miserable and they need to be upgraded to reach the standard of a municipality. If you take Busia, if you take Ntungamo, they are really miserable, and even Moroto. So, this loan will really upgrade them to the standard of municipalities. 

There are some municipalities which are earmarked for city status like Mbarara, Arua and Gulu. So, we deserve this loan and we need to pass it immediately.

Regarding Arua Municipality, I wish you had consulted people of Arua. People of Arua need money to renovate the roads. It is really shameful when you move in Arua town. Arua has very little water. During dry season, people of Arua really suffer. The water supply is not enough to cater for the municipality of Arua. Arua needs power. I wish this portion of money was given for finishing the project of Nyagak because without power really, it will not be a municipality. So, that is the important thing we really need for Arua - fresh roads, power and water.

Regarding the minority report, I really do support the issue of this infrastructure for registration. The way they built; we have seen the one of Lira, the plan is not the very one intended to. It was supposed to be storied but it is just single and very small and they are not functioning. So, I urge the Minister of Lands and Urban Development to ensure that these buildings are given due respect and given money so that they can function because our people suffer when we come here to get land. And the vehicles belonging to the ministry, which are loitering there, why don’t you give them away. We surely need those vehicles so that these people can become functional. Thank you very much.

7.07
MR MICHAEL MUKULA (NRM, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I rise to support this loan request because the African Continent has got the fastest growing population in the world. In the next 100 years, the African Continent will have close to three billion people. China and India combined will have a population of 2.4 billion. Most of these people will be in the urban areas. 

So, I want to say that ever since Adam and Eve left Eden, this is the first loan we have got to improve the infrastructure of the urban centres in this country. My support goes to this loan because of the following reasons:

One, the rate of urbanisation as stated in this report; the urban poverty is high now. Urban unemployment is very high. These are centres that we need for investment in order to create jobs. The health of a congested urban centre can be more disastrous to a nation. 

Madam Speaker, the number of children who are going to school are increasing in the urban centres. And it is important that we underscore the point of maintenance of the infrastructure we implant in the urban centres. I have seen that in Kenya, for example, they have three authorities for roads. Uganda has got only one; that is the National Road Authority. 

It is important that Government takes into account an addition of the direction Kenya has taken in building platforms to sustain the infrastructures, particularly the roads in urban centres. Kenya has the National Kenya Highway Authority; Urban Roads Authority and the Rural Authority. 

Madam Speaker, if we do not put money into maintenance, this infrastructure that we are investing into will again go down. Maintenance must be compounded in the annual budget to urban centres to ensure that what we are putting in as an investment of US$ 150 million has a component of maintenance, which will sustain all these key areas of roads, water electricity, sewage and effective planning –(Member timed out.)

7.11
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the report and to thank the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development for their input. I would like to inquire from the minister, was there any needs assessment of these urban centres before coming up with a loan of US$ 150 to cater for the needs of these areas? What was the basis for allocating this US$ 150 million for the next five years?

This shows that we are going to do a mere facelift. There is need for the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development to take charge of forward planning. Ask yourselves: What are the needs of this country in the next five, ten or twenty years? So that we can plan and say that in the next five years we need US$ 1 billion to finance roads, water and all the other infrastructure. 

By the way, you should also integrate the housing settlements for the urban poor who are not catered for in this report. How are you going to cater for the housing schemes which are so dearly needed by the people who continue to board buses to enter towns –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I add you half a minute. He was raising something which was not touched on by anybody.

MR KASAMBA: It is very important for us as we apply for loans, especially for urban settlements; why don’t we organise urban housing schemes. It could be a component of this loan so that we have hydraform and work-gangs to begin constructing low-cost housing schemes for the improvement of the slum-dwellers in the urban centres. Unless you stop people from moving to urban centres. Otherwise, you must act very promptly to put up housing settlement schemes in the outskirts of the city so that we are able to replace people in the different areas as we do organised urban planning where we have lost time as far as development is concerned –(Member timed out.)

7.14
MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Where I come from, the best I have is a town council which is not supposed to become a municipality; at least not in the next five years. Having said that, I really have no political interest in the municipalities you are talking about. So, I think I am the most natural person when talking about these municipalities, and so, my concerns should be taken seriously.

Madam Speaker, let me quickly go to the minority report. I happen to be on the same Committee of Infrastructure with hon. Semujju Nganda. And I was always with him in almost all the areas he went to. And I think we had synoptic observations wherever we went. So, when the minority report says that these offices are not fully occupied, that they are cracked and that the pick-ups are rotting I find a problem of credibility in reporting.

The regional office at Entebbe which takes this region – we did not have a chance to access it. We only observed it from outside the premises and so we could not have evidence of whether it is cracked, whether it has furniture or no furniture inside and so on. So, his report about it is untrue.

The office in Masaka is fully operational. The office in Mbarara is very beautiful; we accessed it and it had good furniture. The office in Kabarole was under construction and it is double storied; so, it is a good office. Only that these officers continued to mention that the contractors were not on site, which is very true and it is in his report. And that they were being used informally by the people who were there and had nowhere to stay. 

Furthermore, the pick-ups – when we went to Entebbe, we are told there was a stock of about 22 blue pick-ups –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is an important point. I add you half a minute; tell us about those pick-ups.

MR BIRAARO: For the pick-ups, we never saw any pick-up, but we were told they were being handled by a different ministry and then we ordered their repatriation and they were brought back to Entebbe in their normal and running condition. So, the story that they are rotting is untrue. 

When we come to report about this thing and we talk about Moroto – now that incidentally, Moroto is called a municipality, and it has got 20,000 people and Jinja has 33,000 people, are we being only biblical to say that even those who have little, the little must be given to those who have. Moroto should be given more support to befit its title. (Applause)

Secondly, my concern is about allocation for each municipality. In my view, this is too small to create the desired impact. Lastly, when is the next funding for the remaining municipalities? I thank you.

7.18
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): I thank you very much. Our regional urban centre is Arua. I highly support the request for the loan and in reference to Arua Municipality, we have all sorts of people. It is a cosmopolitan urban centre and actually, our regional urban centre where the population has grown. We have businessmen from Sudan, Congo and others coming from Kampala – a trade hub – and because of that, the population has grown since then. We also have refugees. The refugees who had been settled in West Nile have since remained in Arua and because of that, the population has grown. 

I am, therefore, trying to request the people responsible for allocation of these funds that let the money be increased for Arua because the population had grown to the extent that it has almost come to the level of Gulu. This has created pressure on education, health services, sanitation and also the roads. I am, therefore, trying to request that the amount of money that has been allocated for Arua be increased to that of Gulu. I thank you very much.

7.20
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Although I do not come from a municipality, I enjoy the fruits of my neighbours in Kabarole. Kabarole has one of the cleanest municipalities, Fort Portal, and in fact, I would say it is the cleanest in Uganda. It is even cleaner than Kampala City. It has a population that has grown very fast. First of all because of our weather condition, the population is growing very fast and everybody is running to Kabarole for better services.

Fort Portal is serving almost seven districts as the greater municipality. When you look at the way Fort Portal is growing, it should be given more funds. It has been given only 6 million, but if we really increase this money, it would be a model municipality for the whole country, and indeed, with the support of Government, it will do it.

When you look at the drainage system, it has almost the best drainage system. When you look at the design of the roads – you know they say that a child who does not move knows that the mother prepares the best food. But I think the leaders of Kabarole have moved because when you look at the way the roads are separated from each other, you will not get any traffic jam anywhere in Kabarole – the design of Kabarole District is really one of the best. I wish that most of these municipalities would really copy and come and visit – the Mayor of Fort Portal does not like littering –

THE SPEAKER: I want to confirm that Fort Portal is the cleanest municipality. I went there with the Members of the Commission and we came back energised. It is really a very good model. Maybe Members should go there and see it.

7.22
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for the opportunity. I am actually a member of this committee, but as you have heard from the minority report – by the time of filing this report, we had not got the indicative planning figures for the municipality. So, I just want to seek clarification from the minister on the criteria used to apportion the resources to the municipalities. The way I see it, it seems population is the criteria used. 

I want the minister to explain to the satisfaction of the House as to why Gulu Municipality that has a population of 154,000 gets US$ 26 million –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: The issue that has been raised by hon. Baka is very important. He is a member of the committee, but by the time they completed the report, they did not have these figures, which means this has just been smuggled into the report, if I got it right. 

He is even asking the minister about the criteria because by being a member of the committee, he should have asked that question at that time. So, the honourable member is right and no wonder we had some figures superimposed on graphs and that is why some of us were insisting in having these issues here. If a member of the committee can raise such an issue – unless you are saying he is lying.

THE SPEAKER: Are you attacking your report?

MR BAKA: I am not attacking the report. I actually support it and that is why I signed. The truth of the matter is that by the time I signed the report – because I have been to the municipalities and I know the dire need in which they are. For example, for Jinja to complete the roads they have, they need 20 years according to the annual release from the central government. So, they need the money and that time, it did not matter to me that I must have the indicative planning figures for me to approve the report. So, I approved this with this -(Interjections)- honestly.

THE SPEAKER: You are throwing a spanner into the works!

MR MBAGADHI: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to clear the air. I want to assure this House that the issue of the indicative planning figures was an issue that was raised by honourable members, and especially the members of the committee. 

I do remember that in the meeting that we had, where we - I want to even remind hon. Baka that he was part and parcel of that meeting when those issues of the indicative planning figures were being raised, and we did concur that we should not present this report until these figures have been brought to us.

In the meeting that was held later on to finalise the report - and it is possible he was not part of that meeting - we received these indicative planning figures and that is why we managed to get a copy to have these figures imbedded within our report.

However, I want to agree with honourable members, especially on the issue of these indicative planning figures. It was a contentious issue and just like the honourable member raised, especially the Member from Moroto, I want to inform the House that the allocation formula that was being used was the formula the Local Government Finance Commission uses in allocating grants to local governments.

This allocation formula is based on the population of the municipality, the land area and the poverty head count. The biggest problem that we had as Members is that this data was captured by UBOS in 2002. The good thing is that we are having a national census and I think, possibly, we should have some adjustments in these indicative planning figures.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, you are now saying that we are going to allocate money in futility. If Moroto now has several more people than the 2000 that was captured in 2002, then the rest are not budgeted for.

MR MBAGADHI: I do appreciate that challenge that was raised by the MP for Moroto. He indicated to us that the population which was considered was 1,250 and yet it is now 25,000.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I am asking, if these figures are all for 2002, are we not appropriating money in futility? Are we addressing the real needs of the present municipality? I want to know whether we are doing this in futility. Will this money make an impact? Is it going to address the problems of the population even without the census?

7.29
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Madam Speaker, when we are doing any planning work, we use figures from UBOS. There is a criterion which Uganda Local Government Commission has been using and following –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: I find it very difficult for us to continue talking about these figures when actually one of the committee members has raised a credibility problem about them. The chairman has confirmed this. It is not procedurally right for us to proceed to discuss this loan basing on these figures.

What I had thought would be right is that the committee goes back and looks at proper procedure. The Constitution under Schedule 7 provides a formula. The proper formula should be followed when we are dealing with this. We cannot continue to deal with a document that has been disowned by a member of the committee; then there will be credibility problems for this House. I wonder whether it is procedurally correct for us to proceed as Parliament in that line when actually there is a credibility problem which has been raised. The minister did not show how these figures were arrived at.
 
MR SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Still on the issue of credibility; a report was laid on the Table yesterday by the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and has a signature of hon. Linda Timbigamba. Another committee report has been laid today with a signature of the same hon. Timbigamba Linda.  There is a big discrepancy in the two signatures of the same honourable member.  Why should we have different signatures for the same MP?

7.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a few clarifications on the fears as raised by the Members. The basis of allocation of this funding was a scientific calculation using the poverty head count, the land area and the population. When you look at the report, it out clearly states the minimum conditions for this loan. One of them was linkage between physical planning, development planning and budgeting. It was also involving the staff who would be able to implement this infrastructure development.

There were certain parameters, and population size was weighed against the scores of 45 percent, land area of 15 percent, and poverty head count of 10 percent.

MR OKUPA: Can we sort out the matter of credibility before we proceed on the issues of the signatures because we have looked at this and they are completely different.

These things will boil back to us in the commission. If people are going to forge signatures, it may be a staff of Parliament or a Member. You do not need any forensic expert to determine that there is a difference in these signatures.

MS KABAKUMBA: I have looked at both signatures; indeed, they vary too much. At times I use the short or long signatures, but these seem to be so far apart. Parliament may put an inquiry into this, but even when you count minus the disputed signature, the report has the required number of signatures. We can remove the Timbigamba one, because we are not going to throw out this report just because a signature is disputed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have two reports here: One from the Legal and Parliamentary Committee, and another one from the National Economy Committee; really, the signatures are different. I do not know who else – yes, chairperson of the committee.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I want to regret the mix of the two signatures and I call upon you to separate the two functions. I am only making a request. The municipalities that we are trying to dispense money for have done nothing wrong. The leadership of the committee –(Interjections)– excuse, I am, requesting that you first listen to me because we may be harming the patient instead of the doctor. Anyway, what I am saying is that if the municipalities need this money and we have signatures that are enough – I am aware that at times we make mistakes and sign for other people. So, that scrutiny can be done without harming and stalling the process of the loan approval. That is my humble request.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, you know when we take decisions, we set precedents. If it has been raised on the Floor that some signatures may not be authentic, how can I sit here and begin to say, throw this out and live the other? I will be setting a precedent. It is a serious matter because it will appear on the Hansard.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I remember Justice Ogola; there was a person who told him a lie that he had travelled to London. But when he asked for that person’s passport, it was realised there had been no visa given to this person to travel to London. What I recall is that the person apologised. But the judge said that he would not be sure whether all that the person had told the commission was true and that he would also not be sure that what that person was saying was true. This is Parliament of Uganda on the screen. 

Madam Speaker, I am one of the beneficiaries of this loan because I come from Mbarara Municipality. But for your own good, as our beloved Speaker, presiding over this august House now – I wouldn’t like to see anybody start smearing you with this. These are two different signatures that honestly do not have any single relationship. I am of the view that we first get hon. Linda to tell us which of these is her true signature. Maybe the one for this loan could be the true one and the one on the report from the legal committee is forged. Let us stop this thing here until we verify these signatures. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am disappointed because I went to Kabale and got the place flooded, but I assured them that we were processing a loan to sort out that. Last week I was in Mbale, I had so much trouble driving within the municipality. I have been to many of these municipalities. I think it is in our interest to do a good job, but also do it properly. I am deferring further debate on this matter until we establish the signatures of all these Members. I defer this matter until 8 May 2012. 

For next week, honourable members, I want to leave you to concentrate on the budget. Next week, the sessional committees should sit and complete their reports to the budget committee so that we can comply with the Budget Act –

MRS BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, you have properly ruled on the issue of the signatures and the issue of documents that are said to have been smuggled into the report. However, I would like to seek guidance on who is going to oversee these activities so that when we revisit this matter on 8 May 2012 -

THE SPEAKER: Leave that to me and the Clerk to Parliament; we will handle that. Honourable members, as I was saying, you concentrate on the budget so that you can make your reports to the Budget Committee in time. But on Wednesday, we have an ecumenical service at 9.00 O’clock. Otherwise, plenary will resume on 8 May. I wish you happy Labour Day celebrations in Gulu; please make sure you go attend it. House adjourned to 8 May 2012.

(The House rose at 7.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 8 May 2012.)
