Wednesday, 6 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, I do not have much to say save to welcome you.

Hon. Kabushenga has guests here, who are assisting him to develop his constituency. These guests are Peter and Jill Packham who are consultants in Kinkiizi. They are from the United Kingdom. You are welcome, and thank you for the work you are doing for us. (Applause).

2.46
MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a question for oral answer to put to the Minister for Works, Housing and Communications. According to our Rules of Procedure, it is under rule 29(a).

THE SPEAKER: I think it is an urgent matter but the Minister of Works, Eng. Nasasira, has been away. I got in touch with him and he was prepared to answer the question but unfortunately he has not arrived yet. So, if you put the question nobody will assist you in answering it. Otherwise, I would have accorded you an opportunity to raise it.

MRS SSENTONGO: I think given the presence of the Third Deputy Prime Minister, I can still present it and we pass it over to the relevant minister.

THE SPEAKER: You will not be served properly. What you need is a proper answer rather than it being passed on. What I can say is that maybe tomorrow I will give you an opportunity to raise it, when he is here, otherwise you will ask it and it goes on record but you will not get an answer. 

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I just want to inform the honourable member that the Minister for Works is not absent. He is actually engaged in a meeting with the Secretary General of the Commonwealth. That is why he is not here to answer the question.

THE SPEAKER: So, tomorrow I will definitely include your question.

2.47
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of public importance in regard to the people I represent, namely Lubaga South. Recently, two areas in my constituency, Nakayiza and Kironde zones in Kabowa and Nalukolongo, were served with eviction notices. The first notice will affect 183 families and the other will affect 1,000 people. These people are very worried because they do not know their fate. They are being summarily evicted by Wamala Growers Co-operative Union, which union most people say does not exist, but they have been served with notices. The group residing in Nalukolongo is of 200 people. They are very worried about what is likely to happen to them.

Noting that the Constitution is very open about the fate of mankind; land belongs to the people. I would like the Minister in charge of Lands to answer the following queries.

One, is the minister aware that summary evictions currently prevailing in various parts of Uganda are as a result of a situation, which is almost a stalemate? The district land boards are very silent on the assignment they got in law, namely that they should pronounce the land dues to be paid in the form of Busuulu, so that the state of affairs where the landlord does not get anything, is stopped. What is the ministry doing to ensure that the district land boards tell the people the dues they are supposed to pay to avoid the state of fear? My people are worried. Some of them have even told me that, “Hon. Lukyamuzi, we better cease to be known as Ugandans because any time we are leaving and we do not know where we are going”.

Finally, what is the ministry doing to educate the masses about the contents of the Land Act and its amendment, which was passed by Parliament? No one should evict anybody without going through the proper process. Most of your people are in a similar dilemma –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, I think you have made your point. The question is understood. Can the minister answer?

MR LUKYAMUZI: I was saying, when will this state of uncertainty stop? Are we Ugandans if we are going to live like that, the way Lubaga people are living? What is the minister telling us? If he is not telling us anything he should better leave the ministry and we take over; and the time is now. (Laughter)

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Baguma Isoke): Mr Speaker, I have no intention and there is no indication that I will be leaving the Ministry of Lands, at least for the time being. 

We in the Ministry of Lands are concerned that there are many evictions of people residing on land without certificates of ownership. But I take it that the eviction orders are orders of court. In most cases, like we have seen in the recent past in Kabalagala, where one Nakimuli was short dead, the eviction order was a fake one. It was done under a mango tree by people masquerading to be registrars of the High Court. 

Two months ago there was a bloody eviction also in Busiro South where a so-called court bailiff was killed in action while enforcing a fictitious court order. These two orders served on the people of Lubaga South should also be examined because I have high suspicion that they too are not authentic and are not issued by any court of law in Uganda. This is a problem we are having.   

The land boards know their duties, functions and responsibilities as enshrined in Article 241 of our Constitution and in executing their role they do not follow any direction from any person, even the Minister of Lands. They know, according to the Land Amendment Act of last year, that they have to pronounce themselves on court evictions. Busuulu per district is going to be paid by each person holding ekibanja on registered land, and we have no way of forcing it but to remind them that it is their duty in law to do that, and we are waiting.  

The programme for sensitizing the public and institutions involved in the management of land namely the land committees at sub-counties and the LC II as courts of first instance in the resolution of disputes, is ongoing over the radio, in barazas and in seminars throughout the country. This is an ongoing exercise.  

Mr Speaker, we are in the process of social and economic evolution where we are moving into the primary stages of capitalism. The primary stages of capitalism are characterized by fictitious people trying to grab property by any means. That is why today corruption in public offices and corruption in collectives is a matter of great concern but it reflects that there is an invisible hand, a drive in people trying to accumulate property without going through proper means. We shall see an increase of this phenomenon before we get the means to control it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: There are no supplementary questions. This was an isolated case for eviction in Lubaga and the minister has told us what he wants to tell us -(Interjections)- but you did not tell me about it before. I will only allow people to raise questions if they approach me early on.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.58
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Mr Speaker, last week we had organised a very peaceful demonstration against the third term project, which was code named “Operation knock out kisanja”. Our peaceful demonstration was blocked -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not read your statement?

MR SEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, I am going to read it out.

THE SPEAKER: Read it.

MR SEBAGGALA: Sir, I request the hon. Member of Makindye East, Mike Mabikke to read out the statement.

2.58
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a statement by hon. Latif Sebaggala, Member of Parliament, Kawempe North, and Michael Mabikke Member of Parliament, Makindye East, made this day the 6th of April 2005. I apologise that we have not been able to run copies because power was on and off today so the machines had technical problems in running several copies.  

In the morning hours of 31st March -(Interruption)

MR MWESIGWA RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I rise on two points of order. One, we do not have copies of the statement. Is it in order for the statement to be made? 

Two, is it in order for a statement to be made by a member acting as a proxy of another, when that other one is in the House?

THE SPEAKER: First of all the Order Paper indicates that it is a personal statement so we are not going to debate it. It is a statement jointly made by hon. Mabikke and hon. Sebaggala and actually I must say that before we came in the Minister of Internal Affairs, Dr Rugunda, informed me that tomorrow he intends to make a statement on the matter of the demonstration. It is tomorrow, therefore, that we shall be able to debate the issue, but let hon. Mabikke make the statement.

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. In the morning hours of 31 March 2005, hon. Latif Sebaggala and I were arrested, held at the Central Police Station for six hours and we were only released after recording statements with the Police. The sin we had committed was being organisers of a peaceful demonstration against the removal of presidential term limits in Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, 17 others were arrested and charged on the 1st of April, for unlawful assembly. The demonstration was part of an ongoing project code named “operation knock out Kisanja”; with the first phase involving a one million people match from the entire countryside into the city center.  

The demonstration had been routed to start at the Constitutional Square, the British High Commissioner and to Parliament. Two memoranda had been prepared: one was to be presented to you, Mr Speaker, and the other to the British High Commissioner to Uganda. The demonstration was organized under the auspices of Forces For Change, a political pressure group that brings together activists across the country’s political spectrum.  

A letter notifying the Inspector General of Police had been written on the 23rd of March, and a follow up letter was delivered on the 29th of March, to the Inspector General of Police updating him on the final programme of the demonstration. Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala informed the organisers that he could not make any comments on the planned demonstration until his boss, the Minister of Internal Affairs, okayed the activity, implying that to allow or to refuse the demonstration was subject to a political decision.

On 30th March, a letter was delivered at the last minute to the organisers of the demonstration. The author was Mr F. X. Rwego, writing on behalf of the Inspector General of Police. The letter noted that the demonstration could not be allowed for reasons highlighted in the press release issued by the Minister of Internal Affairs on 29 March 2005. In the press release the minister was advising against any more demonstrations on the subject of presidential term limits since the matter was before Parliament.

Mr Speaker, you are aware there are several demonstrations, which have been organised when matters are before Parliament. For example, hon. Latif Sebaggala and I participated in a demonstration organised by hon. Lukyamuzi on power tariffs, and that matter was before Parliament. Recently the Moslem community organised a demonstration against the Domestic Relations Bill, a matter that is again before Parliament.

The organisers considered this communication inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution, the Road and Traffic Safety Act, the Police Statute and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Further still, the press release by the minister was only advising and not ordering or banning demonstrations. In fact the minister’s press release was not grounded in the law. Mr Speaker, we decided to proceed with our planned demonstrations and we are going to proceed with many more other demonstrations for the following reasons:

We are pursuing our inalienable rights guaranteed by chapter 4, Articles 20, 21 and 29 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.  

We proceeded with our planned demonstration because we observed that the Police is not empowered to grant permission for any such activity and it is only duty bound to keep law and order.

Mr Speaker, we proceeded with the demonstration because it was too late to stop citizens from across the country that had already begun their journey into the city for the one million people’s match.

We want to use this opportunity to condemn the indiscriminate use of tear gas by the Uganda Police and for their brutality in dispersing unarmed citizens. In fact, we fear that the teargas that was used on the 31st could contain elements of weapons of mass destruction. (Laughter). The victims of this teargas are undergoing medical examination and when tests are concluded, another statement will be made to Parliament to this effect.

We call upon this august House to rise to our people’s expectations and exercise our constitutional role with greater independence as the country enters this delicate period of transition. This Parliament should not go down in the annals of history as having promulgated the kisanja Constitution of Uganda, 2005, just like the 1967 pigeonhole Constitution.

Mr Speaker, the demonstration could have been stopped but “operation knock out kisanja” continues. I want to thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you had earlier stated, tomorrow afternoon I intend to make a statement on the matter and I will also make some comments on some of the issues that have been raised by the two honourable members. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL TO BORROW UA27,010,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP FOR FINANCING THE ROAD SECTOR SUPPORT PROJECT

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a brief to Parliament seeking a resolution of Parliament authorizing the Government to borrow UA27,010,000 from the African Development Fund (ADF) of the African Development Bank Group for financing the Road Sector Support Project, and in particular the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kyanika road. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, this document should be handled by the committee but as the Business Committee directed, the Sessional Committee in charge of the Ministry of Works should work together with the committee in processing it.  

BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UA6,550,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) FOR THE MULTI-NATIONAL PROJECT FOR CREATING SUSTAINABLE TSETSE AND TRYPANOSOMIASIS FREE AREAS IN EAST AND WEST AFRICA

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to present a brief to Parliament seeking for a resolution of Parliament to authorize Government to borrow UA6,550,000 from the African Development Fund (ADF) for the Multi-national Project for Creating Sustainable Tsetse and Trypanosomiasis-free areas in East and West Africa. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The same procedure should apply in this case. I do not know whether it is the Social Services Committee dealing with this issue -(Interjection)- Committee on Agriculture? Thank you.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON AMENDING THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

(Debate continued.)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, yesterday we were handling this particular subject and we disposed of the minority report and the main report by the committee is still being debated. But yesterday one of us tabled a motion trying to amend the recommendations of the committee and as you will appreciate, the committee had three independent issues it dealt with. One was voting in the House on constitutional matters, and this arose as a result of a motion that had been brought by hon. Nyombi Thembo and seconded by hon. Kizige.

The committee also dealt with the issue of rule 108 that in dealing with the constitutional matters the decision of the committee should be carried by two-thirds. That is another independent recommendation. 

The other recommendation made by the committee is that we should have a subject committee so that after we finish the second reading the Bill should be sent to a number of select committees dealing with particular subjects for them to scrutinize and report to us. These are three independent issues but in the same report. I suggest that in continuing with the debate any member is free to make his submission on all these issues but at the end of the day when the debate is completed we shall deal with these issues independently so that we shall vote on dealing with the issue of voting. 

Then we are to deal with the issue of the two-thirds. That is under rule 108, and the other one is about how we shall proceed. So, when you stand to make a contribution you are free to deal with all the issues. But you should appreciate that this report was made because of a motion by hon. Nyombi Thembo and Kizige. I would like to know the view of hon. Kizige on hon. Madada’s motion. 

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, I have carefully considered hon. Madada’s motion and I have no objection. I accept that amendment. 

THE SPEAKER: In that case what we are debating should be the recommendation of the committee as adjusted by the motion of hon. Madada. We agreed yesterday that we should allow five minutes each so if you contribute you do so for five minutes.

3.20
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to make a contribution to the report presented in Parliament. This Seventh Parliament has voted only once by division lobby. That was in the year 2002 when we were debating on the Butamira issue. We went into the lobby and we got some interesting results, which were recorded in the Hansard and personally I think we should vote by division lobby.

THE SPEAKER: Who is the acting chairperson? Incidentally I do not see the chairperson here. Okay, it is alright -(Interruption)

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, when we used the division lobby the Butamira people got a copy of the Hansard and I must report that they were very happy to see that report. They have kept record of the Hansard and I am sure that in 2006 they will use it very ably when people go for campaigns. To this extent I personally support voting by division lobby so that we get people signing for their votes. That is my first proposal. 

Secondly, I was a little disturbed yesterday when Prof. Kagonyera spoke about Sir Thomas Moore. Sir Thomas Moore is known for having stood for principles that is why a whole book has been written entitled, “A man of all Seasons”. If we want to be men and women of all seasons, we have to practice politics based on principles not experience. I know my friend Prof. Kagonyera reads a lot about animals –(Laughter)- but I think he may be advised –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, Prof. Kagonyera is a veterinary doctor, is he not? Therefore, he deals with –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. The honorable member should be respectful of other members of the House. I have spent 37 years in public life, 18 of them in politics, and I am no fool. I read widely on all subjects including his, which he studied and there is nothing complicated about what he studied. I mentioned Sir Thomas Moore specifically as a person who sacrificed his life for his conscience and it is a fact; it is true. So, is the honorable member in order to be derogatory in his reference to my name, an otherwise respectable and knowledgeable man? 

THE SPEAKER: What we can say is that you have told him exactly what you said. He might not have appreciated it then but maybe he is appreciating it now. 

DR NABWISO: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. All I was doing was to pay tribute to Prof. Kagonyera because he is a specialist in that area but I was trying to draw his attention to this - (Laughter).  I was trying to draw his attention to that book by Robert Halt –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: I am grateful.

DR NABWISO: Very good, thank you very much. So, let us stick to politics of principles.

Lastly, during the 50s there was an American anthropologist called Prof. Roydh Faraz, he was the Director of Makerere Institute of Social Research and he wrote a very interesting book called “How Basoga Commit Suicide”. Prof. Faraz spent three months in Kamuli District in Budini village. When he talked about these Basoga who commit suicide, he came out with an interesting proposal; that if a person wants to commit suicide, give him a rope and he goes and commits suicide. 

Mr Speaker, we are in this act of allowing people to vote in the main lobby –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Mr Speaker, it is a well-known phenomenon that some people all over the world do commit suicide. In the circumstances, the explanation given by the hon. Member holding the Floor, which concludes simply by saying “If someone wants to hang themselves, give them a rope” could simply have been made without reference to the distinguished people of Kamuli, the Basoga. Therefore, Mr Speaker, is the hon. Member in order to come here and bring the Basoga of Kamuli, where I come from, into disrepute -(Laughter)- by stating that they are the ones who commit suicide only? 

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that hon. Dr Nabwiso is from Busoga, therefore, he was talking even about himself. (Laughter) I think he was saying that the study was concentrating in Kamuli, mere sampling, but it affects all the Basoga.  (Laughter)  So, I think it was a fair comment, and he was quoting a book; the author might have been wrong.

DR NABWISO: Mr Speaker, in order not to delay Parliament, all I am saying is that if people want to change Rule 75, if people want to commit suicide by changing known and civilized methods of voting, then the best we can do is –(Interjection)- I do not want information - Then the best we can do is to allow people to hang.  

In this Parliament, the Late Grace Ibingira brought a Detention Act and people clapped and praised him, but he was the first one to be imprisoned under the Detention Act. Later, President Obote introduced a very controversial Constitution; in 1971 he lost the power. I want to advise my colleagues in NRM that let us not give ourselves ropes by which we shall be hanging democracy and the Movement forever. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof Semakula Kiwanuka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The way we vote here tells a lot about the kind of democracy we would like to build in this country.  The principle of open voting has certain aspects; one is a show of hands, second is a division lobby, and the third one is a tally. Either way is an expression of democracy and therefore, Mr Speaker, when we adopt either of those systems we cannot be accused of murdering democracy.  

There is a very important aspect of accountability.  As we stand here, the rest of Uganda should know what we stand for. What we say, whether we are truthful or not, we should be able to be proud of what we do. Just reading us in the Hansard is not sufficient. We have allowed, in the recent past, to be televised so that the rest of Uganda hears what we say. For a similar reason, the rest of Uganda should know how we cast our votes. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.30
THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Sam Kutesa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to address myself to two issues, the one on tally as opposed to division lobby, and the requirement of two-thirds at committee stage when passing constitutional bills. 

First of all, I want to applaud the hon. Ben Wacha for the statement he gave you yesterday when you asked him what he thought of hon. Madada’s motion.  He said it here twice that it is another form of division and that he had no problem with it. You actually asked him a third time, and he was sitting next to me, he said, “I will not answer it, I am tired of answering the same question three times.”  

Mr Speaker, we have talked about the need for a record. We have all agreed that if you stand up and you vote “Yes” or “No”, what you will say will go in the Hansard. It is the same as if you went and signed a piece of paper out there.  But what we are saying is that we adopt hon. Madada’s motion for purposes of saving time. Otherwise, the record is clear; you will stand up, be counted, the Hansard will reproduce what you said, whether you voted “No” or “Yes” on a motion, but you will only have saved time. Therefore, I find that it is the same thing we are talking about except in the interest of time, hon. Madada’s motion is more favourable, and therefore I support it. (Applause)

Secondly, I would like to address the issue of saying that we need two-thirds majority at committee stage. I would like to refer the honourable members to Article 89 of our Constitution, which reads as follows: 

“Except as otherwise prescribed by this Constitution or any law consistent with this Constitution, any question proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by a majority of votes of the members present and voting.” 

I do not know any provision in this Constitution or in any other law other than the rules, which are now being made that says we should have two-thirds at the committee stage. I would be glad to be advised what law that is and what part of this Constitution it is. But if you go to Article 258 and 259, they are even more specific. Article 258 reads as follows: 

“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Parliament may amend by way of addition, variation or repeal, any provision of this Constitution in accordance with the procedure laid down in this Chapter”.  That is Chapter 18. 

“(2) This Constitution shall not be amended except by an Act of Parliament -
(a)	the sole purpose of which is to amend this Constitution and 
(b)	the Act has been passed in accordance with this Chapter.”

“259.(1) A bill for an Act of Parliament seeking to amend any of the provisions specified in clause (2) of this Article shall not be taken as passed unless 
(a) it is supported at the second and third readings in Parliament by not less than two-thirds of all members of Parliament; and 
(b) it has been referred to a decision of the people and approved by them in a referendum.”  

Mr Speaker, it is my submission that reading Article 89 together with Articles 258, 259 and 260, there is no requirement at all under the law to vote by two-thirds at committee stage. In fact, it is envisaged by Article 89 that we shall vote, unless if it is otherwise provided for, by simple majority. I beg to oppose the proposal that we have two-thirds at committee stage. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  As you correctly pointed out at the beginning of this debate, there are clearly three issues for determination by this House. The first issue, which was narrowed by the House yesterday, is whether we should vote by division lobby or roll call. The second issue is to determine the standard of voting having determined the mode to determine by what standard, in terms of numbers, we would adopt amendment to the clauses of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill at the committee stage. The third issue is subject matter committees.  

On the first issue, as you are aware, the Supreme Court of Uganda in its recently decided cases has guided this House on how contentious issues of public importance such as constitutional amendment should be handled. The guidance of the court is that, we should as much as possible apply the method of head count. 

Now Mr Speaker, there are many modes of head count; show of hands is head count, standing up to be counted is a form of head count, division lobby is head count and roll call and tally is head count. The issue is no longer the legality of the mode we shall choose, but the convenience in terms of time. You do not need empirical data for one to prove how long this House will take by retreating to lobbies to register in order for us to vote by division lobby. So, of the two, I find the method of roll call and tally more convenient and cheaper in terms of time. 

On the second issue, the proposal by the committee is that voting in the Committee of the whole House should be by two-thirds of all the members of Parliament. Honourable Kutesa has read the provisions of Article 89(1); I do not want to repeat them here. But the general rule in Article 89(1) is that voting should be by simple majority.  But there are exceptions in Article 89 itself and those exceptions must be found either in the Constitution itself or in any law made by this Parliament. I have perused the Constitution and I have found the following exceptions to simple majority, which were envisaged by the Constitution.  

• You could vote by a half of whole members of Parliament under Article 74(1) to change the political system. If you are requesting the Electoral Commission as Parliament to change the political system, the requirement is that Parliament votes by more than a half of the Members of Parliament. 

• If Parliament is impeaching the President, under Article 106, it is required to vote by two-thirds. 

• If Parliament is voting to censure a minister under Article 118 it requires more than one half of all Members of Parliament. 

• The other exception, which was expounded by honourable Kutesa is the two-thirds majority found in Article 259, Article 260 and Article 261.

I have not come across a law and I would not like to believe that Rules of Parliament are a law as envisaged in Article 89 of the Constitution. I have not come under any law including the Administration of Parliament Act, which requires a standard other than simple majority for Parliament to take its decisions in any matter or in the Committee of the whole House for that matter. Mr Speaker, it is my submission that it is not necessary at all to amend the Rules of Parliament to require voting by a standard other than simple majority.

Mr Speaker, I would like to briefly mention that all Committees of Parliament are subject matter committees. Committees of Parliament have mandates, which are contained in the Rules of Procedure and their mandates are consistent with the ministries over which they have oversight. The Constitution (Amendment) Bill will be coming from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and clearly, the only committee that deals with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs on all matters including Bills is the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 

It would be a waste of time, let alone legally unnecessary for us to scatter the consideration of the Constitutional (Amendment) Bills into various committees, because to do so is not only legally unnecessary, but also a waste of time, and I do not think we have so much time to manage the transition, which we have got to steer this country through. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity to make a contribution on this particular matter. 

When I appeared before the committee I strongly supported the idea of retaining voting by secret ballot, and I gave a lot of reasons and I am sure that my colleagues - at least I felt that my colleagues in the committee were persuaded by the reasons that I gave. Nevertheless, their report departed from what I had vehemently supported and yesterday the House pronounced itself on the matter and I think that is a gone matter. 

So now it is a question of addressing this matter and agreeing on the modalities we are going to use in voting on the constitutional amendments. I think I would support the proposal by the committee. Voting by division would be the only way to ensure, as the proposers of the motion were saying, that everybody is counted, and there would be no doubt as to what a person has deliberately decided upon. There will be a physical movement to either one side or the other, which nobody would doubt in any way. But I do appreciate that when you have 118 amendments, not to mention other amendments, which may come up in the middle, the amount of time required will be enormous. Therefore, I would consider the amendment by the hon. Madada a reasonable proposal. I think it would help in terms of saving time. 

When we come to passing the new modality of voting, we shall have the opportunity to make some amendments here and there, to ensure that the fears of some people are actually catered for. So, I give support to hon. Madada’s proposal. 

I watched the impeachment debates of President Clinton and everybody was called up. Then they would stand up after being called by name and constituency. They would say, “Mwandha, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern Uganda, you rise and say either no or yes”. Unfortunately, we do not have the kind of facility these people had. Immediately the “no” was said, it would be registered and the House would see that the “noes” are taking the vote, or the “yes” have 45 votes so it was actually done at once. 

The fears that I have heard with regard to the absence of that kind of system are that the people doing the tallying could easily make mistakes because it is human. You can call one name, you call another, and it is possible that you may put a tally on a particular yes or no twice or three times by mistake. But with the electronic system you could be sure as the House would see the movement of the votes, therefore, the question of making mistakes in tallying would not arise. In that regard we may have to provide a safeguard, and when we come to finally disposing of this matter, we may have to discuss that safeguard. 

I am very sceptical about voting by a show of hands. In this House I have seen the way we have voted by show of hands; some people will vote like this, others will do like that, you can even pity the clerk who has to count these votes. When somebody has just been counted he may do this and so on, and you have to leave it at his discretion to decide whether that particular honourable member was voting in favour of the motion or otherwise. 

On occasions I have taken trouble to do the counting myself and in some cases there have been discrepancies of two or three votes but because these were not major issues, I have not raised the matter. But on matters of the Constitution, particularly when we come to lifting or not of the third term limit, even one vote will definitely matter. 

I know for certain that Muluzi lost his third term bid by three votes. He had done everything to lobby everybody but at the end of the day he lost his third term bid by only three votes; and by the way it could even be one vote. The reason I am saying that we may have to refine the proposal by hon. Madada is to ensure that we really record the voting with 100 percent accuracy, without any doubt whatsoever. I think that will happen; I gather there is going to be a machine. If that comes in that will be very good.  

The hon. Kutesa and hon. Adolf Mwesige have come up with new interpretations of this question of two-thirds. This matter has been discussed every time and everywhere by all lawyers, but I am told with the lawyers, it is either one hand or the other hand, so you never really get what is the right situation, but maybe this business of looking at this Article and then looking this Article and so on and so forth. I am not competent to make a comment on what the esteemed lawyers have said, but I think we have to be very careful, because we do not want to end up in the courts of law. That will cost this Parliament a lot of time, and at the end of the day, the roadmap will be a fuss. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.49
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr speaker. I rise to support the motion. Mr Speaker, on 6th February 1981, 26 young people took up arms against the then Government that had fraudulently been elected to power. Among the major causes of this move was to fight for democracy and restore it, to bring about rule of law and human rights in our country. The other reasons were to bring about economic transformation of our society, to fight corruption and to enhance transparency, to bring security and provide protection for people’s property and national property.   

Mr Speaker, in 1985, the group had grown so big and all of us had got involved. In 1995, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda was born based on these principles and the Constitution we made; we now want to amend it. The important question we should ask ourselves in our hearts is; are these amendments in line with these original pillars of our struggle?  

Mr Speaker, I have heard people talking that the timeliness of amending the rules is selfish, opportunist, name it, but let me take exception whether to some individuals it is opportunist and selfish, whether it is manipulative? In my view, this is a moment of truth; this is a moment of truth for hon. Rwamirama Bright Member of Parliament Isingiro County North to come here and debate for x and vote for x, rather than debating for y and vote for x. (Applause)

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I disagree with voting by show of hands, because voting by show of hands does not take record of who voted where, and a formula that does not isolate variables is a very defective formula. This is the time to know who are honourable members and those who may be perceived so. The major reasons for amending the rules is that people must be accountable; a division lobby in my view would have been most ideal. But according to hon. Madada’s motion, if the explanation and the procedure that we shall follow will count Rwamirama K. Bright MP, Isingiro North voted for yes or no on this Article, I support it.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, in my view, we have constituted ourselves into a Constituent Assembly. I have been trying to find how constitutional amendments are made and borrowed from our neighbours. The Republic of Tanzania, I am told since their Constitution, they have only amended 14 Articles. We are going to amend 118 or possibly more. Mr Speaker we need a lot of time and we need to build consensus. 

Mr Speaker, I want to be convinced by the lawyers and particularly the committee that nobody will come up and challenge us that actually we have constituted ourselves into a Constituent Assembly because the job we are doing, we are doing half of the Constitution. With those few remarks, Mr Speaker, I beg to support hon. Madada’s motion only if it takes stock and makes me accountable to the people of Isingiro County, North.  

3.55
MR STEVEN BAMWANGA (Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Thank you very much Mr Speaker, for allowing me to add my voice on those who have spoken before me on this motion. First of all, before I make my contribution, I want to tell this House that my heart today was touched by what was put in today’s New Vision and I feel that I should make sure that most of you share it with me because it is talking about what we are debating in this House.

Mr Speaker, when I read that “MP TV dilemma”, I felt that we should do things openly in order not to be mistaken that we are on the fence.  In today’s New Vision they said: 

“When UTV and WBS TV started live broadcasts of Parliamentary proceedings MPs were relieved that their electorates would see them perform, but now it seems they are afraid that with open voting, the electorates are going to see who is for or against what. 

Aggrey Awori, the all round MP, is now telling his fellow MPs to forego the aye and nay and stand their ground. He told Nandala Mafabi while TV broadcast was good it is now going to expose those who survived by remaining on the fence. When you go back home, your constituents will have to know how you voted well, and hon. Awori has a point.”

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Rules and his committee for a well balanced report, and also thank the movers of the amendments to the motion by hon. Moses Kizige and hon. Madada. But most importantly, Mr Speaker, nobody has stood up here to thank you for your wise ruling yesterday and guidance, when you allowed the debate on hon. Matembe’s minority report. Nobody had asked for it, but you actually brought it on the Floor of the House, it was debated and disposed of; this is where democracy is at work.  

Mr Speaker, what we are now required of is to decide on the modus operandi of the open voting. I agree with some of my colleagues who have said that voting by show of hands is, first of all, primitive, and in the absence of electronic voting, if you make a roll call and tally, that is as good as electronic voting in the civilized parliamentary procedures.  

Mr Speaker, Parliament yesterday, having overwhelmingly voted against the secret ballot, and the numbers are all clear, I want to convince my colleagues that we must do things so that posterity will not blame us posthumously. 

There is a great writer called Chinua Achebe who once said, “The time of reckoning has come when we must forego the safety and conspicuous of silence and rise up as one and say, ‘no, you have taken away too much for the owner to notice.’”  
We must now stand up and be counted so that the owners who sent us here, our electorate, see us doing the right voting. It is important to have courage as we come to this House. 

I want also to quote Winston Churchill who said, “Courage is what it takes to stand up and speak out and be seen. Courage is also what takes to sit down and listen to the views of others.”  

Mr Speaker, at times we stand on the Floor of this House and say we are representing the views of our electorate, and sometimes the electorate say we are actually voting against their wishes. When I am on this Floor, the television is on, the radio is hearing me, my people know that I am saying, let us vote openly so that I do not go out with my conscience unclear.  

I would also like to remind you colleagues that Lincoln, a great man, once said, “You can fool some people some time, you can fool all the people some of the time, but you can not fool all the people all the time.” This is not the right time to fool the people all the time. If the people want to give you a vote you must be frank with them, do not speak with one heart and tomorrow you vote with a different heart. 

So, Mr Speaker, I support all those who are opting for the open voting in order to save on the time because walking in the lobby will waste a lot of time, there will be a lot of manipulation, and I think we should do it by actually roll call and we tally so that we can move as fast as possible. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

4.00
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Hon. Nyombi Thembo from Kassanda South moved a motion before he became a minister, which motion talked of open voting/division lobby. Mr Speaker, I consider division lobby - I have a hoarse voice, Mr Speaker, you will excuse me. I consider division lobby to be extremely relevant in our particular situation where there are lots of suspicions - I do not remember which Member of Parliament yesterday was talking of many suspicions - so that the situation is put to rest and everybody is absolutely sure.  

Yesterday, Mr Speaker, I was about to be convinced by hon. Madada’s roll calling like Kindergarten kids; I nearly became convinced, but on second thought last evening when I was sipping my drink I felt that also some people can play around with it.  Some people can play with records even with our - what is this department of Andrew Walube (Hansard)- Yes, some people can play with this method whether it is a clerk recording Captain Guma, retired and tired, yes or no. So, Mr Speaker, I want to submit that this hiding behind time is extremely unfortunate. Colleagues here requested for open vote to be accountable to the population who voted for us, now people are using excuses. 

Mr Speaker, there is a Member of Parliament from Bushenyi who told me that she has suspicions about this round turn of people yesterday who were opposed to open voting and now they are supporting 100 percent the division lobby. This colleague of mine said, “How can hon. Kassiano Wadri, who was strongly opposed or you, hon. Guma Gumisiriza or hon. Kawanga, all of a sudden come out and recommend a division lobby. These are just unfounded suspicions, just to go out here for five minutes, names are put down and they are brought back here! These are issues that are of vital importance to the country, let us not hide behind time shortage and so on - it is time consuming. I see lots of dishonesty in all these arguments, Mr Speaker.  

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Hon. Guma Gumisiriza, thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I want to inform hon. Guma that all Members here campaigned to be Members of Parliament, and this is supposed to be part of the work of the Members of Parliament.  Hon. Members, we are paid for the work we do as Members of Parliament, and this is not the first Parliament and it is not the last one.  Hon. Guma Gumisiriza, the issue of time as you are saying does not arise, we campaigned to do the work; we have to do it. 

MR AWORI: Thank you, honourable colleague. In addition to your fears, what my colleague, hon. Okurut, raised yesterday, I recall in the Sixth Parliament on a difficult matter we went into division, and for a change I voted with the Government.  When the former Vice-President saw me going the same corridor with her, she went to the Speaker and said, “Can you read the motion again, hon. Awori is on our side?” (Laughter). But she was assured by the then Prime Minister, Rt. hon. Kintu Musoke, that, “No, for once he has seen the light.”  (Laughter)

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA: Mr Speaker, yesterday I was reading through a book written by the late Prof. Samuel Karugire, Roots of Instability in Uganda. At the back of the book, there is some circular which Mzee Obote wrote around the 1980 when elections were going on and he was telling his UPC functionaries in UNLF Government how to handle the situation to ensure that UPC wins an election. 

Mzee Obote said, “Make sure that Police officers who are not sympathetic with UPC are deployed ten miles away from Kampala”. This hon. Kefa Ssempangi knows better than I do, and so on and so forth. Mr Speaker, I have no time to go into the details, but that book is interesting.  

Now, Mr Speaker, let this matter not be a matter of life and death, a matter of retention of political power or even losing it, because I am seeing tension among some colleagues of ours; even very senior Movement people really, as if you will die if tomorrow you are not a Member of Parliament.  

I have had the occasion to tell even my colleague hon. Nasasira that even if I lose the constituency, I will be there. So you, colleagues of ours, we want this country to remain together. These unfounded suspicions are going to cause trouble - unfounded in my view.  

Mr Speaker, as I sum up, -(Interruptions)- You survived but you came back.  Are you not here? 

Mr Speaker, finally I have heard hon. Adolf Mwesige and I am sure, Mr Speaker, you have also heard especially with your extra professional ability as a lawyer. I have looked at hon. Adolf Mwesige trying to quote various Articles of the Constitution. The same Adolf Mwesige, MP from Bunyangabo, a Minister of State in charge of Constitutional Affairs is the one tabling a motion, asking this House to withdraw an Omnibus Bill, with the same legal mind.  

Every lawyer in this country talked about that Omnibus Bill. We insisted here, people who read law said, “You people, this is unconstitutional”. Now it is being withdrawn in anticipation of a possible ruling by a constitutional court. 

So I do not want to make futile arguments about this two-third business and second and third Reading. I do not want even to make any single attempt on the Constitution interpretation because I do not think that really I am competent. I have zero competence.  But if you people think it is correct, Mr Speaker, you are a lawyer, hon. Kutesa is a lawyer, hon. Adolf Mwesige is a lawyer, we are not short of lawyers here. Please, save this country of constitutional petitions.  Thank you.

4.11
MAJ. GEN. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: Mr Speaker, I have time and again said that the motives of mankind are less transparent than the motions they produce. We are debating this Constitution and debating the amendments because we are Uganda; we are not Tanzanians; we are not Kenyans; we are not anybody else.  

This is a home grown Constitution and it is not a Constitution that made us, we are the ones who made the Constitution. So if we find where we erred or something we omitted or something that is unnecessary, it is our right that we conveniently amend it. In the process of doing it, like we did last time in the Constituent Assembly, which I had the honour to be a member, we voted openly and nobody has ever been killed because we voted openly. 

All those who were in the Constituent Assembly except those who have died of natural causes, nobody has ever been killed. So for somebody to come here and say, we should not vote openly on the issues of the Constitution - and voting openly has got many forms. For a Member to stand up and be counted and the Clerk says, this is no and this is yes” and somebody stands up and says “No, we must go to the lobby”, I think sometimes, it is making a mockery of our intelligence. Because if you stand up - most of us have done in primary school –(Interruptions)

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, the hon. Kahinda Otafiire is a very senior member of this House and he is acquainted with the rules of this House. He is also well aware that one of the methods of voting is by division. Is he therefore, in order to begin insulting colleagues who are insisting that this could be one of the best methods of voting without advancing his own arguments? Is he in order to attack colleagues who are using our rules to choose one of the ways of voting in this House? 

THE SPEAKER: You see, I have been following the kind of debate here, people who are advocating for secret ballot were accusing others of being timid, having been bribed; this is the kind of debate I have seen here. I think a person should justify why he thinks his is better than the other. But the way the debate has been going on, people have been accusing each other of the other. This time for him, he is saying “No, division is not better, let it be here”. It is a question of assessment of what is better and what is not.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Yes, I am experienced in this House and also you know you chaired the committee that assessed me on copper reverts and you have never made the report.  (Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: The hon. Kahinda Otafiire is right that he appeared before me in respect of allegations relating to him with respect to various cases of mismanagement and abuse of office in the Uganda Railways. The honourable member is aware that my committee completed its task and presented the report to this House, although the report was not debated. Is he in order to insinuate that I presided over a committee, which never finished its work, and therefore he got cleared? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: You finished your work, but the work was not debated, so I think you have informed him that you did. (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: So, Mr Speaker, like I said the motives of mankind are less transparent than the emotions they produce.  Those who want us to go into the lobby, I do not think they are doing it in good faith.  You see, all is fair in war and politics - ambush, flanking, deception etcetera.  These could be some of the tactics –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, you are going to attract another point of order. The point is this; our Rules of Procedure provide for going in the lobby. What you can say is, mine is better than the other, but it is not in bad faith for those insisting on division lobby. So, I think from now be careful about this.

MAJ. GEN. OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. For the sake of time and for us to be able to finish our job within time and to guide this country through the transition –(Interjection)- but my time was wasted by hon. Mwandha - I think we should follow the procedure of roll call, making your position known, there is a tally.  

One honourable member was concerned about having technology to indicate the number of “nos” or “ayes”. We can ask hon. Nasasira to buy one and put it there; I don’t think it is going to cost a lot of money to bring such a gadget so that you can put to rest those who think that they may not be properly counted. We can also count, most people here are literate, we count every ‘no’ - if it is in your interest you count every ‘no’, you count every ‘yes’; if the Clerk makes a mistake we can repeat it, there is no problem.  

As for committees, I do not see why you should go to committees on subject matter. There is a committee that handles these issues of parliamentary procedure.  So, why should we create extra committees for taking more time? 

It is important that we take this country through the transition. Of course the transition may be a bit painful, but let us lessen the pain.  It is not a question of retaining power or losing it, no, it is a question of change. Even the Almighty, having created the earth, the laws of revolution have continued; yes, he did his work in six days, but the rules of revolution have continued. That is why records are broken at every Olympic games; you have never heard records broken backwards, it is an improvement and these improvements are a bit costly.  

So, let us put the country through a smooth, well-organized transition, and let us change our Constitution to suit our political situation. Let us cooperate, let us be orderly and everything will be good.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.21
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This issue of voting in the House has been debated before elsewhere. President Museveni, while campaigning for some of us who are in this House, clearly told Ugandans that vote whoever you want to vote; even if he comes to the House to sleep, we shall wake him up to vote for the Movement. And this is the genesis of this motion, that people want to be woken up to vote for Movement.  

Mr Speaker, if a matter has been highly debated in the House, maybe 60 or more Members will have contributed to that matter.  I have never seen all Members in this House contributing to a single matter. That means that those who do not contribute wait to be convinced by those who contribute. That is why voting secretly would have made sense, but that matter was resolved yesterday. 

But let me also add for the record, that secret vote is an outcome of an Act of Parliament, which gives privileges to Members of this House. We debate here under privilege, if it were not so, we would be permanently in court for some of the things we say here, but we have wisely been protected from litigation by that privilege.  The secret voting is an extension of that privilege, unfortunately, that matter was abandoned yesterday.  

I am advocating for division lobby because it is the surest way that every Member has been woken up, as President Museveni wants it to be.  We will all wake up and move to each side of the lobby we want to vote for; we will have fulfilled the wish of our big man. 

MR KIWALABYE: Mr Speaker, I have listened to my colleague; is he in order to insinuate that we who were elected in this Seventh Parliament to represent our people come here to sleep and we are woken up to vote? Is he in order, Mr Speaker when all of us actually debate fully on any motion here and we resolve all these motions when we are awake? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether he can substantiate, I would have asked him to do so. I have never seen anybody sleeping here. Please let us economize on the –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKERIS: Thank you hon. Speaker. I am seeking clarification from my friend hon. Mwondha as to whether if one stands up and says “yes” or “no”, he or she does so while sleeping?

MR ONEK: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform our colleague, hon. Mwondha that most often you get some Members in this House who just close their eyes to internalise –(Laughter)- and conceptualize issues deeply before they can really go to vote. Such postures are always mistaken for sleeping. A few Members in the Front Bench always do that. (Laughter)
 
Mr speaker, I want to inform my Friend that closing an eye does not mean you have closed your ears.  So, you can rest assure that we shall vote correctly. Thank you.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you for the information especially when you have observed rightly that most Members of the Front Bench quite often close their eyes. But Mr Speaker, my worry is –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, you just ruled that you were unable to get hon. Mwondha to substantiate what he had said and he continues to make statements that he cannot substantiate. Is it in order for him to allege that most Members of the Front Bench do what he has said when in fact he is unable to substantiate that very serious irresponsible statement?  

Mr Speaker, is he in order to allege that Ministers come here only not to attend to the business of the House, when in fact, I am more constant a member of this Chamber than hon. Mwondha by record? He alleges that we come here not to do business but to merely dose away or whatever he is imagining. Is he in order to make that very serious allegation, Mr Speaker?  
 
THE SPEAKER: Well, if he is imputing improper motive that you come here to sleep instead of doing business, unless he can substantiate, I think he is out of order. 

But before we proceed further, I want to take this opportunity to welcome to this House our distinguished guest, His Excellency the Secretary General of the Commonwealth, Donald Mackinnon and his entourage. You are most welcome. (Applause) But let us deal with serious matters on the motion.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, it is a serious matter. I was only given a point of information. It was never from me and I was utilizing that point of information –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Please would you continue with your substantive debate?

MR MWONDHA: The issue of two-thirds in the committee, I thought this matter came and was considered by the committee because of the nature of the Bill before the House. The Bill was an omnibus Bill; it still is until withdrawn. And because it was omnibus, we were likely to deal with various Articles in the committee, and the only way of making sure that Articles are treated as required by the Constitution was to require the committee to fulfil the two-thirds. And Mr Speaker, you have dealt with this matter before –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, are you trying to say that our Rules of Procedure should plug holes in the Constitution? If the Constitution did not say that you should read Article by Article during the second reading, do you want our Rules of Procedure to do exactly what the Constitution should have done?

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, if I have not forgotten, you yourself are on record that there was a lacuna, which the rules could help to fill. 

THE SPEAKER: You see, I might have said so, and there is no reason to say I did not, but I am saying if there is a lacuna in the Constitution, the same cannot not make good in the deliberation which are not constitutional amendment. We note that there is a lacuna and we leave it to you when you amend the Constitution to plug it. But you cannot plug it by using our Rules of Procedure, because the Constitution can only be amended by a Bill. We are not dealing with the Bill; we are dealing with Rules of Procedure.

MR MWONDHA: You see the framers of the constitution and I am one of them, I was in the Constituent Assembly, did not anticipate that 118 Articles would ever come at ago for amendment. We never anticipated that, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, whether they are five or whether they are ten, the principle remains that there is a problem. I think in your view we cannot solve it here. We shall solve it when we start reviewing the Constitution. And as somebody said, we shall address that issue that was never addressed in the Constituent Assembly. 

MR MWONDHA: Then if that matter is going to be addressed, it had better be the very first one to be handled so that thereafter we can proceed properly. Short of that, we will have miscarried some of the positions or –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, but honourable member if you are to amend it, it will mean amending Chapter 18 under Article 259. And therefore, to achieve the results you have to go through the process, otherwise it cannot be shown in a day. But it is a problem, I agree.

MR MWONDHA: Mr speaker, thank you for either assisting me or debating with me –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am guiding you –(Laughter)

MR MWONDHA: The problem with the new addition to the motion by hon. Madada has been brought out clearly. What happens if an error is made by the Clerk doing the tallying, how shall we be able to address that error? That is a problem. What happens if the Member called is absent from the House and hon. Sam Kutesa says ‘yes’ on his behalf?  

MR KUTESA: Mr Speaker, I know the background of hon. Mwondha and where he comes from, and what happens in that area where he operates from.  But is it in order for hon. Mwondha to impute that I could impersonate other honourable members of Parliament when voting? As I said, I know hon. Mwondha’s history in the past, but I do not think even he could not impersonate, but is he in order to impute that I can impersonate? Is he in order to confuse me with himself? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was just using your name and title as an example, but it could happen and especially – you see, right now we are not as many as we should be in this House, but 300-plus seated in this House, a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ can be said for someone who is absent; and the Constitution requires that the two-thirds must be of every Member of the House. 

So, absence from this House is also a vote. How shall we record it? It is a vote because it will subtract from the two-thirds. So, the best way to handle this situation is by division in the lobby; and then there, because many members have said, we must be accountable, we shall be able to sign against our names with our own hands, and there is no greater accountability than that, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: It is time, please.

MR MWONDHA: Mr Speaker, I hope my colleagues will agree with me that the best way of being accountable and standing to be counted is in a division lobby.  Thank you.

4.38
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am glad that the committee’s report represents maturity of those people who represented us in the committee, and I thank them for gathering all the information that Members have and trying to bring us together. I congratulate them.

Mr Speaker, I just want to remind my colleagues that as a responsible Parliament and Government, we stand at a critical political point in time because we were voted into this Parliament and during our term of office, much as we had to debate many Bills, we were mandated to debate the Constitutional Amendment Bill and present to the country a new political dispensation. 

What disturbs me is that this Government has tried to help Ugandans heal the wounds that were inflicted on them by sitting governments. But instead of appreciating that, at this critical point in time when we are trying to amend the Constitution, some people appear to want to take us back. There are suspicions, Mr Speaker –(Interjection)- I have only two minutes, allow me to – because I have not developed my point anyway.  

Mr Speaker, when you hear colleagues suspecting our Clerks and even the Speaker and individuals within the House, it is really - There is nothing wrong, but unless you have evidence to prove that - We have been here and we have been voting –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, when I was discussing the matter and the possible weaknesses of voting by a show of hands, I was very clear. I said that a person counting 300 people can make a mistake, and that is human; I was in no way creating any suspicion of bad intentions on the part of the Clerk or the Speaker. Is hon. Janat Mukwaya in order to impute improper motive about a statement that I made very clearly in the best interest of the process we are doing right now?
 
THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether she was in reference to what you contributed; she only said that people have suspicions and so forth. For instance, yesterday somebody said he or she was apprehensive of the discretion of a Speaker; that was a sign of being suspicious. But there is nothing wrong in being suspicious of somebody. 

You see, honourable members, even in the lobby division, some people can go in the lobby when they do not intend to vote, but the Clerk can still say you voted when you have not, it is possible. So, it is not a guarantee – I am not arguing but I am saying sometimes people go in the lobby and they never vote, but only to show that they are participating.  What are you going to do with that?  There is no foolproof system, I think, we can only trust that the people have integrity and therefore they do what is expected of them; whether lobby or here, anything can happen. But please let us proceed with the debate and we conclude it today, if possible.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, thank you for that wise ruling. People have been quoting this book, Roots of Instability, which was written 20 years ago. But the situation has changed –(Interjection)- Yes, and I am going to state. We vote, we count on the same day, so the results are known at the polling station.  

Two, we are putting our votes in the same ballot box. So you cannot change this with this or with that on the way. Yes, constituencies are known unless Parliament changes. So, these are some of the issues, which cause instability here. So, Mr Speaker and colleagues, unless and there are people here who constantly change goal posts, it is on record in 1999, the vote indicated Movement versus multiparties, come 2001 the record is there. 

The Sempebwa report, which we are going to discuss, is very clear. But ours being mature politics and being leaders, we are saying let us open political space, that is a deliberate decision taken by this government. So, I am just appealing to colleagues that give credit where it is due and criticize when necessary.

I support the report; all the legal issues have been ably put but I just want to state this on two issues. I support voting by tally and recording, why? Because my constituency will see me here being called, I will be recorded, they will see me voting and I should vote for what I stand for!  So, for those people who are saying, “we should go in the division” what are you hiding actually? Mr Speaker, our votes are known already, everybody here knows where one is going to vote. So, whether you stand up here, whether you go in the lobby, it does not make any difference but we want a proper record recorded on the screen of television.

I just want to say, Mr Speaker, that as we move into debating this amendment, I see no reason why we should bring on board another committee because the work that is coming before this Parliament was debated when we debated the White Paper. A report is ready, so the same work that is going to be handled by the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee is a competent committee. So, without wasting any more time, I plead with colleagues that let the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee handle the work expeditiously and we move. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.47
MR NATHAN NANDALA (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The true self is the inside. I can easily laugh when inside I am not laughing. The true conscience of a human being is the inside. I am bringing this in relation to our methods we are trying to adopt. But since the method, which was really going to help us to express our true self has been removed, God should be there to help us!  

Mr Speaker, a true record is the primary record, which is initiated by a person himself or herself.  In this matter of open voting, if you call my name as Nandala and I say, yes, and tomorrow I am able to say no I was mistaken, that is why a true record, which is the primary record is a record I would have in my own handwriting either written or signed on it.  

Mr Speaker, we want to be accountable and this accountability should not be on one single day, it should be one where you can go to the record and discover what I did. In the Hansard somebody can misspell a name but you cannot misspell my signature and in that context, I would ask colleagues, we have agreed to vote openly and we should go further to really put our hands down and sign, we can go by division lobby. If you do not want us to go out, you are fearing people would run or whatever put the books there in the Chamber. 

In 1986, when we came from the bush -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, I recall three fundamental statements, which were made by my President when he was swearing in because we were the ones who brought him from the bush: One - Mr Speaker, I want to be safeguarded from hon. Kutesa because I know – (Interruption)  

THE SPEAKER: You are very well protected.

MR NANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. They were three fundamental statements, which I recall:

One, our President said this is not a change of guards but a fundamental change.

Two, I have come here to make sure there are no peasants by building a self-sustained, integrated blah, blah economy.

Three, the problem with African leaders is wanting to stick in power and I, Yoweri Museveni, will not do it.  

Mr Speaker, this took place in front of Parliament and I was there and as I have told you, I do not want history to forget us, and it will always repeat itself and I know many of you with grey hair know this but you do not want to talk about it. That is why I am saying that in the same context, I would repeat: One, we need a primary record; two, the issue of time does not arise because if we knew that we were going to amend 118 Articles, we should have started the process early. What is important for us now are very few Articles, one or two.  

I would be very glad Parliament is not ending today, Mr Speaker. Let us amend what will help us now and the Eighth Parliament or the Hundredth Parliament can do the rest. This shows to me - I was not in the Constituent Assembly - that these people in the Constituent Assembly maybe had a problem. If you can make a Constitution of 286 Articles then you bring 118 to be amended in the short period, then there must have been a problem. Mr Speaker, nobody should be calling himself a Constituent Assembly delegate if he knows this is a problem and most of them who are on the front bench should have even moved out because they have caused us this time problem.  

Mr Speaker, having said that, the Constitution is the supreme law. I am told the lawyers call it, is it grand law or whatever on which other laws are built. But, we are tampering with a very big instrument and our President told us that let there be democracy and I will build a Constitution. Now, here is the same Constitution, which is supposed to guide us, it is the one we want to break. But let us break it and break it well.  

Mr Speaker, the Constitution is very clear; I am not a lawyer as such, but I have read it. I am happy hon. Kutesa has read Article 89, but Article 88 says: “The quorum of Parliament shall be one- third…” and it says in Article 89 how the one- third can make a decision, but it goes ahead even to be specific on specific items. That is why Article 259 is specifically there for amending the Constitution. So, I do not want us to miss these small issues of adopting a report of Parliament like how copper rivets were lost, and the one of amending the Constitution. Why are you worried, you have the two-thirds, why do you run away? We are paid to be in Parliament and it should be the system we should follow up to the end.

I am aware the major reason on this open voting - let us not beat about the bush because we have been using these same Rules of Procedure for some time, and nobody raised the issue that they are not working well until one Article, 105(2), came up.  Mr Speaker, the problem is Article 105(2). If that is the problem you bring your Article alone here, we deal with it with its own Bill and follow the Constitution and dispose it of and the others will follow also the Constitution.  

It is not right for us to do things for selfish ends. They have mentioned Ibingira and Balaki Kirya, they were stamping that we must pass that law, we should have passed it yesterday, the next day it was on them. I want us to be careful - anyway somebody has said history repeats itself. But I am praying to God that by the time we reach to amending the Constitution especially Article 105(2), all of us would have seen the light because under Matthew 13:13 it says, “They have the eyes they are not seeing, they have the ears they are not hearing….” But it should not be for selfish ends. I am asking you my colleagues that we should make a law, which will live for the test of time.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.56
MRS WINFRED MASIKO (Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Honourable members of Parliament, I support hon. Madada’s motion. I have attentively listened to the proponents of the division lobby, and I have found no merit in the reasons that have been advanced to justify why we should go to the division lobby.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, one of the reasons that has been advanced is that there should be physical count, that people should move and go to the division lobby and then they sign. But, the motion moved by hon. Madada says clearly that a person will be called upon and then there will be a tally, and that is the clearest way of ensuring that somebody has voted the way he has or she has.  

When it is a division lobby, we do not have microphones in the division lobby, we do not have gadgets, which can help people to view what is happening in the Parliament, all these cameras we have are within here. Therefore, I find it very difficult to understand what actually they meant.

Mr Speaker, the proponents of this say that mistakes will be made. I am aware that all of us have gone to school; we have done some basic Mathematics. If we do not trust the clerks that are going to do the tally, we can all have the privilege when the name is being called to actually do the tally ourselves so that we crosscheck that what has been given is right or wrong. Therefore, there cannot be mistakes made on that issue.

Mr Speaker, the issue of time. It is really very unfortunate when people say that we have all the time. Time is a resource! The taxpayers have paid a lot of money to make us sit here and do the work.  The government puts in a lot of its resources to make sure that we come and work, therefore, we need to be careful when we are dealing with time. It takes an average of 10 minutes for every individual to leave this House and go in the division lobby and get the name ticked or whatever. We have done this in the past; every time we go for division lobby, we just do that only item for the whole afternoon. 

Let us be serious as Members of Parliament and be responsible to the population we represent. We need to save time and the tally and roll call are methods that will help us to save time; they are transparent and they should be really adopted by everybody of us who has the country at heart.

Mr Speaker, I would like to comment on Article 89 of the Constitution. I am very glad and proud to have been a Member of the Constituent Assembly, and when we were looking at this Article we were aware of the fact that usually at the committee stage there are so many issues that are raised and, therefore, we were also concerned by the reality on the ground. How practical is it for us to get two-thirds all the time?

Let us be genuine with ourselves, Members of Parliament. If at committee stage we are to introduce the two-thirds, we shall run into a danger of not completing. It might be the intention of some of us to extend the time so that we do not complete because, if we were going to go by two-thirds in the committee stage, it is time consuming and it is not practical and it is not realistic. 

I would like to ask honourable members here, let us do things that are practical, that are realistic; let us be responsible for every action we take. We owe this country a responsibility of doing things that are practical, therefore, let us not really try to hide behind issues and bring forward rules and regulations that cannot be attained. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request Members of this House to support hon. Madada’s motion. It is the motion that will help us to do our work in record time and diligently. I thank you.

5.02
THE MINISTER OF WORKS, HOUSING AND COMMUNICATION (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I make my contribution on the motion on the Floor, let me recognize –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we take five minutes not more.

MR NASASIRA: That the honourable member representing the Workers had raised here a question with respect to strike going on in Uganda Railways Corporation, and I was on my way from a meeting with the commonwealth delegation and I want to promise that since this question came on the Floor today, and negotiations are going on with those people who are leading a strike, I will make a statement tomorrow about the strike in the railway, hopefully we will have solved the problem.  

Mr Speaker, let me start by saying that, although I did not contribute yesterday, I was so excited that the House overwhelmingly voted so that we can vote in future openly. I was very excited and I think this is a very good trend for the future of our country. Let me also use this opportunity because, I heard a number of people who were trying to instil fear in us that, if you are seen voting you will be in trouble; people quoting the dark days of the 1960s and early 1980s, those who died. 

I was a Member of the Constituent Assembly; we voted openly 100 per cent and some of the positions we took were not necessarily the positions that our government or sometimes the President wanted. And as far as I know, almost 300 delegates of us, unless those who died of other natural causes, nobody was intimidated. [Hon. Members: “Mulondo”]. Hon. Mulondo made his statement not during voting it was during his contribution. Whatever you think that some people might have thought of him, but I know a lot of Ugandans who respect hon. Mulondo a lot for the contribution he made. So, let us demystify the fear of open politics like we demystified the gun, like we demystified fearing the Army. 

Let me now turn to hon. Madada. Now, Mr Speaker, when I compare hon. Madada’s motion and the proposal by the committee of going in the lobby, and I realize the task we have ahead of us, it is like if someone asked me to go to Mbarara where I have an urgent meeting to deal with and he gave me an option either to travel by car or by boda boda or by bicycle. All are forms of transport and eventually I would get there; but let us see the task we have. I do not think I would have thought seriously if I opted to travel by a bicycle because, it is one form of transport. 

I agree going by division is also openly voting but going by division for all the amendments that we want to deal with and the time we have is like choosing a bicycle to go Mbarara to catch up that meeting when you have an option for going with Mercedes Benz. Mr Speaker, hon. Madada’s motion helps us to move fast. All Members want now is transparency, accountability and to be on record. I think those are the concerns of Members and all these are there in hon. Madada’s motion. And for those doubting Thomases, the suspicious people, what we should worry about is how we manage administratively that voting. 

I imagine for the roll call we shall be having booklets, calling Members from hon. Aachilla to hon. Zziwa and when the clerk reads out the names, Yes will be recorded “Yes”, “No” will be recorded “No” and “absent” - I am sure somebody will mention that one is absent - will be recorded “absent”. Now first these will be on this tally sheet; secondly, all that will be in the Hansard. So, for the doubting Thomases if you want to check the tally sheet and the Hansard - and I want to propose that these tally sheets are made in standard books and are signed at end of each voting by the clerk and the Speaker as one way of endorsement.  

But for those who are even committed to signing their signatures, I do not see any problem. Those tally sheets could have signatures and if you want your signature you can go to the clerk and sign. But to go in the lobby - by the way I have seen people being threatened as they go in the lobby. I have seen people being pulled in lobbies and the lobby is as transparent and as open as this method.

Mr Speaker, somebody was challenging innovations. I cannot imagine anybody in a modern state or a modern world challenging people that they should not be innovative at all; we must be innovative all the time. I have an innovation now, which we could consider. 

Mr Speaker, apart from you having your tally, I think there could be a simple garget that can be pressed by the clerk. As they read your name, hon. Nasasira “aye” the column on aye changes from 20 to 21 when we are watching here. That is a simple thing, this is just administrative; we can even handle that. Hon Musisi, “nay” the nay increases from one to two – (Laughter) - and we move on and at the end of the day, the clerk reads the “ayes” and the “nays” on the electronic screen there. And for those who might want to abstain they can stand up after and they are counted and we see whether those numbers compare together with a tally. These will all satisfy the un-satisfiable, the suspicious, and the non-believers. We have a duty as a Parliament to finish this business the country is waiting and we move. We do not want people who want to drag our democratic process by delays and so on.

So, Mr Speaker, as I conclude let me touch on two things: One; with respect to the proposed amendment, you know this committee much as I thank them for the work, they added that while we were discussing looking at hon. Kizige’s motion, other things came up, things like voting at committee stage, things like working in the committees and they have made their proposals. 

In fact, this report has now become an omnibus report because there are other things. They have turned it into an omnibus report because they have added voting at committee stage. They are worried about so many clauses and so on, but those who said voting on the second reading and the third reading should be by two-thirds, knew very well that for any Bill there is also the first reading. They could have put there two-thirds for the first reading. They still knew that there was committee stage, they did not put there two-thirds. They knew carefully where they wanted to vote, and for those who are worried about the number of clauses, as far as I am concerned, you have an opportunity if you think one clause was not handled well to recommit it and you go back.

So, let us not again derail the process by trying to get two-thirds on each clause so that we finish two years from now. Our country is waiting for this Parliament to do its job quickly and finish. So, I do not support the amendment of Rule 108(3) because I think it is just a delay and there is no need for it. In any case, lawyers tell us that what is not prohibited is allowed. So, since it is not prohibited, there is no need to bring it in to delay us and the process.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I also oppose the proposal of having subject matter committees because I see hon. Oulanyah’s committee actually as a subject matter committee. We have brought the Bills, they have assessed the Bills as subject matter committees, they are bringing back their report and we shall sit here through the process of dealing with any Bill and finish the work so that Uganda can move on with its democratic process. Mr Speaker, thank you very much.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The debate is going on very well. Some of us need guidance as regards the capacity of this Parliament to accommodate all the 300 Members of Parliament and for every Member of Parliament to be able to speak and how many minutes it will take each one. Because the number of gadgets we have here and if all the 300 Members of Parliament are to sit here, that requires prior preparation and the buying of these gadgets so that every Member of Parliament has it. I do not know whether your Office has taken care of that.

THE SPEAKER: In the next few days I will look into that.

5.18
MR JACK SABIITI (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Let me thank the Chairperson and the Committee for the good report, and I would also like to thank hon. Matembe for her minority report.

Mr Speaker, some of us who had wanted secret voting had our fears; fears of timing because of the politics in the country at the moment, the intimidation and harassment, the kisanja money, and the conscience, as one Member has stated. 

However, since the consensus of the House is that we must go by open voting, let us go for it wholesale and let every Member of Parliament be accountable. So, the proposal by the committee, and indeed the amendment of hon. Madada, go a long way to make sure that every Member of Parliament is accountable. And I think if we do it the Kikiga way, that is the way we should do it, and I thank both the committee and hon. Madada.

But I have my reservation as to the way we are going to handle this voting. In the event that there is an objection by some Members that the tallying has not been good, that there could have been some underhand in the way the whole tallying was done, how do we handle that? 

I would have wanted, Mr Speaker, that hon. Madada’s motion be hinged on Rule 76(1). This one reads: “Where after the Speaker or the Chairperson has announced the results of the voting under Rule 74, immediately, forty or more Members stand in their places signifying their disapproval of the outcome of the vote, the Speaker or Chairperson shall order for a division” because certainly you will expect some people –(Mrs Mwesigye rose_)- I have little time, please. You will expect maybe in the whole process some people to be dissatisfied. So, I request that hon. Madada looks -(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Mr Speaker, hon. Madada’s motion is in respect of amendment of Rule 75. So, hon. Jack Sabiiti is quoting Rule 74, which has no relevance to constitutional amendment and Rule 76 is in respect of Rule 74, which rule has no relevance to constitutional amendment. Is hon. Sabiiti in order, therefore, to mislead this House?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe he did not address the two rules when he made his observation. Now that he can compare the two, then he can maybe revisit his position. But the point is, honourable Member, that even in the division there could be a problem.  That is why under Rule 76(2), it is anticipated there could be also confusion, there could be errors, you can repeat it. 

So in case I think also, where you think that the tally is incorrect, we can always repeat it. So, that is not a problem, if it is challenged that there is a mistake as far as I am concerned, I have counted 60, but you have counted 62 and there is a serious disparity, we can repeat.

MR SABIITI: With that assurance from you, I hope whenever this matter comes on the Floor of Parliament and there is an objection, you will stick to your word as you have always done.

Secondly, my main concern is on two-thirds, and this is where I have a very big problem. As you are aware, Mr Speaker, I was also a Member of the Constituent Assembly, and when we talk of the second reading and the third reading, I shall need your guidance here. When does second reading start?  What does it mean?  Where does it end? Is the committee stage part of the second reading?

THE SPEAKER: The answer is “no”.

MR SABIITI: How do you arrive at that where in this Constitution or any law of Parliament the committee does not form part of the second reading? 

THE SPEAKER: The position is this; when the Bill is brought it receives the first reading the Bill stands committed to the appropriate committee of Parliament. In this case the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, where the Bill is scrutinized and Members who wish to make a contribution by way of amending the Bill can go there. 

When the committee is ready with its report, because they are working hand in hand with the Minister in charge of the Bill or the owner of the Bill, then they say we are ready with the report and then the minister will come here and move a motion for second reading. When he makes a move for a second reading he justifies why the Bill has been brought, the principles and so forth. This is accompanied by the report of the committee and a general debate ensues as a result. After we have exhausted that debate, then we put a question on the motion for a second reading. 

Second Reading has its standard meaning; it has nothing to do with clause by clause. It is approving the principle of amendment and when the vote is brought in this particular case I count two-thirds of voting Members. Then if I obtain that the motion is carried, he reads the title of the Bill and that concludes the second reading. 

When you look at Rules 104 and 105, the committee stage will come after the motion for the second reading has been carried. So, it is not proper for some people to say, as I have heard, that committee stage or Committee of the Whole House is part of the second reading. We can only go to the committee stage after the motion for a second reading has been carried. Therefore, they are two different procedures. 

Then when we go to the committee stage and we have finished it using our procedures, the minister or the one in charge will ask us to revert to the House. When he asks us to revert to the House, he makes a report to the House then with the Speaker not with the Chairman. Then he moves another motion that let us adopt the report; this time the House adopts the report of the committee. It is the basis of that one that the Bill gets the third reading; but before that, if you are not satisfied with the report of the committee, you can seek a recommital 100 times. Then finally when it is finished again the report is adopted.

You can break the passage of the Bill when the minister says let the Bill have the second reading now and do pass. You can bring another motion and say, No, I propose that let us not read this motion today but read it six months from then. If your motion is carried there would be no second reading, there would be no passage of the Bill that is the procedure. (Mr Kakooza rose_)- No, let me deal with him because –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: On that particular point, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. 

MR SABIITI: I hope you will give me more time.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I am just worried of the interpretation of that period of committee stage because it is between the second reading and the third reading. To me, that is where we make laws and the valuation and the authenticity of the articles we are going to amend. My humble appeal is that we need more consultation on the way we are going to handle this that so that it does not leave a gap for people not satisfied to go somewhere so that we move harmoniously, very fast and we finish the work. 

THE SPEAKER: There is no doubt with the procedure; that is the procedure. Anybody who is not satisfied with it is free to go to court and people are trained to go to court.

MR JACK SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I am raising these questions because you have to guide this House, and we shall take your word seriously as you guide this House. We may have not studied law but we studied those disciplines, which also touch on the management of Parliament and in my interpretation the second reading is part and parcel of the committee stage. The reason being, when do we start amending a Constitution, when do we start amending the law or the Article in the Constitution? The second reading you are referring to we are discussing the principles, which the minister will have presented to this Parliament. These are general principles, which we can pass –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me, can I help you? Can I refer you to rule –(Interruption)

MR SABIITI: I wanted to make my point –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, no, let me help you. You see, in this red book page 135, we have Rule 105(1) it says: “If a motion for the second reading of a Bill is carried, the Bill shall stand committed, immediately or on a date to be fixed, to the Committee of the Whole House unless the House, on motion, commits it to a select committee which shall immediately be nominated by the Speaker in accordance with Rule 155.” So, these are very clear, simple terms; the committee stage will not start until the motion for second reading has been carried and being carried means being passed. 

MR SABIITI: I see your guidance, Mr Speaker, but in my opinion  -(Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, anybody who missed the opportunity to catch the eyes of Members of Parliament to be appointed Speaker, should wait until the 8th Parliament. As long as we have the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker whom we elected, we should respect them. Is it in order for hon. Jack Sabiiti to say that the rules that you are reading are your own argument? Mr Speaker, you are a very kind Speaker, but we want to protect the Chair of the Speaker. Is it in order for somebody to insinuate that when you are reading the rules, which we made –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable members, especially when the Speaker is there, he must have what they call a thick skin; he does not get sensitive on this and, therefore, I would not like to rule on this because it will be seen as if I am subjective and I do not want to.  But the point has been made and the reference is here, one can read for himself not me, but I think the position I have made is the position I have made and that is the position we are going to follow.  

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, I am being misinterpreted by the Minister of Agriculture. I thought we are here to advance our ideas on behalf of our people we represent and, therefore, if in my opinion what will have been stated on this Floor of Parliament is wrong or right, surely I have that prerogative in this Parliament to advance my thinking. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, given that now you have given the ruling, guidance, I hope that this Parliament will not be delayed unnecessarily in terms of litigation and whatever because I felt really this is an area, which I think some learned friends in this House - when you requested hon. Amama Mbabazi and others and the Chairperson of the Committee to go and discuss, I would have expected a small report to that effect on the understanding on this area so that all of us go together. But if we do not, I can see a problem tomorrow, but I will have talked my mind. With these, Mr Speaker, I thank you.

5.34
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I speak on the motion raised by the hon. Sulaiman Madada. The Committee on Rules adopted open voting, and the submissions of the honourable members are also to that same effect, and a vote was taken taking away now the issue of secret voting on these matters.  

Mr Speaker, the discussions that are being carried are now on whether you go to division lobby or whether you do a tally vote. And my understanding of a tally vote, which is called by other names in this particular amendment or motion, is that my name is called “Jacob Oulanyah, how do you vote?”  I say, “I vote No” then they mark it as ‘No’ and the presiding officer, in this case the Speaker, would repeat that, “Hon. Oulanyah votes No” so that the records are clear and final. In the Hansard it will be very clear, I have said ‘No’ and the Speaker repeats that, “Hon. Oulanyah votes No” so that concludes that process.

Why do I support this as a proper innovation at this time? The two situations are similar with the division lobby. In fact, they are almost the same. The only difference is the time it takes. If you get out of the Chamber of Parliament to go and register your name and sign and walk back, you will take three times the time you stand up to say ‘No’ and that vote is recorded. So, is it in the interest of this House at this moment to adopt a procedure that would save time and make us execute business within a reasonable time? I think so, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, the motion does not stop there. I want us to examine the other leg of the motion. The motion foresees a situation where it may be required that you do another type of voting, and the motion talks about show of hands. 

I am looking at a situation, for example, in the Bill that is before our committee, which is a ready report anyway, but because of the developments that we have now seen - In that Bill we have, for example, the amendment to change the name ‘Electoral Commission’ to ‘Uganda Electoral Commission.’ Would that require a division vote, would that require tally and tie and whatever it is? Or should there be in such circumstances the discretionary power given to you, Mr Speaker, to decide that you can do this by show of hands?  

I want to be on any record showing how I have voted, but certainly I would not mind not being on the record of changing the name from “Electoral Commission” to “Uganda Electoral Commission.” So, I would support the second leg of hon. Madada’s motion that there should be circumstances under which the Speaker could direct that the vote be taken by show of hands if the matter is, for example, the type I have cited. That discretion would be important, it would make sense to me and I am sure the honourable members see the sense that it would make.

I have spoken strongly previously on the question of the two-thirds, I do not intend to speak again on this matter. But for the record, let me state that there is a Professor of Law called Kasese, he writes and teaches international law. He says that lawyers are trained not necessarily to know the law, but where to find the law. But he goes on to say, they are also trained to argue where the law is uncertain. 

Mr Speaker, we have a case of uncertainty in the Constitution; we have a situation of a gap in the Constitution and it is entirely up to the honourable members to resolve it. I offered a solution, I made suggestions, I do not want to repeat them. But I want to say that whatever decision we take on this issue of voting at the committee stage, should be supporting the spirit of the Constitution. 

I have heard the very eloquent submissions of the hon. Adolf Mwesige and the senior minister, hon. Sam Kutesa, on this issue. I do not intend to contradict them at all, but what I would rather do, Mr Speaker, is to ask us to determine how best we would have reflected the true spirit of the Constitution in amending an Article of the Constitution when we vote at the committee stage. 

Mr Speaker, I do not say it would be unlawful; I do not even say it would be unconstitutional because there is a gap. Like the hon. Adolf Mwesige submitted very eloquently, he said, “I have searched in the Constitution and I have not found” - because it is not there, and that is the reason we are speaking, it is not there.  What do we do as Parliament?

If I had a huge hole in my coat, if I take it to a tailor, I would presume that the tailor would put material that would be kind of similar to the general colour of my coat rather than bring a white one and put it on my black coat, it would not look nice. So, where there is a gap, we should supply it with a necessary and proper material that suits the circumstance and in this case, I will not make suggestions. My submissions on this are very clear, Mr Speaker, I rest my case. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I want to take hon. Kinobe – I think honourable had indicated that she wanted, she has abandoned.

5.40
MAJ. JIMMY WILLIAM KINOBE (Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But I think it is good that we exhaustively deal with the subject.

MAJ. KINOBE: Mr Speaker, honourable members, you can imagine speaking after my honourable chairman. I am standing to support the Madada motion. Honourable members may have noticed that the honourable Speaker at the end of every – I have the Floor hon. Kutesa. Members might have observed that at the end of every day’s debate, the Speaker would adjourn the House to give us time to harmonize and consult and indeed, after every sitting, we have been sitting and consulting.  

When I read hon. Madada’s motion, I realized that the Members usefully used the time you used to give us after the adjournments, because they captured the spirit that was in the report. When the Members of the committee submitted that we needed a division lobby, they came up with this harmonized version, which will deliver us to Mbarara, going in the most comfortable vehicle rather the bicycle, to use hon. Nasasira’s words.

Mr Speaker, I have been in this Parliament for sometime and I have been to the division lobby several times. If Members consider what happens in the division lobby when we go there and compare it with a new and orderly innovation being created by this motion, you will bear with me that normally when we go to the lobby, the desk is put there, the clerks stand there, we all surround them, you cannot hear what is going on and we end up wasting a lot of time, sometimes unnecessarily. But when I look at this new innovation, one; it comes out with an orderly way of calling your name, you answer what you want to answer and a visible score board is there. 

I have every reason, Mr Speaker, to support and urge Members to support this improvement of the hon. Madada’s motion that is going to deliver us to what we want. Because as Members have submitted, it is true all of us had our own conscience, but given the process we have gone through, it is no longer our own conscience because we went out, convinced people and they want us to see how we exercise the conscience in accordance with the debate that has been going on, since all the discussions on this matter started.

Mr Speaker, the arguments for having the hard record have also been ably made; not only to be seen today but also to be read tomorrow. It is very unfortunate that some Members were submitting that they are trying to protect timid, opportunistic leaders. 

Honourable members, Harry Truman one of the President’s of America had this to say about timid leaders: “If you fear the heat, get out of the kitchen.” Those who fear the heat, it is high time they got out of the kitchen. In this era, where we are advancing transparency and accountability, it would be very unfortunate that one can argue that let us protect the Members who ate the money, protect the Members who did this, protect Members who are timid. I think this is very good that our reasons are recorded and posterity will judge us and we will stand to defend whatever reason every Member submitted in this House.  

So, on that note really, Mr Speaker, I thank the Members of the committee, because when you look at their report, after analysing all the submissions, I think they made a very patriotic statement, which says that, “While recognizing the need to protect Members of Parliament from manipulation, it is important that a Member of Parliament, not only accounts for his or her actions to his or her voters during this process, but should also remain responsible for his or her actions to the country and posterity” and I look at these innovations as very good steps to ensure that the element is advanced by the committee.

Mr Speaker, my chairman has talked about the two-thirds. I want to propose that after adopting the Madada motion, the list will be there to indicate how many people voted. I think the best way to answer the spirit being talked about, is to make sure that at no time, the numbers of Members of Parliament in the House should drop below the two-thirds that is required by law. In that, whoever would want to go to court tomorrow, these tallies will always be produced and they would see that the spirit of the committed Members –(Interruption)

MR KUTESA: I think there is a mistake.  There is no law requiring these two-thirds. I know that the hon. Oulanyah has argued very eloquently about the spirit and about if you have a hole in your jacket that you should try and fix it with the same material of your jacket.

 The problem with hon. Oulanyah’s argument is that, he has got a hole in his jacket, but he is trying to fix the one in his trousers. (Laughter) Yes, because we are talking about rules, the hole is in the Constitution; his hole is in the jacket, but he is trying to close the one in the trouser -(Laughter)- and it does not work that way.  

The lacuna that the Speaker pointed out was in the Constitution and you cannot fix that lacuna by amending the rules. So, hon. Kinobe, there is no law requiring in the Constitution that you would have two-thirds. Indeed, the hole may be there in the jacket, but if you leave that in the jacket and you close the one in the trouser, you miss the point.

MAJ. KINOBE:  I thank hon. Kutesa.

MR MWONDHA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable member holding the Floor. I thought this matter had already been settled by none other than the Speaker; that when we come to it, we shall devise a method of dealing with it and I want to stick by that. I hope Members will also stick by that.  

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, why do we not finish this debate?

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I want to give this information especially in light of what you said a short while ago, that you wanted to exhaust the debate. I want to say that there is no gap, absolutely none, because as hon. Kutesa and hon. Adolf Mwesige stated here, the Constitution is clear. In Article 89 it says: “Except as otherwise prescribed by the Constitution or any other law, consistent with this constitution, any question proposed for decision of Parliament shall be determined by majority vote.”  

This Article was reproduced word by word in our Rules of Procedure in Rule 71.  Therefore, what this means is that where, like in Article 259, Article 260 and Article 261, there is a requirement for two-thirds majority at Second and Third Reading.  It means that for the other stages it is majority vote that counts, therefore there is no gap.  Thank you.  

MAJ. (RTD) KINOBE: Mr Speaker, I thank all the Members who have given me information.  My submission was not a legal argument, mine is just a political argument that prudence dictates. Whereas we may not have an express rule in our Rules of Procedure, I am just appealing to Members of Parliament that just in case anybody would want to use that, let us make sure – hon. Lumumba was saying that we should be committed and we are paid to be here.  

I am just urging Members that, come the time, let us make sure that we have two-thirds of the Members here sitting and voting. So that when they decide to go to court they will produce the tallies; even without the rules, people will still see that you had two-thirds deciding on that matter as a political move to pre-empt whoever would want to use the legal entry point. 

So, it is my appeal that politically let us retain this. I do not know whether two-thirds must always be in the rules. Even if it is not in the rules, can’t we have more than two-thirds sitting at any one time?  So, we can sustain our quorum; let us urge all the members, whip all the friendly forces, even those who intend to oppose, just come here and sit, have your voice recorded, have your vote recorded, have your tally counted so that at no time should the numbers go below the two-thirds and we shall have defeated all those who would have wanted to take that as an advantage.

Finally, Mr Speaker, it is harmonizing our positions.  I still believe that we have started on a long journey, which must be concluded harmoniously.  Let us use the same spirit of discussing and consulting, then make arguments exhaustively. But at the end of it all, whatever decision we must make, Uganda is not ending tomorrow.  Let us not bring in every political difference you may have with the position, let us put Uganda above self like we did in the Committee.  

Honourable members, the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs as it stands today chose to put Uganda above self, and that is why we produced the reports that we have been seeing coming out.  That same spirit should guide this House as we dispose off this important business at the time when the country needs our services most.  I thank you.

6.20
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): I thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to contribute on this important subject of voting method in the constitutional amendment.  This is important because I am aware that there are 287 articles in the 1995 Constitution. The bill, which was recently withdrawn, is seeking to amend –(Interjection)- it is not yet withdrawn?  Okay, the bill before Parliament is seeking to amend 118 articles, that is substantial.  It means that this Constitution is going through a drastic surgery that at the end of the exercise, the Constitution will be definitely changed beyond what we were expecting.  

This matter is, therefore, important to me and to the people I represent.  I know the people of Tororo demonstrate their seriousness by eating raw rats -(Laughter)- if there was a way, some of us would have eaten raw rats to show how serious this matter is to us.  

To make the Constitution took this country eight years, and many of us were involved in it directly or indirectly. Therefore, Mr Speaker, for us to come with a major amendment at a time like this causes a lot of worry and concern and we need to be understood.  If there are very many of us, who are very suspicious of the current process, I think you have to understand.  

The issue of secret ballot has been put to rest as far as this exercise is concerned, but I just want to share an experience, which I went through in 1980.  In 1980, although somebody said that in Kampala area Police who did not support the UPC party were transferred away from Kampala. I want to share an experience to demonstrate that they were actually not transferred.  

In one of the polling stations in Kawempe, we had a huge majority of supporters of Uganda People’s Congress. It was one of the strongest areas in that zone as far as the party is concerned. We had almost 18 agents to ensure that our votes were safeguarded, and all the 18 were there.  

As usual, I moved around to ensure that all polling stations were properly being manned. As an interested party and as required of me as a leader to ensure that when elections are taking place, you have to make sure that your votes are properly being guarded, your agents are there and everything is going on smoothly. 

 At the end of polling, votes were counted; and in that particular polling station, UPC got zero –(Laughter)- and I asked myself what happened to the votes of the agents because there were 18 agents, that was our concern.  From that time, Mr Speaker, I take the issue of secret ballot to be very important; it is a very important subject to me.  

The issue of secret voting is very important when we are deciding on an important issue.  It is possible that those people genuinely supported the party, but there were certain issues they could not openly discuss and that is why they voted the way they did. I admire them for that.  

There were issues they could not articulate openly, but they chose to tell us what they wanted by voting secretly and we got the message. That is why I thought as leaders, we should give ourselves opportunity to express certain important matters that may be misunderstood if it is told in the open. Particularly the timing, Mr Speaker, we know that the country has been polarized because of the Ekisanja project and even the House has been accused – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, honourable member. Now as I see the position, the issue of debating secret ballot is irrelevant. The issue now before us is hon. Madada’s report and recommendation of the committee.  I am just doing this to save your time so that you concentrate on the other issues which are relevant.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: I want to thank you, Mr Speaker. I thought this experience is very important. In case an issue may arise it is important to have it on record.  Time is golden, I was extremely touched by the contribution of our elder, retired Military Commander, Henry Tumukunde – (Interjection) - oh, he is not yet retired?  I think he should retire because I understand he is forming a party- (Laughter) – You cannot form a party - This is the process of political metamorphosis and we should thank him for that.

Hon. Tumukunde took very hard line position in the Constituent Assembly but talking the way he is talking means the process has changed many things. I think all of us along the way, if we do not learn from each other, we will never be useful to this country.  

Therefore, I am not going to take a hard-line position. I am going to accept the open voting.  I accept the open voting, however, I want to be assured that when that open voting method is adopted it must be open, not halfway open.  It must be open to the extent that the people of Lira Municipality will know that Mrs Ogwal voted on our behalf and voted on that subject. That one I do agree.  However, I have - because many people are saying it will be recorded and the Hansard will reflect how we have voted.

Mr Speaker, I was surprised yesterday when I picked the copy of the Hansard from my pigeonhole, it recorded the debate of the 17 February 2005, on page 12,548, because it is recorded in series. It is recorded there that, “Mrs Cecilia Atim Ogwal (Gulu Municipality, Gulu District).” It is here for your information in the debate of 17 February 2005.  So human errors are possible. We may say that when we adopt the head count or tallying method everything will be perfect. But right now this is the report we have of the debate of the 17 February 2005 recording me as the MP for Gulu Municipality. I am in trouble with hon. Mao. I do not know what will happen when he turns up!

Finally, Mr Speaker, on the issue of – (Interjection) – Mr Speaker can you call my neighbours to order – (Interruption)

CAPT. STEVEN BASALIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With due respect to my neighbour, I want to rise on a point of order.  When these Hansards are given to us, we are supposed to cross check them and make any correction so that your name and your contribution is clear.  Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Cecelia Ogwal to have not read the Hansard and corrected it?  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, that will presuppose that she got the copy before, maybe she did not, otherwise she would have corrected it.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. How would you correct Hansard unless you had got a copy?  These Hansards were distributed yesterday. I do not know how you would have read it before you got a copy. However, thank you for interrupting me.  

Mr Speaker, on the issue of subject committee. I just want to end by giving my views on this. Subject Committees are important, however, the way members of this House were elected to the various committees at the beginning of the 4th Session of the 7th Parliament can cause some suspicion. 

Therefore, I am not very comfortable with the Subject Committee being established to go through the process.  I we would rather discuss all the issues openly here because I will not be sure of how a committee would be composed in order to quickly handle certain matters in a manner that may not possibly suit me.  So, I would support open debate on every subject here so that everybody is a party to all the debates and they can witness whatever has happened.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I plead with the House to keep the Speaker out of this exercise.  A lot has been said about the Speaker being biased. Therefore for this motion to propose that the committee – if I may read as it says that – “Voting at the Committee of the Whole House for purposes of considering clauses in the bill for an Act of Parliament to amend the provision of the Constitution, shall be by roll call and tally provided that the committee may on the direction of the Speaker vote by show of hands.”  

I think we will be putting too much on the Chair. I think if we are to do this, let us do it by the method we would have adopted. Let us leave the Speaker out or the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole House out of this matter. I would not like the Speaker’s personal decision to interfere with the process because this is a constitutional amendment process. I would not like the name of the Speaker to be tarnished because of this. 

Some Members are not quite comfortable in the way business is being conducted in the House. Therefore, the Speaker may be accused for matters of decisions being directed in a certain way.  So, I plead with the House to protect the Speaker, so that he does not directly get involved in directing the affairs during the debate.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS TIPERU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Having been here from the time when the debate started. Realizing that many of the members have vehemently articulated their views on this matter that concerns as to whether we should vote by division lobby or tally and others. 

Mr Speaker, realizing that many things have been promised, like hon. Nasasira has talked about issues of us having a screen. Mr Speaker, you have also promised to improve conditions in this Parliament. 

Aware of the fact that this Parliament has ever been dragged to court due to confusion on the modalities of voting in this House; 

Knowing that this Parliament has agreed to make the population as watchdogs to the proceedings of the House; 

I now move in accordance to Rule 61(1) that a question be put so that this matter can rest.  I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now I put the question - you see there are two motions. There is the committee’s motion and there is hon. Madada’s motion.  So, I put the question to hon. Madada’s amendment.

MR KASIGWA: Mr Speaker, I am seeking your guidance. At what point in time an amendment to hon. Madada’s motion could be amended?  

THE SPEAKER: Could be what?

MR KASIGWA: I would want to move an amendment on hon. Madada’s motion.

THE SPEAKER: But now we have decided to put a question. 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point for clarification.  I would like to understand it clearly whether hon. Madada’s motion is only in respect of Rule 76)(1)(a). Our position tackled two issues: The open voting in general, and we also had provided for an exception to the general rule.  So, I would want to understand it clearly whether hon. Madada’s motion is only in respect of Rule 76(1)(a) or whether it is supposed to take care of the entire Article 76.

MR MADADA: Mr Speaker, my motion is in reference to Rule 76(a) specifically.  It is an amendment to a motion already set by hon. Kizige that was adopted to this House. So, I am amending a motion of a motion already in this House.   

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, I accepted hon. Madada’s amendment, knowing very well that I had rejected the proposed Article 76(2) by the Committee.
  
MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, this session is very important. I would like to seek your indulgence in a matter put forward by hon. Kasigwa. I would like to think that a possible amendment to hon. Madada’s amendment is quite acceptable, and I wanted to be part of the team to amend it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. members, we have been debating a motion, which was tabled yesterday. In debating you could have made a proposal to improve hon. Madada’s amendment.  We have come to a stage when the motion says that I put the question, and that means closing a debate on the motion so that you pronounce yourselves in one way or the other.  Therefore, at this stage I am not taking in an amendment of a motion, whose debate has ended.  I am afraid I am putting the question.

PROF. LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I consulted the mover of this amendment, hon. Madada, yesterday. Rule76 (2) as it is now actually does not give the Speaker discretionary power; it gives him total power as hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised. I consulted with him because when he spoke, Mr Speaker, yesterday you did say that on minor issues.  Now, this particular provision does not bring out minor issues. Therefore, I had proposed an amendment; and that is why I was seeking an opportunity to do that because you cannot propose an amendment during the general debate; you cannot.  I consulted with hon. Madada and he agreed that I move an amendment –(Interjections)- if I am lying he is here – I consulted with hon. Madada -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honorable member, let us use our procedures.  There is a motion, which has been carried by the House allowing me to put a question.  Now for you to stand up and say that you want to amend, what do I do with the decision which you have made for me to put a question to the amendment?

MR KASIGWA: But then, Mr Speaker, there was the position of the Committee and we had not yet disposed off the Committee report.  So that is why some of us thought when we move amendments, will we come to dispose off the committee report?

THE SPEAKER: No.  We are doing exactly that, because the amendment is saying- yes, we are exceptive, but provided you improve this way, this is what we are doing.  This is a supposed improvement on the Committee’s recommendation. Therefore, if his motion is not through, then we put a vote on the original text of the report.  Please!

MR KASIGWA: Mr Speaker, granted, but then honestly.  

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  I think it is clear, hon. Members.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am entitled to be protected from the mob.

THE SPEAKER: Be sure I am protecting you, Madam, Ogwal.

MRS OGWAL: Tell the frontbench to keep quiet, especially hon. Betty Akech -(Laughter)  

MRS BETTY AKECH: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  It was hon. Cecilia Ogwal who the other day reminded us that we should not get up and seize the microphone and speak before we are given permission. I am surprised that she is the one breaking her rule.  Is she, therefore, in order to do two things:  First of all, to breach her own rule, but secondly to call this House a mob?  Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: I have not heard that.  If it is a ”mob” that is out of order.  But the other one to err is human.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  We were generally on the report of the Committee on this motion in order to generate consensus, and I think we have generated a consensus.  But I feel, Mr Speaker, on constitutional amendment issue, we should seriously consider the second part of hon. Madada’s amendment -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: You see, if you have a problem of pronouncing the name, refer to the constituency. I hope you know the constituency.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am actually very conversant with names from Bbale, but maybe the way he is associated- but that is a different matter.  The point I am raising is the second part of this amendment. I have raised a very strong point and this is something, which I would like us to deal with at this point.  I would not want the Speaker of the House that will be guiding us throughout this process to be given discretionary –(Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you have made your contribution, they have heard it. They should take the serious consideration of what you have said.  But my duty is to put the question and dispose off this matter in one way or the other.

MRS OGWAL: But will you have taken a position on Rule76 (2)?

THE SPEAKER: I have no position; you have the position.  The entire decision is yours.

MRS OGWAL: But that is why I call it, a mob, because I am raising a very serious point.

THE SPEAKER: You see, hon. Members, when you make your contribution, you do not force people to accept your position.  You persuade people to accept your position; they may accept, they may not accept.  But for you, you have done your duty, you have told them the danger; it is really up to them to decide.  Otherwise, what do I do?  Many have contributed differently.  So what do I do?  I am going to put the question. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: The position is as follows: abstaining are two, “Noes” are nine; “Ayes” are 109.  The motion is carried- (Applause)- Now you heard from the mover that his was concerned with the first part.

MR RUHINDI: The mover, Mr Speaker, is saying his motion was in respect of the entire Rule 76 1 and 2, and why I actually personally voted against his motion is because of our committee’s, too.  I know there was consultation on Rule 76(1), voting in the open in principle.  But our Committee, Mr Speaker, had made an exception whereby the Speaker, upon a motion, would order for a secret voting in respect of a bill or any of its clauses to amend any provision of the Constitution.  We made this exception after necessary consultation. As you are aware, hon. Colleagues, we wanted to provide for a flexible situation.

. Imagine we are moving from secret to open, who knows, one time there may be need for secret voting on any clause of a bill to amend the Constitution, and that is why we provided for this exception.  If this is finished, it is finished, Mr Speaker, but I was seeking guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Madada, your motion has been carried.  Did you intend it to even cover Rule 76(2)? 

MR MADADA: It is for sure that my motion meant to carry the whole Rule76(a) because I knew very well when I was putting my arguments I said we want a specific motion, which has no fear of interpretation, which has a specific area that has been agreed by Parliament and without any misinterpretation of anybody; and that is what I meant, and that is what we have achieved. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay.  Now, hon. members, in the committee’s report we have another independent issue of two-thirds to make a decision on constitutional matters in the Committee of the whole House. I told you when we started that you cover all the issues involved and that debate has ended.  Now, can I put a question on that proposal by the Committee that we decide by two-thirds majority? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I wanted to be clarified. Are we voting on that matter generated from the committee’s report or it is some matter we had not foreseen that we are voting on now?

THE SPEAKER: I hope you were on time when we started the proceedings. I clearly explained this.  I said that there were three independent issues in the Committee’s report: One was how we go in the division and so forth. I said the other independent issue, which was also on the report, is two-thirds during the Committee of the whole House. I also said another one was to refer the matters to a subject committee.  It is on record that I said at the end of the debate we shall independently vote on each of the three.  So, we have finished one, we are moving on the other.  Now, I want to put the question to the recommendation by the Committee that during the Committee of the whole House on constitutional matters we use two-thirds.  

(Question put)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is as follows: Abstaining, zero; “Ayes” - 26 and “Noes” - 101.  

(Question negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, the other issue is after the Second Reading is to refer the bill to the subject select committees to consider –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, as acting Chairperson of this Committee, I have done some consultation and we have decided as a committee to drop this proposal. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: So, honourable members, as a result of what we have done today –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker.  On page five of the report, the Committee had recommended that Rule 76(a) be subjected to Rule 9(2).

THE SPEAKER: What does that mean?

MRS MWESIGYE: Sir, it means that we need to pronounce ourselves on that recommendation.

THE SPEAKER: What are the consequences of that so that members know; maybe they never addressed themselves to that.  What is the impact?  Maybe the Chairperson can explain.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, Rule 9(2) is in respect of the requirement to suspend any rule of our rules. All we are recommending is that, that rule shall not apply in respect of those already provided in Rule 9(2), including now Rule 76(a), so that it cannot be suspended by motion on the Floor of the House.  We cannot add on Rule 108(3) because it has not been carried.  Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it clear?  I put the question on the Committee’s proposal. 

(Question put)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER:  The position is: abstaining - one, “Noes” – zero, and “Ayes” - 101. The motion is carried. 

(Question agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: So, as a result, our current Rules of Procedure will consequently be adjusted to reflect the decision we have made today. I thank you very much. 

Now we have the remaining business on the Order Paper, I think we shall deal with it tomorrow. We have now finished business; the next item is No.6.

MOTION SEEKING THE APPROVAL OF THE HOUSE TO WITHDRAW THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005.

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe we deal with it tomorrow.  Hon. members, with this we come to the end of today’s business –(Laughter)- that item will be dealt with tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.35 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 April 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

