Thursday, 26 April 2018

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today is Prime Minister’s Question Time, which starts at 4.00p.m. for 45 minutes. Those of you who wish to raise policy issues should prepare to have a discussion with the Prime Minister from 4.00p.m. for 45 minutes.

Honourable members, I have received a copy of a motion just today. We could not put it on the Order Paper because we did not have the motion. However, we are going to see if we can alter the Order Paper to accommodate it. 

However, Members, when you have matters, please, have them supplied to the Clerk in time, so that they are properly captured on the Order Paper. For this motion, we are going to cause an alteration of the Order Paper to accommodate it. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the International Day of street children, which will be moved by hon. Bernard Atiku, at an appropriate time. Thank you.  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR DAY CELEBRATIONS – 1 MAY 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development? She is expected to present this statement. Can hon. Ndeezi Alex, present this statement on behalf of the minister?

2.07
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Central): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This statement is supposed to be presented by the executive arm of the Government. Therefore, I cannot make the statement on behalf of the minister. (Laughter) However, a few minutes ago, I interacted with the minister in the corridors. I do not know what could have happened.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I am asking you to speak because I saw you with the minister. 

MR NDEEZI: I do not know what could have happened. Maybe she is on the way coming. She is within the precincts of Parliament. Maybe we could move to the next item as we wait for the minister to come. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are the chairperson of the committee and I have authorised you to go and be there in person with the entire committee. 

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I request you to accept my request because I do not have the statement and of course, I cannot represent the Executive.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Call both items; four and five together.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF INDEBTEDNESS, GRANTS AND GUARANTEES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that we received these reports. I proposed the question and recommended that the debate would be joined both in the state of the economy and the motion on the state of indebtedness so that we can have a joint debate. However, when decision time comes, we will take the decision separately on each of the motions. So, debate starts now.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support that we debate the motions but the chairperson of the committee is not in the House and he is supposed to answer some of the issues raised in the debate. I do not know how we shall proceed. It is our duty as whips of different parties to ensure that our Members come here and keep time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister is here for these two motions. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Where is the chairperson?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The chairperson does not discuss. He or she only raises issue on behalf of the Parliament. The minister is here to respond to issues. The chairperson does not response.

 MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Today, you have the minister but you do not want to engage him and yet when they are not present, that is when you raise issues.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is now in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you the spokesperson of the honourable minister? Honourable minister, we had already skipped your item and yet, it is an urgent matter. The day is on Tuesday, next week and today, is the last sitting day of Parliament. The time you were supposed to present the statement, you were not here. Let us go back to that item to receive the statement. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR DAY CELEBRATIONS – 1 MAY 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have to apologise to the Speaker and the House before you present the statement.

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): My apologies, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is not how you apologise. Do it properly. 

MS MUTUUZO: I would like to extend my apologies to the Speaker and to the Members of Parliament, for coming late by seconds.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By seconds? Please, proceed.

MS MUTUUZO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, as you are aware, on the 1st of May every year Uganda always joins the rest of the world to commemorate the International Labour Day. On this day, we recognise the workers and employers for their contribution to the economic and social development of a country.

The International Labour Day is a gazetted public holiday in Uganda. Every year, ceremonies are organised at the national and district local government levels. This year’s national celebrations will be held in Ssembabule District, at Ssembabule Town Council playground. His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda will grace the celebrations as the Chief Guest.	

Mr Speaker, all local governments and Kampala Capital City Authority have been informed and requested to observe the day in accordance with the guidelines for commemoration of national celebrations.

The theme for the International Labour Day 2018 is “Promoting the Public Spirit in the Public Sector.” This theme draws on the fact that whereas public servants like all workers seek employment as means of livelihood, they also have an over-arching obligation to act in public interest. This means that public officials must perform their official functions and duties and also exercise any discretionary powers in ways that promote the public interest.

Preparations

The National Organising Committee and the District Organising Committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Chief Administrative Officer, Ssembabule District respectively, were consulted for preparations. They constituted a national committee and are preparing for the function.

The programme is expected to begin at 8.00 a.m. with a series of activities which include a parade by UPDF, Police, Prisons, workers and students and many other activities as scheduled in the programme, which is uploaded on your iPads. Invitations have been extended to various distinguished guests, including Government officials, diplomats, workers and employers. I would like to invite you, honourable colleagues, to join the workers at the national celebrations at Ssembabule or at your respective districts.

I also take this opportunity to wish all the workers a happy Labour Day celebration. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for the statement. I am going to allow the Workers’ representatives, if they are prepared and the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development to speak. I will then see if I have any additional room for other Members to speak.

2.16
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement, particularly celebrating the Workers’ Day or Labour Day. As a worker, I feel that it is important that we join the rest of the world to celebrate this important day. The theme is also pertinent that we are promoting public spirit in the public sector. According to the theme, as workers, we should make sure that we live according to the expectations of the public. My only concern would be that the other side should also be recognised because many times, the workers are let down by the policies, which are absent.

As we speak today, we have a lot of issues, some of which we are aware of like the selective salary enhancement. It becomes very difficult for people to work for the public when there is a social divide, where some are more important than others. For example, today, we have a district like Namisindwa. The teachers there have not received salary since July and I have the details. 

The Member of Parliament from that area, hon. Grace Namukhula brought it to our attention but up to today, people have not received salary. To make it worse, what is happening now is that some of the members – I do not know where they got them I would like to imagine that these are ghosts – are getting salary and printing pay slips on the code of Namisindwa 617 and the district schools – those who are teachers - do not belong to the same place.

Some of them are in Bukalamuli, which is in Mityana but with a code of Namisindwa. Therefore, when there are those irregularities, at times it becomes difficult. We need to be mindful so that the workers can be able to do their part, particularly in the public sector. People go to work so that they can earn a living and look after their families. When there is no motivation, it becomes very difficult. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, and I submit.

2.19
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons With Disabilities, Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to express, on record, our appreciation and thank the minister for this very important statement. It is a reflection of very high level of responsibility and accountability. It is also a reflection of the importance the state attaches to the rights of workers in this country.

I beg to use this opportunity to remind the minister on three very important issues that you need to address as a matter of urgency. As I speak now, we are handling a Bill entitled, “The Minimum Wage Bill.” It was read from the Ninth Parliament. We call upon the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to take particular interest in this very important Bill. It is a Private Member’s Bill but the ministry has been hesitant to associate with it. Please, find a way to associate with this very important Bill. Secondly, we call upon the Executive to address the outcry relating with salaries in all Government departments.

I would like to remind the minister that today, we are receiving a statement in relation to Labour Day on May 1 but in March, we had Women’s Day. On that day, you forgot to come here and present a ministerial statement. On 3rd December, we had International Day of Persons with Disabilities but on that day, you forgot to come here and present a ministerial statement. 

The other day was a day for children but a ministerial statement was not presented. Mr Speaker, therefore, I request that this tradition of presenting ministerial statements should continue for all important dates, including Women’s Day. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is a commemorative statement of information about the hosting of the National Labour Day. The debate will be limited. We will stop this debate at half past; so, I will start from Upe, Manjiya, Kalungu, Mbale Municipality and Bukonzo West. Two minutes.

2.22
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Mr Speaker, thank you very much, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the statement. However, I have some issues that actually you need to address as a Government concerning the workers.

One, as we celebrate this Labour Day, there are some workers who are facing challenges of understaffing. They do donkey work. I think it is very important that Government helps to increase staffing in the districts. For example, a district like Amudat is understaffed by 75 per cent. The island districts are also understaffed, so Government should address that.

Secondly, the chairman was talking about the minimum wage. There is a lot of exploitation of workers by foreigners. When they come here, they pay about Shs 50,000 or Shs 100,000 that cannot help. They repatriate their profits to their countries. It is very important that Government introduces a minimum wage in the country so that we avoid this exploitation of our people by the foreigners. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

2.23
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me add my voice to thank the minister for that statement. The International Labour Day is a very important day and it is about stocktaking and commemorating the social and economic achievement that are made by the labourers.

However, in Uganda as you will appreciate, we are crippling with the challenge of the huge pay remuneration discrepancies amongst workers. That is why Uganda has a challenge of brain drainage. We have lost so many especially doctors who go to Kenya, South Africa. We have a very big number of our workers leaving this country in search for greener pastures.

As if that is not enough, this is the same Government that is now hiring labour from Cuba of doctors. The motive would be good but would have a disastrous repercussion especially for the few doctors who are so patriotic that they have not emulated their colleagues who have gone out and remained here and suffered with us.

Now instead of having a mechanism in place that would concentrate focus on attracting and retaining the labour force of these doctors and even attracting those that have left Uganda to come back, you hire labour in a country that has challenges with labour.

Mr Speaker, on a day like this when celebrating our labourers, would we surely be saluting our labourers if we are abusing them by having to hire others to out-compete and by the way giving them a better pay than the ones that we have here? A Swahili would ask, Iyo niwungwano kweli? I thank you.

2.26
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Labour Day is a very important day in many countries and it started in 1800s. In most of the countries around the world, they commemorate this day. That is why the UN recognised this day and formed the International Labour Organisation to look at the grievances of workers. That is why it is very important for workers to come together and celebrate.

The workers of the world united to fight against imperialism and exploitation of man by man. If you read Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels you will know how the workers of the world united to fight against exploitation. When you look at workers in this country and the labour force, you see how much is paid to our people and it is disturbing.

The labour ministry should come with a Bill on the Floor of Parliament so that we approve a minimum wage for our workers. Now the Labour Day in Uganda is for awarding medals and I keep wondering why these medals are awarded when our people are being exploited.

The Government should try to create employment for our people and pay them a living wage. I feel touched that the workers out there, if you do research and see how much they are paid, this Parliament would not be here to come and discuss a ministerial statement. Therefore, Madam Minister, I would like you to go back and speak to Cabinet that our workers are mourning –(Member timed out.)

2.28
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Mr Speaker, in the same spirit, let me thank the minister but - you see, when you raised this on the Order Paper “Statement by the Minister on International Labour Day celebrations”- indeed she has done it the way we are having our cards in the pigeon holes reading the programme as it will take in Ssembabule.

I was there during Obote’s regime as a young man; I saw what used to happen. I was at St Savio Junior School and you would feel the International Labour Day in that Government which I was not supporting as of then and up to now. However, they would display the performance of their labourers - how they were earning, companies that were employing them and all that.

However, I pray to the Prime Minister to ask these ministers who come panicking. She has read a statement similar to the day’s programme in the invitation cards. Someone should be coming to this House to give us an account of the performance of this ministry in relation to labourers. Who are theses who have suffered, what you have done to those who were mishandled or mistreated by their bosses and what is the new legislation you are bringing to improve.

We were here in this Parliament when hon. Rwakajara brought that Bill of the minimum wage and it has never come out up to now. You imagine here, Members coming- hon. Mutuuzo, what are we debating here about your statement in the way you have read it? What are we debating? We have a lot of issues.

I saw they gave us some books in our pigeon holes they are full of pictures – (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the statement the minister has read is the usual statement to inform the House about a celebration, which is going to take place as information specifically for that. The ministerial policy statements, which are always scrutinised by Members of Parliament, entail the information I have listened to from my colleague how the ministry is performing, what policies we have so that the Members of Parliament can have an input.

However, when you see ministers coming up to give us statements about a celebration, which is going to take place, it is specifically on that, to tell us the theme, venue, programme and to invite us to attend. 

My point of procedure is on whether the honourable Leader of the Opposition and the other Members who went into the details of the performance of the ministry now, when we are receiving information about a celebration, is procedurally correct. It is a point of procedure where I need guidance from you, Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All the honourable member is saying is, yes, we are going to celebrate and as we celebrate, we take stock. Therefore, all the Member is saying the ministry should have come and said, “On Tuesday, we have celebrations. These celebrations will be in Ssembabule. However as we go there, this is where we stand on the issue of labour.” (Applause) That is all they are saying.

Certainly, it will not be proper to come and read a statement on how the day is going to go. You should have some content of, “This is where we stand on issues of labour; we have the following laws, there are gaps here, the following policies, and there are gaps here. This is what we plan to achieve as we go to Ssembabule.” It would be a fair thing to do because this is a Parliament and not Uganda Broadcasting Corporation. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to thank you. If there is anybody who is more attentive in this House, it is you. I pray being a professional teacher, I have ever trained listening skills and paying attention. When the minister was reading this statement, the Government Chief Whip was out –(Interjections)- give me attention.

However, Cabinet is not-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members our time is up. Let us pause this matter here.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, as I conclude –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The time is out, please, conclude.

MR SSEWUNGU: Let me conclude. My prayer is – I can see the chief whip is very interested in what the minister has said. Let us develop a system of having good reporting about any public holiday but not coming here panicking and just reading what you have put down. There is a programme, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, you are a senior legislator, learn from some of us who followed you. 

What we are saying is good and the Speaker has ruled on the same matter – (Interjection) - Let me stop because the honourable minister is becoming unruly before the Speaker and I am not used to that kind of behaviour. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us support this cause; let us stand with the workers of this country and let all of us go to Ssembabule. There will be no House sitting that day so we do not have any reason Members of Parliament not to be in Ssembabule. All the arrangements will be made if members indicate how many of them are going, all transport available within this Parliament will be taking Members to Ssembabule so that we give this occasion the seriousness it deserves. Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

AND

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF INDEBTEDNESS, GRANTS AND GUARANTEES

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will debate these motions and finish them before the Prime Minister’s Question Time. Can we start debate on both motions? Debate starts now each member taking three minutes.

2.36
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, when the economy does not do well, individuals equally do not do well. In the financial year we are talking about, I equally did not do well and I felt the effects of a poor performing economy. 
Agriculture, for the case of Uganda, is our backbone. However, the performance in the agricultural sector has always been given that pedestrian kind of attention that has not helped us as a country. 

Irrigation is one of the policies that we are saying we should adopt. Whenever there is a drought, we speak about it; when there is a drizzle, we throw away irrigation and then we go back where we were. When we fail to get food, you say it is because we are lazy. We need the factors of production to be there. The economy of this country cannot do well if we do not accept to put our priorities in the right places. 

Equity is the other thing. The economy cannot perform well when we are not equitable in distribution of resources. For instance, if you put 100 tractors in Kampala and then you do not put even one in Kumi, do you really think the economy will perform well? I do not think so.

Mr Speaker, it is painful if for us as a country we are just going to watch things happen and we are not going to act. I wanted to comment a bit on commercial diplomats. We are talking about embassies, which are dilapidated but our ambassadors are the ones who are supposed to be attracting foreign investment to this country. What are we going to do? We are talking about Abuja but we have not constructed an embassy there. We are talking about Germany, we have not done anything; we are talking about supporting tourism, how shall we support when the embassies are dilapidated? 

I think that it is high time we stopped having celebrations, like we are talking about Labour Day. We say we go there, the theme for this year is ABCD but when you track where that theme reached in terms of implementation, zero action. They say Women’s Day celebrations, the theme is, “Supporting rural women, empower...” but when you follow up after that meeting, you get zero, I mean zero. 

Therefore, my call to Government is that whenever Parliament gives recommendations, stop shelving those resolutions because we are the ones who sit with the people. We are the ones who will listen to their breathing and we understand it better. When we bring those recommendations as what we would love you to do, if you do it you will see a difference –(Member timed out.)

2.39
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. About Uganda’s economy, I think that there are things that we need to look at. We cannot say that maybe Uganda’s economy is healthy because when we are looking at an economy, there are two things that we need to observe. These are exports and the imports. 

If you look at Uganda’s economy, we are depending on only imports, meaning that we are pulling out all the resources to foreign countries and we as the Ugandan economy, we are not earning anything from those foreign countries. Therefore, if we are to determine and have a good and healthy economy, we need to expand our exports. However, if we depend on the imports, meaning that we are pulling all the resources to China or Japan - we are importing all the cars, clothes and all the goods that we are using in this economy - we are leaving the economy without the tax base.

Instead of having the taxes, we are taking the taxes and all the other resources to other economies. If we look at this economy today, because of the dependence on importation without expanding the export side of this country then Uganda’s economy is going to collapse because of that. We are depending on importation and borrowing money maybe, to implement some of the projects of this economy. This means that as we borrow the money, we are giving the other people money leaving our country non-performing. 

Mr Speaker, as we look at this, we need to also consider that as we encourage more investors to come in they should also look at that. They should at least buy Uganda’s goods and show that we encourage investors to export more goods from this country. Thank you.

2.43
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we stand here today, we are debating the state of the economy of the preceding year at a time when the conditions that prevailed then are not much different from what is happening this financial year.

No amount of brilliant speeches will sort out the problem of this economy, which is limping if there is no strengthened commitment on part of Government to implement the plan in place. We have a very good National Development Plan II but when you look at the budgetary commitment to the higher sector priorities they are not aligned at all, and there is no way you can say that the backbone of this economy is agriculture when it is not appropriately supported. 

When you look at the report that was prepared, it is talking about drought as one of the factors that led to poor agricultural performance during the preceding year. It is much more than that. An agricultural sector is not appropriately financed by commercial banks, the kind of budgetary commitment - what is the backbone of the economy? We do not want insufficiency to drive that sector to take this country backward. We know international economies that have developed and are doing very well because of appreciating and having the conviction that agriculture can take them very far - Brazil is one of them. It has not developed because of concentrating on manufacturing or industrialisation but agriculture.

Unless this country and this Government sits down and recommits itself to the development of the agricultural sector, we will continue to lament year in, year out –(Member timed out.)

2.46
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is regrettable that during the financial year 2016/2017, our economy declined - economic growth was at four per cent compared to the previous year which was at 4.7 per cent. And yet we were told that the projection at that time were at 5.5 per cent which still was below the 5.7 per cent of the NDP II target.

Members, economic growth in this country is not inclusive. We have few people who are in the service and industrial sector who are contributing highest and yet we know that foreigners who will repatriate some of the money to their countries dominate these two sectors.

Therefore, our second contributor to GDP is the agriculture sector, which employs 69 per cent of our people, and we know that the budget, which is allocated to this sector, is not sufficient. As we talk now, this financial year we are looking at Shs 868 billion, which is about 3.7 per cent of the national budget.

Therefore, this is even far below the 10 per cent of the Maputo Protocol commitment. Therefore, Members as we debate the next budget we should focus on agriculture, which is our second biggest contributor to GDP and some of the areas of focus should be, for instance, the irrigation policy. Israel is a very dry nation but they export bananas and yet it is drier than Karamoja - for those of you who have gone to Israel you know this. How come they are exporting bananas? They are using irrigation - that is why we need the irrigation policy.

However, the issue of the extension workers also needs to be looked into. We need to help our farmers on best farming practices much as we give them all these inputs. If we do not help them out, we may not realise much. Therefore, as we debate the coming budget, let us look at the economy and extension workers in agriculture are very key.

The other issue is access to credit - farming needs money but how many people can access this credit? Therefore, as a government, we need to help our farmers to access credit in order to produce so that they can boost the second contributor to GDP.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the gallery this afternoon we have a group of students from Kampala International University under the Forum for Ideas. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House; please join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

2.46
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Any economy where there is no labour, it cannot grow; an economy with underemployment or disguised employment like we see in this country will not grow.

In the next few days, we are going to celebrate Labour Day and I think the two things are interlinked. Without organising our labour, which consists of all the many young people we see on the streets riding boda boda motorcycles, betting and literally doing nothing, I think we are not going to grow this economy, however much we wish that it grows.

I come from the agriculture committee. The farmers of this country who we say are the backbone of the economy of Uganda are in isolation. They are in dire need of re-organisation into viable cooperatives. Without cooperatives, people are working as individuals and there is a lot of under-performance in all the sectors.

In this country, we have set ourselves the 2020 target as the year when we should be producing 20 million bags of coffee. However, if the farmers growing coffee will not be organised in cooperatives, I think we will never get there.

We have been thinking about SACCOs as a replacement of cooperatives, but SACCOs are not a replacement. Cooperatives have got a way they organise and through them we are sure to get the right implements, inputs and right quality of products because they know what is in this thing they are doing for them.

When the farmers used to produce coffee as co-operators, they had quality, which was standardised. Today I produce my coffee the way I like it and so is somebody else; we sell to the market and many times our coffee is rejected. Uganda’s vanilla was rejected on the market because everybody did what they wanted and we call it “privatisation” or “liberalisation”.

Even if we have a liberalised economy, there must be standards. Tomorrow we are going to celebrate Labour Day. Again, the origin of Labour Day was trade unions. In this Parliament, we have representatives of workers. I do not know the strength of the labour unions in this country.

I was listening to the preparation our friends in Kenya are doing and I wish this day would be more of a labourers’ day, than a political day. I want to confess, I do not attend many of the national celebrations because they turn out to be party celebrations.

I do not understand why it is like that. Let us get workers at the forefront –(Member timed out.)

2.51
MR ELIAS ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to thank the committee for this very good report on the performance of Uganda’s economy. I rise to speak with a very heavy heart. The statistics provided show a decline from the financial year 2015/2016 to 2016/2017. GDP declined, the performance of the sector of agriculture, forestry and fisheries, industries, services also declined. We are in serious trouble.

I happen to belong to the Committee on Finance. We have moved and visited our border posts, visited some infrastructure but one thing that seems to be very glaring is that there is gross mismanagement of our economy. Evidence of effective strategic planning is not there.

We went to Malaba - it is our border post and actually our cash cow but when you look at the infrastructure that should support that very important cow, you see it lacking.

Something is wrong with our planning process; where are our priorities? You look across the board in technical terms, we are overtrading. We are spreading too thin on the ground and we want to do everything. At the end of the day, we end up doing nothing and you cannot see the impact.

My prayer is that we need to go back to the drawing table. Let us get our priorities right. Even if it means suspending some of our programmes now so that we can focus on those key priorities and ensure that they are 100 per cent financed. 

2.55
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Talking about the state of the economy which is definitely limping, just a few days ago, I was looking at a document where Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was saying no more recruitment in the districts and no more recruitment by the Public Service Commission. Now, that vis-à-vis the current unemployment vis-à-vis the limping economy vis-à-vis the betting economy and then you ask yourself - we used to call it a “boda boda economy” but now it has gone to betting. 

While that was still lingering in my mind, the discussions going on now about the taxes; taxing air, water, oil, WhatsApp and Facebook. When you bring very many taxes, people will evade taxes and you will not get the money. At the end of the day, the economy is going to get worse. Somebody was saying that something is wrong; actually everything is wrong. We need to get back on board and ask ourselves: “What is happening to our economy; is it bad governance or poor planning?” Everything is wrong. 

Mr Speaker, I am concerned as a people’s representative that we cannot continue to say, “Everything is well”, when all my young people are into betting and even those who are completing university will not be recruited. I thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

2.57
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of the other Members to speak about the state of the economy. When we talk about the state of the economy, there are so many things that we consider as priority. For instance, my interest goes into the health sector and education.

Mr Speaker, it is absurd that as we speak now, we still have some schools that are government-aided and pupils study under trees. When we stand on the Floor of this Parliament, we talk about so many things on how we can provide good education to our children. However, there is no way we can talk about development when we are leaving education behind as a priority.

It is my prayer that we give education first priority because we cannot have a developing economy if we cannot have well-educated children, especially from the grassroots.

When I go on the issue of health, I know every Member of Parliament here will bear me witness that when we look at our district hospitals, they are doing badly. As I speak now, in my own hospital in Butaleja (Busolwe Hospital), there are no functional toilets and pit-latrines. The patients and their caretakers are defecating on the hospital compound. Therefore, there is no way we can speak about the state of the economy when we are going through these.

Mr Speaker, we must get very serious on such matters and make them a priority. There is no way we can talk about a progressive economy when we cannot treat our own Ugandans? This is a very big concern and there are sectors that we should give more attention to than the others. It is true that we need the roads and the other things but when it comes to education and health, let us give them a better eye. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.00
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to say that I am glad that we are debating the status of the economy in the country. Like everything else, even the economy has two sides; there is the bad and good side of the economy.

All of us here in this House are elected Members from the countryside. We know about our economy and what Government is doing. I think it would be better for us as representatives of the people, to talk about the two sides; the success and failure of the Government. However, it appears we are concentrating only on the bad side which is not honest –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, the clarification, I would like to seek from the Prime Minister is whether he read this report because this report gives negative sides of the economy. 

Therefore, if Members are submitting on what they got from the report and you expect them to tell a lie out of the report, it requires me to ask you whether you also read the report; so that you give what you think is good in the report rather than putting us under duress to give what is not in the report. These are factual. That is the clarification I would like to seek from the Prime Minister.	

MR OKUPA: A very simple logic for the Prime Minister. If your eye is sick, that is the one you treat; you do not treat the buttocks which are not sick but the eye –(Laughter)– therefore, we are only concentrating on the sick part of the economy?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Sir. Whatever is read in the report – you see the fact is that we feel what we are talking about is what we have read and seen is okay but some facts are not even in the report. For example, there is general peace in the country –(Laughter)– does anybody need to tell you that? Must they tell you that you are peaceful to come from wherever you come peacefully? You come in the day and in the night peacefully; is that not an achievement? Must somebody tell you that? Must you be on whatever side you are? This is general peace and that is an achievement whether you like it or not.

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, the senior Member of this House who has just been holding the Floor is indeed a senior. Being Leader of Government Business, when they were compiling this report, he actually was aware that they were compiling it and he should have presented all the details that he is talking about to be included in the report. Is it in order for the senior legislator, who is the Prime Minister and a General to come and talk like he is not in the position that he occupies? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, really, was that a point of order? (Laughter) I think the point the Prime Minister is making is that: All that is being talked about has to be supported by stability and peace. This should be its foundation and we should start by recognising that. That is what he said. The mistake he made is to say, “Who does not know that?” So if we already know, why talk about it? (Laughter)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you for that wise decision. It is indeed true that we have to remind our colleagues of this obvious status quo; which is peace - that is not denied by anybody. 

Without peace, nothing would happen. Even this House would not sit here. There would be no elections. People would be running up and down. Just as it happened in Amin’s regime and post Amin’s regime. (Interjections) Whether I was in Amin’s regime or not, I am still here. 

There was no peace during Amin’s and post-Amin’s regime. From 1966 to 1986 there was no peace. That is 20 years of instability. But then Amin was overthrown - so you cannot keep talking about Amin as if you had just fallen from heaven this morning and you are not aware of the events that took place. 

So far, I would like to say that we are all responsible for the situation of the economy. During the colonial time, our coffee was called “kiboko” - this “kiboko” is a Swahili word. It is a small stick used to counsel people who fail to follow orders. So if you were given 3-4 acres to grow coffee and you did not, they would “kiboko” you; you would be beaten up. From that time up to now, we are still reaping the benefits of “kiboko”. 

Why don’t we do the same now? If not “kiboko”, this time we can apply sanctions, ordinances from the districts and so on. We can help. There are many young people throughout the country playing “omweso” all day; very strong-bodied people. Having so many man hours spent from morning to evening. You MPs pass by them with your cars; you watch them contributing nothing and you say nothing. You are not even advising your district councils to pass ordinances to stop this “disease”. Therefore, you are contributing to failing this economy, which you are now complaining about. 

Out of that forceful endeavour, we are now exporting 4.7 million bags of coffee originating from that “kiboko”. That is worth US$554 million. 

I would like to thank the Government again for educating doctors who are being exported out of the country. Not everybody can go outside – even MPS. I think MPs are not qualified. (Laughter) You say to yourselves, “Just because I am an MP I must go in to exile”. I do not think you have any room there. There are people there who would also like to be MPs in their own country. Just because you are an MP here does not mean you can be employed as an MP in another country. 

You must be qualified as a doctor. You must be qualified as an engineer and this must be done by a stable Government where there is peace. These people’s education lasts five years and then they spend another year in internship. Then they graduate and go out. 

When they are out of the country, they remit money that totals to US$456 million every year. If we have, let’s say, 100,000 doctors abroad - these are individuals; they are not well organised - People go out there for greener pasture. 

We as the Government have trained them and they are free to decide whether to work here or not. If, as Government, I am not ready to pay what you could get outside, then go for it. When you are there, however, you have not forgotten your relatives. You send us money in dollars and it benefits everybody. We must thank the Government because there is peace and Government is educating people and therefore we should be able to contribute.

My appeal is, let us also ask our colleagues, the ministers, to give the better side of the economy. When other people are talking of the bad side, let us, as ministers come and present the good side. For example, the Minister of Works can talk about how many roads have been done and how many are yet to be done. That is the best way of debating. Let us not have a one-sided debate. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Unfortunately, the Speaker only picks those who have risen; those who have shown interest in speaking. I cannot force a Member to speak. Therefore, if your ministers are not rising to speak, sir, I cannot force them to speak. (Applause)

3.13
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the economy is doing extremely poorly. The economy is ailing. If you really want to find out how the economy is performing, look no farther; the banks are closing and we are seeing young people on the streets without jobs. We are trying to see the divide between those that are better off and those that are worse off. This is probably the only country in Africa where we are comfortable seeing our brothers and sisters in one community doing badly while our brothers and sisters in other communities are doing well. This is our economy and it is sad, hon. Minister. 

The way we look at the economy, we focus on economic growth. I think we need to put a clear distinction between economic growth and economic development. Economic growth will look at the quantity but development will look at quality. I will be interested in knowing the income or wealth distribution. We have an economy where wealth is concentrated in a group or just a small community and the other communities are doing very badly. How? Personally, I come from Kasese. Go to our community – and I think other communities – where people cannot even afford the basics such as clean and safe drinking water.

Hon. Minister, I think our country needs a collective effort - action and thought - fundamentally to identify, define and address the fundamental causes of our ailing economy. Mr Speaker, I do not see the solutions in the near future but I think we need to do something as a country because for any inaction we are doing three things: We grow the problem; perpetuate the problem; and escalate it. If we have to act, we need to act now. 

I am looking at the sustainability of the cream of our society or country – first-class degree holders from Makerere University. We don’t care where to put them. If we cannot find jobs, at least we should be in a position to put them back to schools; get master’s degree scholarships or PhD scholarship opportunities. However, they are right here on the streets with first-class degrees – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to remind you, we are debating two motions – this on the state of the economy and the one on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees. 

3.17
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. When we talk about economic growth, especially in our country, we look at the poverty levels, unemployment and income inequality. How do we handle them as a country? 

Another thing is that as a member of the committee on agriculture and as a country, we know the President has been promoting science subjects in all schools. Our scientists are becoming a little bit redundant. Yes, you are promoting them but whatever effort they are trying to make is not being recognised. For example, the research they are trying to carry out is not being recognised. 

As Government, I think we should also take into consideration what our scientists are trying to do. We are not talking about the GMOs today, but I think we also need to appreciate what our scientists are doing and we take them into account; really, is studying science just a privilege or a joke? It is going to be difficult for some of us to encourage our children or the other people who want to study science because I think it is not taking us anywhere.

When we talk about economic growth, we need to see how we can move ahead. I think that as a House, as we look at some of these issues, we need to take into account the fact that if we need to have economic growth or development we really need to look at certain issues.

As a gender activist, I think that involving the women and girls – in fact both genders – in these economic activities would take us way ahead. We were talking about Labour Day celebrations. The theme was clear but what is the stand of the women in this Labour Day celebration? This is because we go for unpaid labour. Most of the men will tell us, “My wife does not work.” When you ask, “But what does she do?” He will say, “She bathes the children, she does this…” Isn’t that work? I think we need to look beyond that. 

3.20
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee reports grants amounted to Shs 949.7 billion below the programmed levels of Shs 1,766 billion and the committee recommends that Government should strengthen its domestic revenue mobilisation efforts to avoid reliance on foreign aid.

Mr Speaker, I wonder how we can strengthen our domestic revenue collection when we are still importing much more than what we are exporting. We are even failing to support our local manufacturers here in the country and in that way we cannot export what we do not manufacture.

Mr Speaker, we are even failing to consume our locally-produced items and we prefer the imported ones. In Kabale, our farmers grow apples and they do not have enough market but we still import apples from South Africa. We are even importing Irish Potatoes from South Africa for chips in our restaurants. Really? We are failing to guarantee markets for our locally-produced items. That way, really, we may not grow our economy.

I pray that Government supports our local manufacturers if we are to export more to the foreign markets and even support our local entrepreneurs in their day-to-day activities.

Mr Speaker, the Government should also try to guarantee markets both locally and internationally for our locally-manufactured items. That way, we shall be strengthening our domestic revenue collection –(Member timed out.)

3.23
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank God that I have caught your eye to talk about such an important topic. Well, I would like to say that our problems came from as far as the colonial times. Those days our societies were well organised and unified. However, now because of the politics and the spirit of selfishness, we have over sub-divided ourselves and planning has even become a problem. 

As we cry out about the poor economy and need for resources, we are creating more areas of expenditure. I would like to say that, as a country, we should also start counting on our leaders right from Independence so that we can recognise where those past governments came from. By the time we took over power as a new government, we should see what they did well and what they failed to do, what we have tried to change and what we need to do to make sure that we move forward.

When I look at our history, I realise that some of our past leaders were more patriotic than some of the current leaders in general. (Applause) I would like to appreciate the contribution the NRM Government has made to Uganda; indeed, we appreciate the peace. However, peace is relative. I am a medical personnel and the absence of war does not guarantee peace. Mr Speaker, people are stressed - (Applause)

When you look at the level of crime and strikes everywhere, people are not at peace. However, Mr Speaker, I think we can do something. I read the committee report and I thank the committee because they have done a lot of work. However, we need to do something to revamp this economy. For example, we should solve the issue of land so that we can empower people to ensure that even when they plant coffee, which Operation Wealth Creation gives them, they will live to benefit from it and the children will enjoy the fruits.

Let us look at where we have the comparative advantage and take responsibility to empower that sector. For example, we can do something in agriculture but we cannot perform in agriculture when other things are - we need to have a source of money where people can get soft loans that can easily be paid back. 

In fact, I am of the view that as members of Parliament, we should stand to say that instead of giving these free inputs, we should subsidise them so that we can empower people to embrace a working mind. Otherwise, people are eating everything. They only wait for Operation Wealth Creation to bring for them seedlings and yet they come late. We are creating a racket of a rat race; a poor country where people sleep and do not work to sustain themselves.

Mr Speaker, people are very poor at household level and members of Parliament are bearing the brunt. We are acting as shock absorbers for Government; we are into burials and everything - (Member timed out.) 

3.26
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM,	Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The previous speaker has said it and the Leader of Government Business was trying to cover up. To be honest, we are shock absorbing for the Government.
	
The level of indebtedness is enormous and alarming and I think it is a preference of the Government. I would like to use a simple example on the loan this Parliament passed in 2014, to work on the Rukungiri- Kanungu Road. The loan was granted but up to now, nothing has ever commenced. This means that Government prefers taking loans even when they are not operational. Therefore, Leader of Government Business, you have a lot of business to do other than coming here to cover up the un-coverable.

Mr Speaker, we are talking about the backbone of our economy, which is agriculture – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order.	

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to impute that I am covering up when I was very clear? Even if you were sleeping, you could wake up. Does it mean that by saying there is general peace we are covering up? I do not think so.

By saying some of our trained doctors are all over the neighbouring countries - we trained them; is this also covering up? Therefore, is the honourable member in order to misinform the public that I am covering up for the Government?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules are very strict on imputation of improper motive on another Member. The statement made by the Member for Kinkizi West suggests that there were spirits that were not acceptable and that is improper imputation of facts. So, you are not in order but proceed. (Laughter)

MR KABERUKA: Mr Speaker – (Member timed out.)

3.30
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for the report they have presented to this Parliament.

I would like to talk about the decayed economy of this country. As a colleague earlier pointed out, when you look at the priorities of this country, you see a situation where we cannot at any one moment get better in the economy. When you look at the primary schools, especially the service delivery section – a primary school pupil in Universal Primary Education (UPE) gets Shs 8,000 in a year. If this is translated into the three terms, it is Shs 2,600 per term. With such, the education sector is completely messed up. 

Mr Speaker, to make it worse, there is confusion which is being set in the salary enhancement for the science teachers and the rest of the teachers. In the salary enhancement, the secondary school teachers are supposed to get Shs 2 million with effect from the next financial year. However, the same teacher who is with other teachers in the same school only gets Shs 600,000 or even less. With this kind of confusion, we are likely going to see worse situations.

Further, a health centre III gets Shs 1.5 million and a health centre II gets Shs 600,000 for the entire financial year. When you look at this practically, most officers in charge of health centres III travel over 60 kilometres to go and withdraw this money and yet part of this money also caters for their allowances. What is left cannot provide service for the people. I think we have to be very sincere to this country.

Mr Speaker, corruption is one major issue, which has affected greatly the economy of this country. We have received billions of monies in other programmes like Operation Wealth Creation, National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) among others. However, because of the corruption which has failed to be controlled even by the anti-corruption bodies created in this country, we cannot feel the impact of the money which we appropriate in this House.

I, therefore, pray that –(Member timed out.)

3.33
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Mr Speaker, before I make a submission, I have a challenge, especially when it comes to the report on the public debt guaranteed and other financial liabilities. 

The report that was laid on the Table here by hon. Matia Kasaija was for the financial year 2017/2018 and yet the financial year has not ended. How can we discuss a report about indebtedness when the year has not ended?

Secondly, when I look at the report of the committee on the state of indebtedness, it covered the period of June 2017. Which is which?

Thirdly, when you go to the body of the report, there are glaring mistakes. You say external borrowing decreased by 4.2 per cent in 2017/2018. This financial year has not ended but they go ahead and compare it with the year 2018/167; which financial year is that? It cannot be 2018/2016, if you remove the seven. What is the finance ministry trying to bring to us?

If you read further, they give a figure of total borrowing realised during the financial year 2017/2018, which has not ended. Therefore, I have a challenge with the minister’s report. The years are not properly aligned to what we are supposed to be debating. I thought we are debating the state of the economy for the financial year 2016/2017 but we cannot debate financial year 2017/2018 because it has not ended. 

Mr Speaker, that notwithstanding, I would like to say that on the issue of borrowing, I think a lot needs to be done to make the best use of the loans that we borrow. We have had a challenge where we borrow money but do not put it to use. An example is the road that the honourable colleague from Kinkizi has talked about and the issue of the Kapchorwa-Suam Road. The money was passed in 2015 but to date, the road has collapsed and people have died because the road has not been worked on.

Assuming the report on the economy is for the financial year 2016/2017, the economic growth was affected by a number of factors. However, allow me to state three or four issues; drought and pests in agriculture. How much money have we put in this financial year to address that matter? There was the issue of the army worm, which has come back. 

If we want our economy to grow, how much money have we put to address the issue of the army worm, drought and to provide for irrigation? We know that drought, year in year out, affects our country. If we want our economy to grow, then we should be able to address those issues. 

There are issues which also affect the economic –(Member timed out.)

3.36
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The state of our economy is in a crisis given the serious external and internal shocks – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you a member of the committee?

MR NAMBESHE: Oh yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are completely out of order. (Laughter)

3.37
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. While I was reviewing this report, I had the opportunity to read the recently published World Happiness report that ranked Uganda among the 20 unhappy countries.

Among the things that were highlighted in that report on why Uganda ranked 19th out of the 20 most unhappy countries was the level of efficiency by Government in responding to people’s problems. We are here at this time discussing the state of our economy and among the key issues is the fact that 81 per cent of our population is young people below the age of 35; the biggest demand out of there is the need for jobs. 

However, what we have done most is to export slaves to Arab countries. This report from the finance ministry should come every year and vividly tell us about the number of jobs we have created for the people of Uganda. (Applause) 

These are some of the –(Interruption)

MR DULU: Thank you very much. The clarification I am seeking is; when you talk about jobs, what exactly do you mean? When we talk about jobs, we do not only mean working in the offices; even digging is a job. Thank you.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, my colleague. It will be up to Government to come here to Parliament and tell us that they have created this number of jobs in digging. All that I require is for us to be serious on this matter. Every other time, we get information about our young people who are exported to Arab countries. The only reason they go there to suffer the ordeal there is because we are not creating any jobs here. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, we borrow money every other year but we never follow up on the multiplier effect of that money. We never mind how many jobs are created out of every dollar that we borrow. We never care about that. We end up borrowing the money from one country and give all the jobs to the same people from the same country. 

Instead of supporting our local manufacturers here, we give out contracts anyhow. We do not care whether this person who is going to implement these contracts will create any jobs for our people. At the end of the day, the materials come from where the money was borrowed.

Mr Speaker, I think it is high time that whenever we come here to talk about our economy, we must provide the answers that our people need. You are aware that our people in the private sector – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have 20 minutes to Prime Minister’s Question Time. I wanted us to take decisions on these two reports before the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I am going to ask the Leader of the Opposition to speak.

3.42
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. The honourable minister is not around but let me go ahead. 

Uganda’s total debt rose from Shs 15,086 billion in 2012/2013 to Shs 34,407 billion in 2016/2017, which is an increase of 200 per cent. This is quite abnormal.

Secondly, the external debt also increased within three years from 15.6 per cent in 2012/2013 to 24.6 per cent as at 2016/2017. Inflation stands at 6 per cent as at March 2018, higher than the projected inflation of 4.8 per cent and these are Bank of Uganda statistics. 

Mr Speaker, I took interest in page 11 of the report, where the committee recommended that Government should expedite the implementation of all projects financed by debt to increase the country’s productive capacity in order to repay debt. This is where you come in, Gen. Moses Ali.

All the Members in this House request for loans and when you bring them before Parliament, we support them. However, they become nonperforming loans. For example, in the Ninth Parliament - when I come to this Floor, I don’t want to speak about Kalungu only. However, there were about five districts including Kalungu, for which we passed a loan here to give them electricity. Up to now, it is almost four years ever since we passed that loan and nothing is taking place.

Unemployment levels; the Member from Kyankwanzi has elaborated very well on this matter and I don’t want to repeat it.

Foreign repatriation continues to worsen. The economic point of Uganda - we see foreigners almost managing our economy and we give these people tax holidays and incentives but at the end of the financial year, they take all their proceeds home. This is affecting our economy.

Still on page 11, the committee says, “Government should expedite the implementation of the export promotion strategy.” Uganda has one of the best food crops that are required in foreign countries that at one time, we could export pineapples to Britain at low cost because we had Uganda Airlines. If you talk about cassava today in Europe or Britain, they get cassava from Trinidad and Tobago. The cassava they buy is always waxed because it can get spoilt.

However, for a country like Uganda, if we had our airlines here, people would harvest cassava, pack it and within eight hours, that cassava would be in Britain and people would earn income. However, because we even let clearing and forwarding at the Airport under someone’s arm, Government has no control; we cannot move ahead.

The Uganda Railways - how do you transport food products from Kasese to Pallisa? Yesterday we were in Soroti with the Committee on Education and Sports and we were able to buy a basket of mangoes at Shs 2,000. These mangoes are needed in foreign countries; why don’t you bring back our railway lines so that we have cheap cost on transportation of goods?

Mr Speaker, a country that does not protect its citizens on some businesses will never improve its economy. I was in India and we saw a machine that makes plastic bottles for mineral water; you just need only $8,000. You are allowing such companies and foreigners are also opening up mineral water and toilet paper making factories here, which are using recycled papers.

These are some of the small industries they could open up in Omoro and Kalungu for your local people without allowing foreigners to take such business away from you but you have left - even the supermarkets. Therefore, the unfavourable investment conditions for the local investor in Uganda cannot help us improve our economy.

Right now, as we fight, it is still Ugandans who are paying the high cost of fuel and they are the ones generating income for the country. 

As I conclude, Gen. Moses Ali, you were there during that time and you saw - lately these WhatsApp groups are very interesting. We have seen Amin talking about himself as a very poor man. In fact you never see anything of his because this man and his friend, Gen. Moses Ali, whom he worked with, developed this country. 

They opened the US Embassy, bought buildings there and you see Uganda House and they never put these investments in their names; they registered them in the name of Uganda as a country. However, we sometimes refer to them as swine, which is very dangerous.

Therefore, if we are to improve the economy, we must look at the local investor - the Ugandan. I always cry about Pakistanis in Uganda importing old vehicles here yet at one time Ugandans were importing those cars from Nagoya, Mikawa, Yogashaki and others. Why do we have such? Now you are bringing a new law about new cars that you want cars from 2010 and above yet you are driving cars that have been in your ministry for the last 20 years and you still sit in them.

Mr Speaker, I, therefore, request the minister that throughout our debate, you cannot conclude the matter on these recommendations. Could you take them seriously? Look at the recommendations of the committee and kindly do the change. I am happy that you are here and you know more of this and you are always with us. I rest my case.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing this issue to be debated here on the Floor of this House. For so many years, the state of the economy has been given little time to be debated on the Floor of the House and that has denied us getting views from Members - people’s representatives - on how best we can improve our economy. Therefore, I am very grateful that this item is being debated here.

I would like to thank the Chairperson and the members of the Committee on National Economy for the views that you have brought through your report and we take them seriously. The recommendations in the report; I will work on them and the Members who have contributed on the issues at hand.

Mr Speaker, the state of the economy is scientifically measured. We know whether the economy is doing well or not. It is not a subjective matter. I would like to inform you as a report indicated that despite the challenges that we are facing which we know, one of the key challenges we are facing in our economy is the 68.9 per cent of the 7.8 million households who live in a subsistence economy. That is the key challenge we are facing as an economy and it is what we are focusing on if you look at the expenditures in our proposed budget.

However, when you talk about growth, we have now figures that we know for sure that our economy will be growing at 6 per cent as opposed to the 5.5 per cent we had projected. Therefore we are making some steady progress –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, the minister is talking about growth and I would like to single one sector; construction. For the last two consecutive financial years, this Parliament has been putting 21 per cent of the budget to the construction sector and although we are putting a lot of resources in that sector, the minister is aware that 98 per cent of the contractors are foreigners.

How do you expect that huge amount of money we are putting into that sector to register tangible growth? They are bound to find avenues to take the money back –(Applause). I did not want to comment because if you bother to look at the two documents, there are so many errors and I know the sources of those errors are from the ministry of finance.

Therefore, I do not know whether they are really coordinated in generating the figures. We do know who owns certain figures. If you look at the report, you find that the figures being referred to are different in many ways. However, since I was not given time, I am seeking clarification. How do you expect Uganda to register growth when you know that in the areas where you are putting a lot of money, Ugandans are not there? How can we register growth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, your response must stop at exactly 4 O’clock. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We know that that has been a challenge; yes, we have invested a lot of resources in the infrastructure sector and we are seeing dividends. There are challenges but we are seeing dividends. For the first time in a long time in the history of Uganda, we have added over 2,000 kilometres on our road network and you are now able to travel from Kisoro to Koboko on tarmac roads. That is a great achievement. Infrastructure facilitates the growth of the economy. 

Owing to lack of guidelines and laws in place to facilitate the local people, we have now put guidelines in place that have reserves for the local people in terms of bidding for construction. We hope that in the next financial year, our local people will be able to participate meaningfully as we build their capacity in the construction sector. 

Compared to the region, our inflation has remained in a single digit at 2–3 per cent. Mr Speaker, as of June 2017, our public debt was at Shs 4.9 billion. Borrowing is not a bad thing but if you borrow and you do not utilise the money meaningfully, it creates a challenge. This is a challenge that all of us, as the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said, should address. 

We have provided good infrastructure in place, we are funding good projects but we have a challenge on implementation. I think as Parliament, we seek your intervention; sectoral committees must make these sectors implement the projects for the monies that you appropriate to them. 

However, as we borrow, we are not reckless because our debt to GDP ratio remains at 37 per cent vis-à-vis the threshold of 50 per cent, which we set as the East African Community. Kenya now is above 50 per cent; there are countries that are in the 70s. Therefore, we are very cautious about the dangers of over borrowing.
 
The exchange rate has remained stable at 3,600 and it has grown by 1.4 per cent. Mr Speaker, because of the resources that we have collected – remember in 1986, our revenue collection was only Shs 5.6 billion but now we are at Shs 14.7 trillion. These resources have grown over time but the challenge that we have is that the population growth rate continues to harm the dividends we are making in the economy. 

For example, every financial year, we add 1.6 million people; these people will need schools, good roads, peace and help. However, we are also seeing good dividends out of the good programmes we are putting in place. For example –(Interjections)- just a minute, hon. Nandala-Mafabi – because of these good programmes, we have seen the life expectancy increase from 43 to 62. 

We are seeing the maternal mortality coming down, infant mortality rate coming down; HIV/AIDS continues to be controlled. In fact, this is the best time to be alive in this country. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this brings us to the conclusion of this debate on the two motions. I now put the question to the two motions, one at a time. 

I now put the question to the motion that the report of the standing Committee on the National Economy on the performance of the economy during the financial year 2016/2017 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now also put the question to the motion that the report of the standing Committee on the National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, our rules allow us on Thursdays at this time, 4.00 p.m., to interact with the Prime Minister for 45 minutes. Like we keep saying, the issues to be brought should be policy issues on which we expect the Prime Minister to give us answers, not specific constituency issues like potholes, which might not be within the knowledge of the Prime Minister and might make us use that time in an improper way. 

That time has come and I will start with a Member who requested earlier, the Member of Parliament for Bushenyi-Ishaka.

3.59
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the pensioners in the health sector up to late last year were getting their pension through the Ministry of Health. However, from November last year, they have not got their pension because it was decentralised to districts but the budget was not taken to the districts. Since November, the pensioners in the health sector have not received their pension and they are asking what the way forward is. Thank you.

4.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr Speaker, as the honourable member said, Government decentralised the payment of pension benefits. If the people in Bushenyi who are concerned have not had their benefits, this is a matter that is important to Government. Government is going to straight away investigate and correct it. The Minister of Public Service is here and you are directed to handle it straight away. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member of Parliament for Jinja District is not here. Can I have the Member of Parliament for Kamwenge District?

4.01
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister a question concerning the certificates of business studies.

In 2012, the Government decided to phase out the business schools that were awarding certificates from the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB). To date, six years down the road, those people who sat for their examinations received pass slips but they have not been given their certificates yet they want to look for jobs and to go for further studies. 

Can we get clarification from you, why UNEB has held the certificates of these students who sat their examinations in 2012 for schools that were awarding certificates for accountancy and other courses from UNEB? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the question of people graduating and not getting certificates, unfortunately, has been fairly common. I have also heard of it at Makerere University. This is obviously a disease that cannot be tolerated and the honourable minister responsible for the Ministry of Education and Sports is here; please follow up the matter to ensure that people get their certificates on time.

4.03
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): I would like to ask the Prime Minister whether he has an up to date status of the performance of the various loans we have been borrowing because in the past when we looked at the status, we would find out that loans, which were borrowed almost 10 years ago have not yet taken off.

We would like to know how the loans have performed because we have realised how much we are paying in terms of debt servicing particularly for external loans. 

Can you please tell us whether you have an up to date status of the loan performance? Thank you. 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the subject matter raised by my sister, Cecilia Ogwal, has been of great concern to Government for quite some time. About two years ago, Cabinet set up a team headed by Rt Hon. Moses Ali, the First Deputy Prime Minister, to investigate this matter and the results that the Cabinet committee brought were quite startling because performance was poor. 

As a result, Government has embarked on rigorous measures to improve performance. The performance was in a range of about 35 per cent but now it is about 60 per cent. Therefore, we are aware of the problem and it is being tackled head on.

4.05
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to read to you Article 49(1) of the Constitution. It says, “In every month in which there is a sitting of Parliament, the minister responsible shall make a report to Parliament in respect of -
(b) the action taken in compliance with the findings of the Uganda Human Rights Commission.”

For the years I have been here, I have not seen Government reporting to Parliament on the actions that have been taken in compliance with the findings of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. Why is Government unwilling to comply with the constitutional command and when, if at all you intend to, or which challenges are you finding that you cannot report to the nation on what your Government has done to comply with the findings of the Uganda Human Rights Commission? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, through the Uganda Human Rights Commission, Government makes known to Parliament the situation about human rights issues and where there is need, the minister responsible for constitutional affairs comes and makes appropriate reports.

However, one should look at the issue of every minister making reports regularly in more detail and see the implementability of that particular provision and to also ensure that this is properly harmonised with what is already being done at the moment.

4.07
MS REHEMA WATONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the price of cement has continued to increase daily yet the factories that manufacture it are in Uganda. Isn’t the Government watching over the price of cement? People are very poor and the private sector is key to the economy of this country. Why is cement so expensive in this country? The same applies to other construction materials.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister is right. There has been a rise in cement prices, which have indeed brought some shocks in the construction industry. The main reason really is that there is increased economic activity, both in the country and in the region. In addition, the quality of cement produced by Uganda is of high quality so the neighbouring countries are clamouring for it. There is therefore competition and as colleagues know, the market forces are now at work. 

Nevertheless, the honourable Minister for Trade and Industry is engaging the cement manufacturers to ensure that there is adequate response to meet the demand and stabilise the prices.

4.09
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Constitution under Article 208(4) bars any person from raising an armed force except in accordance with the Constitution or laws made by this Parliament. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, under what law are the crime preventers recruited and later conscripted into the UPDF? 

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that when this country was challenged by some security issues, the Uganda Police Force, under the constitutional mandate, has recruited some Ugandans to supplement the work of the Police Force in order to deal with the situation. The police force is part of the security system in the country and police works very closely with UPDF. Therefore, the UPDF and Uganda Police Force are being helped by the crime preventers. It is true that Government is considering bringing to this august House appropriate policy framework and request for legislation to deal with this matter.

4.11
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recently the Minister of Education and Sports came up with a decision to increase the salaries of science teachers. What research did the education sector conduct to assess the recent demonstrations we had by all teachers to increase their salaries? Did that inform your decision to increase salaries for science teachers only? Have you looked into the implications of such a decision and what is going to happen in the short and long run? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government of Uganda took a decision to comprehensively review salaries in a phased manner and in that process, it is true that the first categories that are going to get salary increments within the Public Service include science teachers. However, let me also say that other categories will be considered in a phased manner.

Yes, Government has had some complaints and concerns about headmasters, deputy head masters as well as Arts teachers. Government is looking into this matter.

4.14
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on 12 April, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released a letter to the accounting officers in central and local governments informing them that there will be no recruitment in the financial year 2018/2019.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, recently over 120 town councils were created and many health centres are going to open under sub-county health centres II. How is the Government going to operate those facilities without health workers and other relevant officers in those offices? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, Government has taken a major decision on comprehensive salary increments in a phased manner. Government also decided to freeze recruitment so that we properly deal with the issue of increase of salaries instead of opening up recruitment before you stabilise payments for those that were already in place. 

In exceptional circumstances, there may be consideration by Government. For example, Government has authorised the recruitment of science teachers. Therefore, it is a measure to ensure that there is proper and well-considered administration of salaries and appropriate resources to pay for those whose salaries have been enhanced.

4.16
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the Chinese and other construction contractors come here, the only thing they give a Ugandan worker is a reflector jacket. This means that after work, this person is no longer their worker. They are not given identification cards or appointment letters.

In most cases, if he is a driver, they will ask that person for his original driving permit. As Government, are you aware that this is happening? Do you have a policy which guides these contractors in their relations with Ugandan workers? If it is there, can you lay it on the Table? If it is not there, when are you going to put it in place so that Ugandan workers are treated as human beings and know that the Government really cares about them? Thank you.          

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the laws of Uganda refer to all employers whether Chinese, Ugandan or European. If there are some gaps that the honourable member has recognised then Government will definitely take the necessary measures. We would appreciate getting more details and we are going to carry out our own investigations. If there are any things being done that are not consistent with the law, corrective measures will be taken. 

4.18
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Government took up a drive to improve tourism in a bid to improve Uganda’s economy. One of the things talked about was to improve road networks in the tourism sector. What is the Government doing to improve the tourism road network, especially those which are already gazetted like the road from Kabale to Queen Elizabeth, from Mgahinga to Bwindi National Park, which pool a lot of resources to this country? What are your plans to improve that?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I agree with hon. James Niringiyimana that tourism is a major sector and Government has already taken a decision to upgrade a significant number of tourism roads. Therefore, in due course, you will see improvement in these roads.

4.19
MS DAVINIA ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question goes to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Right now, we are having issues of floods in the country. I come from a region where we farm only once in a year and most of our crops have been swept away by these floods. What emergency response do we have this time because I foresee us coming to this House and lamenting that there is hunger and famine in Karamoja? 

The bridges have been washed away. The bridge that connects Katakwi District, which is in Napak District, was completely washed away by floods. The same applies to the bridge in Bulambuli District. The other day when we came from Turkana, we had to go via Malaba and Kitale. 

I remember last year we requested this House to set aside relief funds in case of such eventualities. Thank you.            

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister has raised a serious point. It is true that many parts of Uganda have been affected by heavy rains. The Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda National Roads Authority in particular have dispatched teams to Karamoja and a number of other heavily affected areas to see what can be done. 

There are challenges on the ground because the grounds are soft and working in such a soft and slippery environment has its own challenges. Actually, some of the machines and heavy tractors are being threatened by some of these floods. However, Government, through its appropriate central and local government agencies, is doing everything possible to deal with this situation.

For the people in Karamoja, I would like to say that since you have one planting season, it might be good to work closely with Government to harvest as much of this water as possible so that the cows, population and crops can be nourished by that.

4.22
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concern to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is about education and staff ceilings. I know that when it comes to primary education, it is really the districts. However, if a school is lucky, you find that from Primary One to Primary Seven, there are seven classrooms and only eight teachers, inclusive of the headmaster. 

If it is very unlucky, they could have only seven teachers. This is not taking into consideration women teachers going for maternity leave. Do you know that the staff ceiling of our primary schools seems to be at around 65 to 70 per cent? If you are aware of that, what are you doing about it? Thank you.      

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, fortunately the dynamic minister responsible for primary education is listening very attentively. We are doing whatever is possible to ensure that there is appropriate staffing but at the same time, we do not go beyond our capacity to pay. Nevertheless, the ministry and Government keep a close eye to ensure that services are not compromised by this position.

Therefore, if there are specific problem areas, they can be looked at by Government and the Ministry of Education and Sports.

4.23
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, last year you committed Government to find solutions for the problem of pollution caused by the national referral hospital at Kiruddu. Can we get an update of how far you have gone in correcting that problem because you had promised that a new sewer line would be put in place at that Government facility? It is continuing to become a health hazard to the environment and the people who stay along Salaama Road. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is raising a very important point. It is true that the ministry concerned is doing something about this. I would however want to know the details from them in terms of how far they have gone. It is true that hospitals are places where people should be cured of diseases but with problems of sewage that my brother is talking about, we could end up with people getting infections from around the hospital. 

Therefore, on that point, we are in absolute harmony and we will follow up the matter to see the progress being made and we would like to see progress made and the project completed as quickly as possible.

4.25
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, some time back, the Government had made an attempt to export doctors to Trinidad and Tobago. Today, it wants to import the same from Cuba. What is the justification for that?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, I concur that at one stage, there was consideration for doctors to go to Trinidad and Tobago. It is true that on the ground, we have problems of doctors in our hospitals. Colleagues, in your respective constituencies, you must have realised this. 

It is true that Government is considering getting professional reinforcement from a friendly country; Cuba, which by the way, will not be the first time. Cuba helped us start Mbarara Medical School and has given doctors to Uganda that have proved to be of very high quality. 

We look forward to getting reinforcement from these doctors. Nevertheless, the backbone of healthcare in terms of doctors will inevitably remain Ugandan doctors.

4.27
MS SUSAN AMERO (NRM, Woman Representative, Amuria): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question I would like to ask the Prime Minister is; we are aware that Teso and Bunyoro affairs ministries lie under his docket. These ministries had a consultancy of Shs 10 billion each to make a development plan. However, as things stand, there is only Shs 700 million in their budget. 

I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether these ministries are for decoration or are meant for burials only. What is the Shs 700 million meant to do? Apart from paying the salaries of five staff, how can you spend Shs 10 billion to make a development plan and budget Shs 700 million to operationalise it? When do you intend to give these ministries Votes of their own? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, when resources become more available, the ministries will get more appropriate funding.

4.29
MS ROSE AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have been reading in newspapers and watching on television that Government is going to bring Eritrean and South Sudan refugees from Israel. 

My question to the Prime Minister is; we already have enough refugees in this country. We have South Sudanese, Congolese and Rwandese and we are full, as a country. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, how prepared are we to have these refugees they are bringing to our country? Do we have land? We have been debating here that our economy is declining. How prepared are we to have them? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is true that Uganda has considered the question of Africans who are facing challenges in Israel and in principle, Uganda is willing to consider up to 500 of these refugees. Uganda has also put a condition that if they are to be considered for relocation to Uganda, the refugees must come with an appropriate package.

4.31
MR PENAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, between 2016 and today, in my constituency of Butemba, we have had new sub-counties and a town council. Butemba sub-county was divided into two to give birth to Byerima. Kyankwanzi sub-county was divided into three to give birth to Kyankwanzi sub-county, Kyankwanzi Town Council and Banda sub-county. 

Incidentally, the leaders of these two sub-counties have fallen under the new administrative areas. The one of Butemba now resides in Byerima and the one for Kyankwanzi sub-county is now in Kyankwanzi Town Council. 

Last year, hon. Mutonyi brought here a Local Government (Amendment) Bill seeking to realign those leaders who are found within new administrative units to stay there without going back into an election. As I talk, the Electoral Commission has already issued a roadmap for the election of these same leaders because they belong in new areas and they have been advised to go back for elections.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in view of the amendment that is coming, is it possible that the Government can order the Electoral Commission to hold on for the Bill to be passed and we have these leaders saved from going back into elections and Government saving money? 

In addition, when are we going to reduce expenditure on uncoordinated Government work between Parliament, the Central Government and the local governments? Is it possible to help these people not to go back into an election and save public funds? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Some aspect of your question is anticipation and you know the rules are tough on anticipation.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Local Government, hon. Tom Butime, is dealing with this matter and it will be completed next week. The House will be informed accordingly.

4.33
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to explain to this august House what plans the Government has to work on water for production in the country to enhance food production and to make Uganda a food basket for the East African Community. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the transformation and modernisation of Uganda will inevitably be accompanied by the modernisation of agriculture and irrigation is a key element in this process. In fact, Cabinet has already passed an irrigation plan for the country and no major area of the country will be left behind. We are essentially on course. The detailed mechanisms are going to be worked on as well as the resources required for this programme.

4.34
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the killing of Ugandans has continued unabated and now Ugandans are being abducted. Children and women are being killed. The other day, a Ugandan lady was killed in Busia. This is despite the fact that Government has very many security organs. 

What are you doing to provide Ugandans with security so that we can enjoy living in this country without fear? Can you assure Ugandans that they have peace and that they can go to work and return peacefully, that children can go to school and return home peacefully? We have become another Columbia and Mexico where people are abducted daily.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, if I got my brother correctly, he is referring to the security issues. Is that correct? 

Mr Speaker, my brother is right that there have been some challenges in different parts of the country: in Masaka, Kampala, Entebbe, Busia - Government has put machinery in place and colleagues will remember H.E the President handling the issue of Bukomansimbi and Entebbe and a number of these criminal elements have been apprehended. 

The Government is on top of the situation and we will deal with these issues. If there is any additional information, help the police and security forces so that we can deal with this matter and stump it out as quickly as possible so that indeed Ugandans can be fully secure in their country.

4.37
MR GODFREY WATENGA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Mister, prevention is better than cure. As we are here, it is raining in Bududa. Just last week, a landslide occurred in Bushiyi sub-county in my constituency and we are still having indicators that there is more trouble ahead. What preventive measures does the Government have in place? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is the same problem of rain and its effects. I am happy that my brother is talking about Bududa because this is an area where I lived for some time when I was a secondary school student. 

Government is working closely with the population and local governments to ensure that we deal with the problem and even prevent the problems associated with heavy rains. 

Let me also take this opportunity to say that colleagues should encourage preventive measures such as growing of trees and forests, farming in a manner that is friendly to the environment and stopping soil erosion. One of the problems the Ministry of Works and Transport is facing today is that people are cultivating all the land in the hills and preparing the soft soils for erosion, which comes and either blocks or sweeps away the roads. If we had done agriculture well, planted trees to stabilise soil and planted forests to protect the environment, we would be safer, we would be producing food and we would not be in these problems.

4.39
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in my constituency, there is an order that was given to LC I chairpersons to conduct elections for “mayumba kumis”. They were instructed to elect chairpersons for every 10 households. 

My question is, do you want to instruct the ministry responsible to stop this process until you come up with a proper amendment to the Local Government Act to take care of “mayumba kumis”? Thank you very much.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member was rather economical with his information. It is difficult to know who gave this order. I will say that the Minister of Local Government is in charge of these issues. The election for “mayumbi kumis” is not known to me that in Government it is the practice today. It is also possible however, and somebody has said it at the back, that local communities can say, in order to improve security or production, they can locally organise themselves. 

Therefore, in a nutshell, let us examine and find out before any formal action can be taken. If it is, for example, a local security initiative, it may be given encouragement by Government. If it is counter-productive, it may be told to stop. We will investigate and take an appropriate decision after the investigation and you will be involved in this investigation.

4.42
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is the policy of Government to construct secondary schools in sub-counties where they are not. Where they have not been able to construct, the Government has picked up community secondary schools in those areas and granted aid to them. Those schools have been applying to the Ministry of Education and Sports and the ministry has said they will grant aid to these schools as funds are available. 

What has surprised us, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is that some new schools that have come up in the last one or two years, have been proposed and have jumped the queue. They have been released on the list of the current Government-aided schools, leaving out those that applied three, four or 10 years ago. Why is this so?

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, quite often you may find that in some subcounties, there are several schools and all the schools have applied. If one of the schools is picked, it will cause some grumbling. Nevertheless, we will look at the point Ndugu Abbas has raised and we will appreciate getting details. 

However, let me also take this opportunity to state that it is a manifesto commitment of the National Resistance Movement to ensure that every subcounty has a Government-aided secondary school and the Government is now taking extra steps to mobilise resources to ensure that this is actualised. 

I hear a comment from hon. Mwijukye – not surprisingly – that we have said it for quite some time. Indeed what I am giving is a progress report on implementation.

4.44
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I ask this question premised on your response to hon. Akol’s question on refugees, and aware of the considered view on the international humanitarian law provisions on the management of refugee persons. Have you considered that receiving individuals with a package attached to them amounts to something similar to slave trade or slavery, because you are attaching a prize to human beings?

In making the decision to bring refugees from Israel to settle here, have you been considerate of our national concerns and international humanitarian law provisions on the management of refugees and the involvement of Parliament in making this very critical decision? How has it affected our international stand as a country because you have labelled Uganda as a slave trade country? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, it is difficult to even quote my daughter, hon. Adeke, about Uganda being in the category she has described. Suffice it to say that Uganda is a strong pan-African country and Uganda gets provoked when Africans are in distress.  Therefore, Uganda will make extra steps to ensure that it comes to the aid and support of Africans who may be in distress.

The second question was whether the Parliament of Uganda been involved in taking that decision. Yes, it has been involved. My brother, the Minister of State for Relief and Disaster Preparedness, hon. Musa Ecweru, held a press conference - I do not think he came to Parliament but the point is well taken and an appropriate statement will be made by Government on this matter in this august House.

4.46
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are people with disabilities who I think are not catered for in the planning process of Government. When you talk of science pupils, we know that people with visual impairment will never be science oriented because of their disability but they are qualified to become teachers.

Recently, we have been made to understand that there is an online recruitment in the Public Service. Again, visually impaired people are not catered for in the use of computers for online recruitment. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, could you explain whether we are part of the planning process because in every Government plan, we are always the last to be considered? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Mr Speaker, my sister is raising a very legitimate point that sometimes, generalised macro-planning may not take full account of all sectors of society. However, as we very well know, it is a priority programme by Government to ensure that people with disabilities are given as much attention and their rights are respected as much as possible. 

If there are gaps that my sister has recognised with regard to the rights of people with disabilities, Government, as usual, will be more than happy to work with you to close these gaps as quickly as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now beyond 45 minutes. I will ask the Leader of the Opposition to speak.

4.48
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to welcome back Rev. Fr Lokodo, the Minister of State for Ethics. Indeed we saw what happened when he was incapacitated and we are happy that he is back alive and kicking. We prayed for you and I am sure the prayers worked. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as we talk, there is shortage of oxygen supply in most of our medical facilities. This shortage has basically affected Mulago National Referral Hospital and other regional referral hospitals. I would like to request that you give utmost attention to this matter because it is a matter of life and death.

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has also talked about crime preventers. I agree with him that they intend to bring a law. However, I would like to know from him who is paying the crime preventers at the moment and under which framework they are operating. I know what it means to wear an army uniform when you are not fully institutionalised in the army or any security institution.

There is also the issue of LC I elections. The Electoral Commission recently said that they lack Shs 7 billion to conduct these elections. The rampant killing of people in rural areas is a result of failure to have leadership at the lower levels. I think the Government should pay attention to that.

Why are manufacturers increasing the cost of cement? As we talk, when you go to Kenya, the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda, Hima cement is cheaper in those countries than in Uganda. When you go to Rwanda and look for Tororo cement, the price is actually lower than it is in Uganda and yet that cement comes from here. The Prime Minister should tell us what is happening.

There is another issue about the increment of salaries for teachers. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I do not agree with you on this, unless you are saying that you are phasing out humanities; but what shall the lawyers and teachers do? These teachers have the same lesson times and mark the same examination scripts. I think you have to review this issue. In addition, there are some science teachers who are getting higher pay than their supervisors. How will you manage that?

As I conclude, I would like to say that in 2018, Kampala Capital City Authority created new pedestrian signs along some walkways. They installed them in the whole of Kampala City Centre and near zebra crossing areas. However, as we talk, these signs are not respected. This to me brings up the issue of right of way. This matter is being abused. What measures is Government putting in place because the traffic code is very clear about who has the right of way? 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we live in the same area and use Salaama Road. I always see your convoy along that road and it is always well organised. However, I want to tell you that these days, the police are hiring out patrol vehicles to private people. In Makindye in particular, there is a young man called Brian White. This man is going to kill people and will one day knock your convoy. He has no right of way –(Mr Aogon rose_)– I am submitting at the Prime Minister’s Question Time and so I am not going to take information. Moreover, I am the Leader of the Opposition today and I am trying to use this time to see how I can conclude my questions. (Laughter)
	
Mr Speaker, the reason Government gave privileges to some individuals is because of the nature of their work and the position they occupy in the country. I am not complaining about having right of way. However, even some of your ministers have put sirens on their vehicles so that they can be given right of way. What measures have you put in place to make sure that each party involved follows the traffic rules?

There is another issue of pedestrians in Kampala. There is no respect for pedestrians, even though Kampala Capital City Authority has tried to address this. Those are my questions and I wish you could reply to them.

Finally, can we get a clear policy on refugees before you bring these people from Israel and Russia? That is why you have got such a question from one of our members. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR RUGUNDA: I would like to thank the honourable Leader of the Opposition for the clear points that he has made. I will attempt to respond to some of them.

With regard to shortage of oxygen, the policy of Government is to ensure that both Mulago and the referral hospitals produce their own oxygen. I know Mulago and a number of other hospitals have been doing this for quite some time. Therefore, if there is a problem in that process, then we will immediately follow it up and get it corrected. However, the issue of oxygen is critical to any serious hospital.

Crime preventers, as I said, are recruited under the law to support the security institutions. As I have already pointed out, Government will be bringing the necessary policy and legislative framework to be discussed and approved by this august House.

I entirely agree with my brother, hon. Ssewungu, that if the local councils are properly in place, they will be powerful instruments for security, development and even resolving disputes. That is why all of us are interested in having these LCs properly elected as soon as possible –(Interjection)– Well, the seriousness of this can be demonstrated by the fact that the National Resistance Movement, for the last almost two years, has had its candidates ready for LC positions. Therefore, we are ready. It is a question of sorting out the remaining hurdles.

On the question of cement prices, this point is well taken. As I have said, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives is already following it up and she is going to be reinforced.

On phasing out humanities in the education system, I would like to state that there is no such thing. Humanities are, needless to say, a critical and important component of our education. All of us benefit from humanities and there is no plan like that. However, it is true that we said we need also, as we transform, to encourage science education but the time for teachers of arts subjects is also going to come. They are not forgotten nor are they being phased out.

Regarding KCCA signposts, all of us should respect these signposts. I think we may need more sensitisation by KCCA and the rest of us. The police may have to also take some measures to ensure that the signposts and zebra crossings are indeed respected. Nobody is above the law. Brian White, colleagues and ministers are not above the law. If anybody is using unauthorised sirens, they are breaking the law. Fortunately, the minister in charge of police is here. We will do what is needful to ensure that the law is respected.

On the refugees who are coming in, Uganda has approximately 1.4 million refugees and is doing her best to deal with them. I agree with the comments made that the matter of refugees who Uganda is considering for relocation should be discussed by this august House so that this Parliament is part and parcel of the process. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, this has been a great improvement. However, I have Members who I had lined up to speak but the time is limited. I keep saying that we need to reflect on the way we phrase the questions so that we have many more questions. If you take up to three minutes asking a question, then you have already limited the time of two other Members who could have used that same time to ask questions. 

The Rt Hon Prime Minister has the latitude to use as much time to explain but you have a limited time to ask a question. Therefore, help other Members by shortening your questions and being direct to the point - no background, preambles or laying facts before you ask your question. Questions must be direct so that the answers are also concise. Thank you. We have done well today, except that some Members have gone back without asking their questions. For that, I apologise. We will keep on improving on this.

Honourable members, I had altered the Order Paper to accommodate a motion. However, given that this motion has only come today without notice on the Order Paper, we will receive it but debate it next week. Otherwise, we want to complete the business that had already been here today, particularly that one coming from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Therefore, this motion will only be presented and we defer debate to next week.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO COMMEMORATE THE INTERNATIONAL DAY OF STREET CONNECTED CHILDREN

5.01
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your indulgence in accommodating this motion without notice. Allow me to inform the House about the presence of some of the partners that are helping this country to manage our children who have been withdrawn from the streets. We have Dwelling Places and Children at Risk Action Network (CRANE), a consortium of Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) or Civil Society Organisations (CSOs) that are working together with other authorities to undertake this problem.

Mr Speaker, I have a motion for a resolution of Parliament to commemorate the International Day of Street Connected Children, moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament:

“WHEREAS the Government of Uganda is proud to join the rest of the international community to commemorate the day of the street connected children;

AND WHEREAS this year’s commemoration marks the eighth annual international day for street connected children, under the theme, “Equality for street children starts here: Let’s make it happen”, which was selected to bring to the fore access to rights and other issues surrounding children on the street;

NOTING THAT the international day of street connected children is commemorated every 12th day of April every year, and it presents an opportunity to focus on the plight of children on the streets, to advocate for joint action to help remove children from the streets, to call upon all actors committed to upholding the rights of children and child protection, and to consolidate their efforts in addressing the issue of street children; 

NOTING FURTHER THAT the first International Day for Street Children was launched in London on April 12 2011, aimed at giving millions of street connected children all around the world a voice, and drawing attention to an issue that had largely been ignored by governments, the development sector and civil society;

APPRECIATING THAT under the umbrella of the Consortium Of Street Children in the United Kingdom (UK), a consortium of charity organisations working with street connected children from all over the world in June 2017 presented UN General Comment No. 21 that was published and adopted by the UN;

AWARE THAT under General Comment No.21 of 2017, the Committee on the Rights of the Child provided authoritative guidance to states on developing comprehensive, long-term national strategies on children in street situations using a holistic child rights approach and addressing both prevention and response in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child;

CONFIRMING THAT Uganda ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child and therefore as a state party, has an obligation to implement all the provisions;

REALIZING THAT the objectives of the General Committee are-
    a) To clarify the obligations of states in applying a child rights approach to strategies and initiatives for children in street situations;

    b) To provide comprehensive and authoritative guidance to states on using a holistic child rights approach to prevent children from experiencing violation of rights and the lack of choices that results in them having to depend on the streets for their survival and development; and to promote and protect the rights of children already in street situations, ensuring a continuum of care and helping them to develop to their full potential;

    c) To identify the implications of particular articles of the Convention for children in street situations to enhance respect for them as rights holders and full citizens, and to enhance understanding of children’s connections to the street;

COGNISANT THAT children in street situations are at risk of exposure to potentially life threatening conditions associated with hazardous forms of child labour, traffic accidents, substance abuse, commercial sex exploitation and unsafe sexual practices, and death due to lack of access to adequate nutrition, health care and shelter;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament sitting today that-

1. 	This Parliament joins the whole world in commemorating 12th April as a day of children in street situations.

2. 	This Parliament adopts General Comment No. 21 of 2017 to be the framework guide to Government in all undertakings relating to street connected children.

3. 	This Parliament enacts appropriate legislation which will specifically regulate the plight of children in street situations.

4. 	Government specifically recognizes the unique situations of street connected children in the National Child Policy, which is currently being developed.

5. 	Government ratifies the Palermo Protocol and fast-tracks the tabling of regulations to effect the implementation of the Children (Amendment) Act, 2016, Cap 59.

6. 	Government puts in place mechanisms of protecting street connected children from violence and abuse, and ensures children have access to justice when their rights are infringed upon.

7. 	Government provides access to the same essential services, for example schools, hospitals, to enable them reach their full potential.

8. 	Government delivers specialized services and opportunities that delve into the unique needs and challenges of life for street connected children.

9. 	Government renews its commitment to end child labour, modern slavery and human trafficking in Uganda.” 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Aogon, hon. Adeke, hon. Baba Diri, hon. Nabakooba, hon. Nyaketcho, and hon. Margaret Komuhangi. The motion is properly seconded and many more Members are seconding this motion.

Honourable members, as I said, I propose this motion for debate but also guide on particularly prayers 2 and 3. They should be directed to the Government because Parliament cannot adopt the General Comment of the UN without the Government bringing it here, and Government should be urged to bring that law referred to in No.3 so that Parliament can enact it. We do not want a situation where it is brought by a private Member yet it is something that has a lot of financial implications and we lose it in translation. Therefore, with those modifications we can debate.

Therefore, I will ask you to justify your motion but not now, so that when Members debate, they are fresh with your justification to the motion on Wednesday when we resume. I will not propose the question now. I will propose when you justify your motion on Wednesday.

Honourable members, let us receive the justification for this motion properly before the House on Wednesday and then we debate after Members have accessed and read in detail what this motion is about and its implications.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. 

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE LEARNER’S PROJECT UNDER THE NATIONAL IDENTIFICATION AND REGISTRATION AUTHORITY (NIRA)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that this report was presented yesterday and we deferred debate to today. Ordinarily, since there are two reports from this committee and kind of related though different, I would suggest that we receive both reports, but let us debate item No.7. I will allow us process this one first.

I have already proposed the question for your debate; let us start the debate on item No. 7. If there is no debate, I will proceed to the question for our decision.

5.11
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West Kalungu): Thank you Mr Speaker. On this NIRA report, I am not happy with what transpired. I was in this House and I strongly objected the passing of this money. I gave my justifications about how we could register students in schools with the use of local systems which we have, like registers in schools.

What is coming out of the report shows a total misuse of funds. When you go to observations and findings, they mention poor stakeholders’ awareness and publicity of the project. I am happy the honourable Minister of Education is here. She was the one defending this money in this House. 

We told them that there is no better place you can meet stakeholders other than schools because during the term, both children and teachers are there. However, see what you are stating here, that there was no awareness and publicity of the project yet it was run by the ministry and NIRA, which they supported to get a record of students.

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the supplementary funding, I wonder how the Ministry of Finance could have given more money to this project without consulting Parliament and having the money passed by Parliament. You are violating the Public Finance Management Act and these are the reasons we were giving against hon. Kasaija recently when we wanted to censor him. You go and spend money without consulting and getting authority from Parliament. Do you take this institution of Parliament as useless? Where is the performance of this money that shows the number of children registered? 

I remember telling these people in this House and the ministers that for us, Catholics, you do not even need to go to schools; go to our parishes and the records are there because we are baptised. Baptism dates and the days we were born are there.  However, they refused and now here we are with wastage of funds.

About the challenges faced by enrolment of officers – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But would those baptism certificates have their photographs as well –

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, all the information on the certificates is available at the parishes - Church of Uganda, Catholic founded – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Including an up to date photograph of the person to be registered?

MR SSEWUNGU: Of course, Mr Speaker, the photographs are not there. However, those were remedies we were giving to stop wasting the Shs 56 billion by that time. 

You procured cameras that also have a question mark. The recommendations are asking the Auditor-General to carry out a forensic audit. I was not here yesterday but I read this report. What came out of here is that there is no value for money. As a Member of Parliament – (Interjection) - This is the report; hon. Seninde, if you raise a point of order or clarification through the Speaker, I can answer you. There is no value for money according to this report from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. 

Mr Speaker, let us also recommend a forensic audit as Parliament to find out whether there was value for money. Otherwise, the purpose of releasing this money was not achieved. 

As I conclude, I have always quarrelled with the Ministry of Education and Sports because they have failed to provide schools with registers. The first tool to give you the number of children and their presence at school, classes and age is a register because there must be a roll call every day. If it is primary section, you roll call in the morning and at mid-day; if a child does not come to school, there must be a reason, which is noted in the register. That is what we are telling the honourable minister but for them, they were fighting to get the Shs 56 billion and now here we are getting wasteful expenditure for this project – (Mr Akol rose_) – I can take the information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, why doesn’t he just debate? You conclude and then he debates.

MR AKOL: I just have some information to give - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I know your kind of information is like a debate so let him just debate. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to thank the committee. Thank you for this open report you have given. It is really revealing that funds were wasted. I will be more interested in seeing the Auditor-General going to the root of this project and see whether there was value for money. However, we shall remain on record as having refused the release of this money. The minister was here to defend it but I do not know what she can say right now before the Speaker. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Member of Parliament for Kilak North - Oh, is he a member of the committee? That is why he wanted to give you information.
 
MR AKOL: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then give your information to another Member. 

MR AKOL: Thank you, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are a member of the committee, you cannot debate. I apologise; you can give information to another Member later.

MR AKOL: That is why I want to give the information –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has finished. You will give it to the Member of Parliament for Kumi Municipality. (Laughter)

5.18
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, when we talk about matters of registration, the people who should be most concerned should be the people who are seated right here, the Members of Parliament. The category that we are talking about are people aged between 5 to 16 years. By 2021 or 2023, they will be eligible voters and therefore they should be of paramount concern to us.

I wonder how many of us were really keen at the time of this exercise to follow up what was going on. If these registers are messed up right now, there is nothing that you can correct in the future, and this is critical. We are talking about the type of equipment that is being used in this exercise; it is outdated, tired equipment. It reminds me about what happened in one of my popular places when I was going to vote. In a place where people were keen to vote for me, one of the machines used in the election process was slow, to the extent that to have one person vote was taking nearly seven minutes. That shows you how important it is to have the right equipment and not outdated equipment.  

I support this motion, and this issue should not stop here. This has only opened the way for us to look at all the procurements in the country and I think Government should now be looking at one thing - amending the procurement Act. There are so many challenges in the procurement Act; it is not only about NIRA but across the board throughout the country. 

Our procurement systems have let us down completely. First, people can easily run away with money. Secondly, through procurement people delay projects. There is too much bureaucracy, which has failed us. People swindle money these days. It is the duty of Members of Parliament to follow up and make sure that money is utilised in a proper way. Much as I also say that it is okay for us to tell the Auditor-General to do an audit, as Members of Parliament let us try our best to follow up on Government programmes like this one. 

If you talk about security, which we have been struggling with here, these are the matters. You deal with people whom you do not know. A child grows up to 18 years old and then from nowhere you realise he is not registered or he is registered wrongly and the leaders are not concerned. These are the issues, and I entirely support this motion. We must adopt the recommendations in the report so that Parliament will forge the way forward for this country. I would like to give my colleague, hon. Olanya time to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is okay. Honourable members, this committee has recommended a forensic audit, which means that they were not able to fully present to us what the full extent of the problem is. A forensic audit, I suppose, includes a value for money audit. If this is the recommendation and we are to debate now, won’t the debate be premature? 

If we agree with the recommendation by the committee that there is need for a forensic audit, wouldn’t it be proper to agree to it? After the ministers have spoken, we can request for a forensic audit and then the matter comes back through our Committee of Public Accounts after the audit, and then we can have a proper debate on the full extent of the problem. 

Let me have the ministers. If the ministers will not have anything to say, we shall adopt the report.

5.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister -(Interjections)- Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is also in the House, so it is okay. (Laughter)

MR KANIA: No, Mr Speaker, I am addressing the House through you, including the Rt Hon. Prime Minister of course. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the work they did and the field visits they made. We are grateful for the recommendations they have made generally and in principle we agree with most of them. However, I have the following comments to make: 

First, if you recall from the report, the committee made an early visit when the project had just began. As you have clearly explained in this report recorded by them, although the project was anticipated to start in May, because of the encumbrances we encountered, we were unable to start it fully until August. Therefore, by the time the main activity started, the committee, with due respect, had already made their visit. 

Secondly, if you look at page 3 of the report, I am aware that this could be a good shamble that they visited five schools, which are mostly around Kampala. At that time if you looked at our projection and the plan for the implementation of this project, Kampala was one of the last stations that we went to to do the registration. We started in the north, went to the east, later on went to the west and eventually ended up in Kampala. 

What was done by the time the committee was in the field was the minimum. However, having said those general comments, as I said at the beginning, we agree with them, but we would like to differ with the report of the committee on their recommendation on page 10, that the entire exercise be repeated. We do it for the following reasons: 

First, when NIRA set off for the exercise, it was assumed, from the information from the Ministry Education and Sports, that they were going to register 10 million learners. However, after the first preliminary survey, it was established that the number of students they were going to register were 14 million. In our view, establishment of the fact that the number of pupils that were going to be registered were more than what was anticipated and given to NIRA by Ministry of Education and Sports was an achievement.

Secondly, by the time this project closed at the end of March, NIRA had registered 8.6 million pupils, which would have given a percentage of about 75 based on the original estimation but about 68 based on the estimation of 14 million pupils. This data is available with NIRA. 

The National Identification and Registration Authority is waiting for the Ministry of Education and Sports to establish what they call an IFMS system so that they are able to access this data as of now. Therefore, this is a big achievement and in our view, there is no need to spend more Government resources where the achievement has already been made.

However, areas that have not been fully covered can definitely be repeated –(Interjections)– I am just about to finish. You can seek clarification later. 

Generally, these are our comments. Regarding the issue of the forensic audit, we cannot say no but the basis provided by the committee here in our view is inadequate. If the committee has more evidence backing up a forensic audit, as NIRA and Ministry of Internal Affairs we shall support that forensic audit because we do not condone misuse of Government funds. Thank you very much.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for his submission. First, let me correct something. Not all the schools listed on page 4 are from Kampala. There is a school from Wakiso - Ndejje.

Secondly, on the same page of the report, the committee is saying you did not even consult local leaders, LCIII chairpersons and District Education Officers (DEOs). Therefore, I do not see- (Interjection) - I am on clarification as well and you know that you are senior to me here in this House. Clarification cannot be answered with information.

Mr Speaker, I think what you have –(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I had not wanted to rise on a point of order but at this point allow me do so. My brother is trying to explain, which is okay. However, the justification and explanation he is giving is somehow misguiding this House because he has not given us time to explain what happened.

My colleague has just given a clear explanation that by the time the committee went to the field, the exercise had not taken off properly because it had just started. The schools my brother is referring to were chosen as a sample; NIRA wanted to sample and see how the exercise will go. They were actually piloting. Therefore, we cannot base this kind of explanation on a pilot study.

I wish I had been given a chance to give some explanation-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are going to be given a chance.

MS SENINDE: My brother would appreciate it better. Is my brother therefore in order to persistently misguide the House yet we are ready to give some explanation so that Members are able to appreciate the issue? If there are some challenges, we will take them up and if there is something to appreciate, we take it up. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a very clever way of seeking clarification.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I think I will go back to my earlier statement when the House had just started, that attention is very important in this House. If you reduce your attention, you miss some important issues that are part of your submission.

The Minister of Internal Affairs was complaining about the committee having visited only Kampala schools as per the report. I said that among the five schools they visited, there is also one from Wakiso. This was their scope of investigation.

Mr Speaker, I am insisting your guidance is better because when you go to page 7 of this report - By the way, hon. Seninde, let me tell you that I have read the report from here and I have everything-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on clarification

MR SSEWUNGU: According to the report, you got accounts for your officials and paid them through mobile money, which you are about to tax, and it is an irregularity. The clarification I am seeking from hon. Kania is: What do you lose if we go by the Speaker’s guidance that we go for a forensic audit? Many irregularities are imputed against you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the minister has had no objection. However, what the minister is explaining, which I need to crosscheck with the chairperson, and which is vital information, is that at the time that the committee went and did this investigation, the project was just starting. Now, how much longer after the investigation did the project go on which is now not covered in this report? I want the minister to respond and then I ask the chair so that we are guided.

MR SSEWUNGU: We also need to know whether the committee met the minister.

5.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to add my voice in thanking the committee for the work well done, much as the exercise was just starting. It is unfortunate on the one hand that the committee only interfaced with the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I wish we also had an opportunity to interface with the committee to share and discuss their findings.

The ministry was only coordinating this exercise; we were not implementers. I would like to add that the Ministry of Internal Affairs through NIRA wanted to get an idea of the number of students or learners on which they would base their budget, and we gave them a number of about 10 million learners. Therefore, you will agree with me, dear friends and colleagues, that the purpose of this exercise was basically to help us as Government to have proper planning because we have been planning but somehow basing on numbers that have always been inflated.  That is why we thought this exercise would help us as Government to plan effectively. 

Mr Speaker, when NIRA went to the field, they discovered that there were more schools than the numbers we had. Why? It is because many Ugandans have started schools, which have not been registered with the ministry. That is why we regarded that exercise as an eye opener that helped the ministry to take up the exercise of closing some of such schools. 

In its registration exercise, NIRA managed to register, like my colleague has pointed out, over 8 million learners. It therefore means that if they had been given more time, we are sure they probably would have been able to register all the children that they had anticipated to register. Unfortunately, the time given to NIRA was short and they had to stop based on the time they were given. 

As if that was not enough, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is going to carry out a continuous mop-up exercise targeting children from zero years; it is part of their programme. Therefore, even the children that were not registered will be registered. 

However, based on the recommendations of the report, I would like to talk about the following: One, while I do appreciate what the committee came up with, the challenge is, like my brother has pointed out, the issue of repeating the registration for the children they registered. I do not think that is necessary because it is already overtaken by events. 

Secondly, there is the issue of carrying out a forensic investigation. Well, I have no right to say no if the House believes that it is necessary, because for any exercise it is always good to give accountability and I think that is okay. 

However, all in all, dear colleagues, I would like to add that as the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Government in general, we tried our best to do the necessary mobilisation and sensitisation. We carried out regional meetings in all the regions of this country. We sent messages through the local leadership in the churches and in the media; we tried our best.

You will agree with me, dear honourable colleagues, that Ugandans and I inclusive, sometimes tend not to take certain things serious. We have been talking about registration of telephone numbers, for example, and you have seen how people have been behaving. I think it is a big challenge to us as leaders in this country. However, on the other hand, we need to appreciate the work done by Ministry of Internal Affairs, through NIRA, regardless of the challenges that have been pointed out. We also need to appreciate that NIRA as an institution also faced a number of challenges in carrying out this exercise. The people they worked with are human beings and we need to appreciate that.

As I conclude, I do appreciate the work of the committee and I would like to thank them very much. I think it has to be on record, –(Interjection)– Can I first conclude?

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to thank the committee and also to have this on record, that honestly if the committee had also carried out the exercise they did towards the end, I believe they would have probably come up with –(Interjections)- I mean, they carried out that investigation before the exercise started. If they had also done it towards the end, maybe more things would have probably come out and more guidance would have been given. Otherwise, I would like to thank you so much and to also thank colleagues for all your contributions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, let me guide you. We need clear guidance to the House. Honourable members, there are only two key recommendations. The rest are administrative recommendations, like consulting LCIIIs and paying those who have not been paid. Those are issues that can be handled later. 

There are two key recommendations and one is that the entire exercise of registering learners should be redesigned and repeated. That is a major recommendation. The second recommendation, which is important, is that the committee strongly recommends that the Auditor-General should conduct a forensic audit on the entire learners’ project. This should include, the procurement processes, methods of recruitment, level of facilitation, mode of payment and all those other things that are related to that transaction. 

The two things you need to help us with are: At what stage of the project did you carry out this investigation? Based on the facts that you have been given now regarding the registration of 8 million pupils - about 70 per cent of the first estimates and about 69 per cent of the second estimate of 14 million learners – do you still stand by this recommendation of redesigning and repeating this exercise? You need to guide us on this because you need to look at what stage you did this.

5.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take note of what has been said by the honourable ministers. We did our field visits around June and July 2017 and the project had started in May – (Interjection) - Yes, you announced its start in May. We went to the schools that are mentioned in our report and we actually found the exercise taking place. For some of you who watched news on television, I think you saw us visiting and also questioning some of the enrolment officers who were involved in the exercise.

Mr Speaker, I would like to give a brief comment about repeating the whole exercise. I would like to say that the recommendation has been overtaken by events. Remember around August 2017, the honourable ministers came back to Parliament and said that the exercise would continue up to end of March 2018 and during that time, they have been registering. However, in the process of registration, we realised that even in the schools where registration took place, some students had been left out. You would find that maybe three or four classes had been registered and they would tell the rest that would come back. 

Therefore, I do not know how that information can inform the ministry on how to plan for the respective schools. We would think that the exercise would have been done in a more systematic way - maybe pick a few schools but do the exercise conclusively so that you do not go back to those schools again.

On the issue of the forensic audit, we realised that there were many challenges in the course of implementing the project. I would like to inform this august House that in the course of doing our work, we realised that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had also carried out an exercise on verification of funds spent for the registration of the learners exercise in the financial year 2016/2017 under the National Identification and Registration Authority.

Mr Speaker, when you look at their report, it has many recommendations regarding how money was spent. We realised that the procurement did not follow the required procedures. They bought computers and T-shirts that did not have specifications. All those deliveries were made towards the end of the implementation of the project. We further realised that this report would be added onto our report to form a basis for the forensic audit to be carried out. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems to be clear that the issue of redesigning and repeating the exercise might not stand now. That means if we adopt this report, we would adopt it without the recommendation for redesigning and repeating the exercise. However, the recommendation on a forensic audit stands. Okay? That is what I get from the submissions of the minister and the chairperson. 

Therefore, are we now in a situation where we can adopt this matter, send it for forensic audit and then come back after the audit and have a proper review of this project? Will that be a way to go? Can I put the question to this motion now? The chairperson has to lay the report on Table.

MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, allow me lay on the Table the report of the committee, minutes of the meetings and other supporting documents, including an audit report from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the learners’ project. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that and thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Let the records capture the report of from the Ministry of Finance, Panning and Economic Development on the exercise, the minutes of the committee meetings and the report of the committee itself, on which we are taking a decision now. 

Honourable members, can I put the question to some of these specific recommendations, which are here? Some are administrative like verifying payments and things like that. Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Learners’ Project under the National Identification and Registration Authority be adopted with the amendments made. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk to Parliament, please extract the minutes, specifically on the reference for the Auditor-General to have a forensic audit done, which will include a value for money audit. Thank you.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE OVERSIGHT VISIT TO THE REGIONAL FORENSIC ANALYTICAL LABORATORY IN EASTERN UGANDA, MBALE

5.47
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the oversight visit to the Regional Forensic Analytical Government Laboratory in eastern Uganda, Mbale.

The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs undertook a field visit to Mbale District to appraise the status of the Regional Forensic Laboratory under the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL). The visit was conducted in accordance with Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rule 185 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which empower the committee to monitor the performance of the ministries and agencies under its supervision. 

The Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It provides a full range of general scientific analytical, forensic and advisory services that facilitate effective legal proceedings to dispense justice, safeguard public and environmental health and safety, as well as the promotion of trade. 

The Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory also provides forensic analytical and advisory services to a wide range of clientele, including Government departments responsible for the administration of justice and other agencies of Government, mainly the police, courts of law, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP). It also provides services to statutory agencies responsible for environmental management, compliance to standards, drug analytical investigations, tax investigations, security and intelligence as well as the private sector and members of the public, especially the traders and local manufacturers through the promotion of trade. 

Historically, this department was referred to as the Government Chemist and it has been in existence since 1927. It has had varied administrative changes in status and placement within the Government structures and bureaucracy. It became a directorate in 2009 under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. It is a directorate with three departments namely Criminalistics and Laboratory Services; Quality Chemical Verification; and Regional Forensic Laboratories. 

The committee made reference to the following documents: 

    a) The National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2016/20l7; 
    b) The Semi-Annual Budget Performance Report for the financial year 2016/2017; and 
    c) The Ministry of Internal Affairs official website.

The terms of reference were as follows:
1. 	To ascertain the most common cases as well as the conditions under which the forensic laboratories operate, their functionality and infrastructure;
2. 	To ascertain the staffing level of DGAL; 
3. 	To ascertain the cost-benefit analysis of equipping the existing laboratories with the necessary sophisticated equipment, reagents and chemicals as a means of saving Government money on transportation of samples abroad; and 
4. 	To ascertain challenges faced by the Government analytical laboratories in Uganda.

The committee visited the laboratory in Mbale and observed the common cases and conditions under which the forensic laboratories operate, their functionality and infrastructure. We noted that DGAL is still unable to reduce case backlog, which negatively impacts the administration of justice. 

The most common cases that DGAL receives in big numbers are those that require DNA analysis for crimes related to murder/homicides, sexual assaults, and toxicological/poison cases. As a result, the committee was informed that the current case backlog stands at 5,556 criminal cases, 1,524 DNA cases and 3,292 toxicological cases.

The committee was also informed that there is a context within which most cases are defined. There are particular cases that are more reported in some regions than others. It is imperative to note that the committee was not given the figures to indicate which region beats the other.

The committee further noted that despite the completion of the forensic laboratories in Mbale, Mbarara and Moroto in 2014, the said laboratories have not been fully operational due to lack of funding. Further, the Gulu Laboratory is nearing completion but the likelihood of it being operational upon completion hangs in balance.

We recommend that DGAL prioritises equipping of the existing regional laboratories under its operations with the required equipment and reagents as opposed to constructing new laboratories.

The committee also noted that DGAL is seriously understaffed. Whereas the approved structure for the directorate by the Ministry of Public Service is 124 staff, currently there have only 50 staff countrywide. The limited staff members available are forced to rotate; for example, while in Mbale the committee met and interacted with some scientists who had gone to carry out tests but were not stationed in Mbale.

This scenario moved H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda while meeting with Ministry of Internal Affairs’ officials on 28 September 2016, and he directed that funding the forensic laboratories should be prioritised. He emphasized the role DGAL plays in investigations by providing scientific evidence, which is important in proving offences beyond reasonable doubt. 

Further, the semi-annual budget performance report indicates that DGAL has only one driver and yet safe transportation of samples is a critical element of both DGAL's mandate and the delicate chain of evidence DGAL needs to maintain.

A direct consequence of understaffing has led to the heavy case backlog DGAL is currently facing. As of 2016, DGAL had a case backlog of 24,000 cases. With the understaffed facilities, the case backlog is only expected to increase, unless interventions are undertaken by Government to recruit staff. 

The semi-annual budget performance report also indicates that for the second quarter of financial year 2016/2017, 244 cases were received, out of which 208 cases were analysed and reported. Within the half-year period, 36 new cases were submitted for analysis. This demonstrates the high rate of case backlog accumulation. 

The committee also noted that if Government is to benefit from the rare skills of scientists Uganda is endowed with, urgent intervention is required to ensure recruitment is done. 

Challenges Faced by Analytical Laboratories in Uganda

In all our findings, the committee noted that one of the biggest challenges the directorate faces is underfunding and this is the root cause of most of the upheavals that have caused underperformance of the directorate. Due to underfunding, the laboratories in place lack the necessary modern laboratory equipment, chemicals and reagents to be used in the numerous forensic tests to handle the increasing case backlog.

Case backlog was prioritised in the financial year 2O17/2018 budget, with Shs 1.1 billion allocated for reagents, chemicals and consumables to enable forensic analysis of the backlog cases and the new forensic cases coming in at DGAL. However, these funds were not fully allocated to case backlog due to other emerging crimes in the country, which required priority. For example, the rape and murder cases in Entebbe and Nansana in Wakiso District made case backlog a recurring issue. The laboratory had so far received 23 rape and murder cases with 200 exhibits from the women victims in Entebbe and Nansana in Wakiso District. The committee established that DGAL's approved budget for financial year 2016/2017 was Shs 5.34 billion. By December 2016, Shs 4.094 billion had been released, reflecting a 76.7 per cent release performance. 

The semi-annual budget performance report for financial year 2016/2017 further points out, in highlighting DGAL's vote performance, that regional analytical laboratories are not operational due to lack of funding. The heavy case backlog at DGAL, which is crime-related, has a drastic impact on the administration of justice since the vital evidence required by courts of law to dispose of some cases is not timely provided by DGAL. The delay in providing the test results is mainly due to lack of reagents.

We recommend that the Government allocates more funds to DGAL since underfunding has been a recurring challenge in the directorate since its inception.

The committee further noted that the employees at DGAL are underpaid. The national budget for financial year 2016/2017 approved Shs 760 million for general staff salaries of the entire DGAL. This does not reflect the value and the rare skills that most DGAL staff possess. This explains the high turnover because the remuneration offered does not match the rare skills the employees have. A majority of DGAL staff have sought greener pastures abroad or elsewhere in private companies.

The committee also noted that there is urgent need to constantly upgrade the skills of DGAL staff through trainings in developed countries where technology has advanced. As technology advances, criminals also advance their tactics, thus calling for urgency in adapting to the different modern sophisticated methods to match the increasing sophistication in crime. 

We recommend that more staff undergo short courses and post-graduate courses with the help of Government subsidies in order to improve the quality of DGAL staff performance and efficiency.

The committee noted that DGAL is important, especially when compared to the private laboratories, because it is a multidisciplinary national forensic referral institution that provides an advisory role to Government agencies. 

The committee further noted that by equipping DGAL, Government would save money that is used in most cases to send samples to developed countries for tests, which would rather be done here in Uganda. Whereas the equipment to carry out tests is available and the scientists are in place, the laboratories lack the required reagents. We recommend that DGAL should be allocated an adequate budget to have the reagents in place.

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the committee notes that although DGAL is an indispensable part of the Government in an evidence-based system of democratisation, it has faced numerous challenges, key of which is underfunding and understaffing. It is the committee’s prayer, therefore, that management and staff of DGAL are rewarded for the work they carry out with limited resources. We recommend a substantial increase in the Government’s budget towards the entire directorate.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee. (Applause) Honourable members, we will not be able to start debate now but I will propose the question for your debate. 

However, chairperson of the committee, when I look at your report, under Item 5.4 it says that the committee established that DGAL’s approved budget for financial year 2016/2017 was Shs 5.34 billion but that by December 2016, they had released 76.7 per cent. This report was published in March 2018; why are you still giving us provisional half-year percentages of budget performance when the financial year has closed? By now, the report should not be saying this. It should be telling us the performance of the budget in the whole financial year, 2016/2017. We are in March 2018 and that financial year ended in June last year. This paragraph should not be in a report of 2018. That would help us to know exactly where we are.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, this House has a lot of work. When you read this report, the main issue is inadequate funding. By setting it aside for another day’s debate, we shall be giving ourselves more work. Would it be procedurally okay that as Parliament, since we have read this report, we pass the motion with the recommendation that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development finds the money to fund DGAL? Otherwise, we have the skilled people. They know what to do but there is no money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words you are saying we adopt the report so that the recommendations can be handled in the budget process. Is that what you are suggesting?

MR SSEWUNGU: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I will propose and put the question at the same time. Can I do that? Honourable minister, do you have a response to this matter or we just proceed?

6.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Mr Speaker, I just want to underscore the report of the committee and I thank the acting Leader of the Opposition for the recommendation. I go by his recommendation. Thank you. (Laughter)
	
6.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We agree with the recommendation but consider it in the budget process of the financial year 2019/2020. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is true. However, for now the recommendations can be captured and as we discuss it in the budget, you might find that some of these things can be accommodated.

MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, as you have heard from the report, the situation is bad. They really need some funding. If they do not have reagents, it means the court processes would be delayed in one way or the other. They cannot perform yet they have to give scientific - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, what recommendations have you made to the Committee on Budget?

MS NABAKOOBA: The minister said that they should be considered in the budget of 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are not relying on what the minister has said. We are saying this matter is still with us and it is with you and you will come back here.

MS NABAKOOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, go and look at the possibilities and advise the Committee on Budget on the necessary steps to take.

Honourable members, I will first propose the question -

MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the report and the minutes of our proceedings. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full report   and the minutes of the meetings of the committee. 

Honourable members, with the concurrence, I will first propose the motion for your debate on the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the oversight visit to the Regional Forensic Analytical Laboratory in eastern Ugandan, Mbale be adopted but with your concurrence. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the oversight visit to the Regional Forensic Analytical Laboratories in eastern Ugandan, Mbale, be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. There are no amendments. The recommendations that we have adopted should be looked at critically in the budget process so that the matters in there can be dealt with while we discuss the budget.

Honourable members, it is now past 6 O’clock and we have no further business to handle. We have finished every matter on the Order Paper. This House is adjourned to Wednesday at 2 O’clock. Happy Labour Day, Members. 

(The House rose at 6.06 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 May 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

