Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.





Friday, 26 April 2019

Parliament met at 10.05 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Today, we expect to finish with the reports from the committees. Also, as I told you yesterday, the chairman of the committee alerted me that the Bill that had been returned by the President had been examined by the committee and they are ready. So, as you can see now, it is on the Order Paper. We also expect a statement from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, who I still do not see. 

If we are able to do the rest of the things very well and finish with the report today, then we do not have to sit on Monday. However, if we do not, unfortunately we will have to come back on Monday and see how we can finish so that we beat the timeline of 30th. 

I must also apologise to Members because the debates cannot be accommodated to that level. The reason is simple - the ministerial policy statements should have come here by 15th March but they never did. For almost a month, we did not have them and yet we should have used those two or three weeks to analyse the reports of the committees and have sufficient time to debate them. However, now we have four days to deal with all the reports and some of the reports are not ready. This is the challenge that we face. 

This challenge has been brought upon us by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - causing all these delays - and the respective departments and ministries that delayed to deliver their policy statements to the House. We hope that next year, we will do better. Anybody tasked with the responsibility of presenting particular papers by a particular date should be able to do so to free the budget process so that it can run smoothly. Now, everything is all brought together in one week and that is not going to be easy for us but we are trying. 

I apologise to the Members who wanted to debate but are not able to do so because of the tight timelines that we have to follow. Let us see how we proceed today. I do not know how many reports are ready by today. I am told the Committee on Presidential Affairs was ready but I do not see the chairperson here to confirm their state of readiness. Let us see how to proceed. Thank you, Members.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR DAY, 1 MAY 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is not here but I see ministers here who can read this statement. It is a Cabinet statement, so pass it on to the minster. We are not going to accept any delaying tactics anymore. Proceed, honourable minister.

10.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Mr Speaker, I present this statement on behalf of the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

As you are aware, on 1st May every year, Uganda joins the rest of the world to commemorate the International Labour Day. On this day, we recognise the workers and employers for their contribution to the economic and social development of our country.

The International Labour Day is a gazetted public holiday in Uganda. Every year, ceremonies are organised at the national and district levels. This year’s national celebrations will be held in Patongo Akwee Primary School, Patongo Town Council, Agago District on Wednesday, 1 May 2019. 

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda will grace the celebrations as chief guest. All local governments and Kampala Capital City Authority have been informed and requested to observe the day in accordance with the guidelines for the commemoration of national days. 

The theme of this day is “Promoting employment through enhanced public infrastructure investment”. The theme draws from the fact that public investment in infrastructure like rail, roads, power dams and power transmission, oil refinery, apart from creating jobs on their own, will eventually continue to bring down the cost of doing business, which will in turn attract private investment and create more jobs for the people of Uganda. 

The theme relates to the challenges that the country has been experiencing in provision of decent employment opportunities and job creation. Furthermore, the theme is in line with the aspirations of the second National Development Plan, which aims to propel the country towards middle income status by 2020, through strengthening the country’s competitiveness for sustainable wealth creation, decent employment and inclusive growth. 

The theme thus calls on the Uganda Government, all categories of investors and other stakeholders to redesign and review their policies, laws, strategies and programmes with the view to increasing jobs and employment opportunities for the working age population. This population increased to 19.1 million in 2016/2017 from 16.5 million in 2013/2014 (Uganda National Household Survey).

Some of the critical actions required for optimising the employment impacts of infrastructure projects include:

    i. Sustaining the ongoing Government efforts to implement the strategic infrastructure and industrial projects identified in the National Development Plan II; 
    ii. Developing national guidelines on mainstreaming employment creation in infrastructure projects; 
    iii. Integrating employment impact assessment in social impact assessment of infrastructure projects; 
    iv. Making employment creation as one of the measurable indicators of success of every infrastructure project; 
    v. Encouraging adoption of technology that support both efficiency and high employment impact of infrastructure projects; and 
    vi. Promoting social safeguards in infrastructure projects, including promotion and protection of workers in these projects.

The preparations have taken place and the national organising committee and district organising committee, chaired by the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Chief Administrative Officer of Agago District respectively, were constituted. The programme is expected to begin at 8.00 a.m. with a series of activities, which include a parade by the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF), Uganda Police Forces, Uganda Prisons Service, workers and students, among others. Invitations have been extended to various distinguished guests, including Members of Parliament, Government officials, diplomats, workers and employers. 

In conclusion, I would like to invite you, honourable colleagues, to join the workers at the national celebrations, scheduled to take place at Akwee Primary School playground, Patongo Town Council, Agago District or at your respective districts. Let me also take this opportunity to wish all the workers happy Labour Day celebrations. I beg to present. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this statement. This statement attracts debate and I would like to ask the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to start the debate.

10.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to apologise. The Media Centre set the press conference on this matter at 10.00 a.m.; so, I just had to switch from there and cancel it because Parliament takes precedence. I am sorry, Mr Speaker.

I wish to implore the House and once again invite Members to attend the Labour Day celebrations on 1st May as alluded to by the minister. I wish to reiterate that the Government is putting up a spirited fight and expediting all ways to ensure that employment and safety at the workplace are enhanced.

We thank Members of Parliament for the dedication they have put in their various constituencies and also for the support they have offered. I wish to invite all of them to turn up in big numbers for the Labour Day celebrations. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

10.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As you are all aware, I represent workers in this House. Labour Day is not only a national day but an international day. However, many times, we have observed that when it comes to Labour Day, apart from the area members of Parliament, the rest regard it as business for the workers only.

I would like to use your office, Mr Speaker, to request all members of Parliament and my colleagues to come and attend the celebrations and understand the reason Labour Day was created. For some of you who may not know the arrangement, it is best to travel is on 30th April. You can either sleep in Lira or Gulu if the accommodation in Agago is not enough. Either way, it will not take you more than an hour to travel. Please, come in big numbers so that we celebrate together. I thank you.

I would also like to request the Speaker, if possible, to have some arrangement done at Parliament so that members of Parliament travel in big numbers.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are always arrangements from Parliament and the details will be communicated to you. Are there any Members debating this matter of the International Labour Day?

10.18
MS SYLVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for inviting us to attend the International Labour Day celebrations. This is a day on which the workers tend to look back and assess what Parliament has done concerning issues that affect them. 

Now that we are in the budget process, the first question they will ask each and every Member of Parliament is: “By how much have you increased our money; what have you done?” Therefore, as we prepare for the day, I also believe we must prepare answers to the workers. It is not a matter of just going to celebrate yet we are working.

Above all, it is not a matter of creating a class. I believe every individual is a worker. Even women in the house who cook food and prepare children are workers. Without them, you would not have come here looking the way you are. Therefore, when talking about workers, we should make that day holistic for every Ugandan. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.19
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for her good statement. 

I am one of the people who support workers because I have many cross-border workers at the Busia border in my constituency. I would like to request that as we celebrate the International Labor Day, we should look at the workers in the private sector. They are the majority in the emplyment field but we give them very little consideration in terms of policy protection.

Mr Speaker, at the same time, we are at a time where many of our young people are going to work outside Uganda and their rights are abused in the countries they work in. Just this week, we are receiving more than three bodies of girls who went to the Arab world to work as maids. As Government, we should put in place procedures to see how people who go to work outside the country are protected and helped when they have a problem. Although the ministry in charge of labour says there is a procedure they have put in place to help the girls who are in danger, there is no help being given. 

I will give the example of the girl who died two days ago. She even communicated on social media saying, “I am in danger; I am dying and I need help from Government.” This morning, I have seen on social media again one maid in Oman crying and saying, “I am in danger and I am dying; Government of Uganda, help me.” We, therefore, should find a way to help these girls quickly, other than waiting for them to die and we give statements. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.21
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As we celebrate this year’s workers’ day, I would like to call upon the highest institutions of learning, especially Makerere University, to find a mechanism that can help them resolve their differences without affecting our students and the university itself; they are the model university to other institutions of learning - as we try to ensure that the working conditions of institutions are improved. Thank you.

10.22
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, as we celebrate the International Labour Day, the minister urged the members of Parliament to all be in Agago, and I believe he was joking about it because even here as we work on this important budgeting process, we are very few. 

I would wish that in due time, you plan extensively to include representatives from the various districts to come and represent their people in the designated district that holds the celebrations in a given year. We, members of Parliament, can go but there are people down there from our districts that would love to also attend these celebrations. 

Also as you budget for Labour Day celebrations, let it be like Women’s Day and other days where the celebrations are decentralised so that we celebrate in our districts and people can get the message. Otherwise, very few people can go to Agago. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.24
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Government of Uganda for this important Labour Day celebrations for our workers. 

I would like to appeal to Government to reflect on the deteriorating level of customer care in the public service. Mr Speaker, you are aware that in most of these Government institutions, the level of customer care is so bad and the attitude towards the people by service providers is very low. As we celebrate Labour Day, I would like to implore Government to urge the civil service to scale up on the level of customer care especially in the health sector. It is so bad.

When patients go to seek services, the health workers do not give them the due customer care and sometimes some of these people are psychologically sick. Therefore, as we celebrate, I urge Government to reflect carefully on the civil service, especially on the issue of customer care so that the level of service delivery can improve. Thank you.

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. From the time I entered here, I have smelt heavy gas and I have consulted my colleagues about the same. We are about to suffocate. I do not know what is happening.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to first find out what is happening because we might get a problem inside here? This is on health grounds. Personally, I am feeling heavy and my colleagues have confirmed the same. What is happening? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ordinarily, that would not be a procedural point but a point of privilege. That is for the future. However, on the matter raised, I am in the same situation. The explanation is that there is a temporary activity that is going on in the canteen. The kitchen is under renovation so they have temporarily shifted the kitchen to the basement. That is why we are having these challenges. 

The Sergeant-at-Arms had assured me that it would have been completed by yesterday but today we are still in the same situation. There are places where you enter and feel as if you are in the kitchen. Let us bear with them; I hope that by next week all these issues will have been cleared. It is not dangerous gas; it is part of the normal things that you consume. I think you are saying that it is making you feel like going to eat or feel hungry -(Laughter)– but it is not dangerous per se. Can we proceed with the debate?

10.27
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and the invitation he has extended to all of us.

The minister has mentioned that the celebrations are always left to the workers. However, from this side of the Government-in-waiting, during these international days, we do not get serious invitations and arrangements so that we can feel that we are also part of the Government. Some of these international celebrations are like a one-party kind of activity. I call upon the Government to let these national celebrations be national.

Secondly, we are talking about Labour Day celebrations but there are people who have laboured in the country and retired and after retirement, getting what they are supposed to get at the end of the day is not easy. I have very many in my constituency who have retired but getting their money after labouring is not an easy task. Therefore, I would like to call upon Government on this day to look into the issue of people who have worked very hard and we are benefiting from the proceeds of their labour.

Finally, we are in the budget process, so I would like all of us to look at the working conditions of most workers, especially the teachers and the health workers. There are schools where they do not even have accommodation for the teachers. The teachers have to ride bicycles and some have to walk long distances. Even in the health sector, sometimes they are supposed to work at night but they do not have accommodation. 

Therefore, as we talk about Labour Day, these are some of the issues that we have to look into. We have to make the celebrations reflect the national character and remember those people who have laboured before us and those labouring now. Thank you.

10.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I also join the rest of the Members of Parliament in thanking the minister for the statement and also congratulating the workers on this Labour Day.

As we reflect on the theme of the day – promoting employment through enhanced public investments, especially infrastructure -it is also important to take stock of what we have been able to achieve as a nation in this regard. Our investment in reducing the cost of doing business coupled with peace and security has been able to attract investments. This has helped us to set up over 4,000 factories, now employing over 600,000 Ugandans. It is an achievement that we should record on this important day.

I would like to also thank Parliament for the tax reforms you have put in place. This very Parliament, for example, increased the threshold of workers from Shs 120,000 to Shs 230,000 for Pay As You Earn (PAYE). This is in a way supporting the workers’ income. It is an important point again to record on this important day.

It is this Parliament and Government that have continued to give salary enhancements. You recall that last year, we increased the salaries of civil servants by 35 per cent. Our target is to continue with this reform until our civil servants receive a pay that they deserve in regard to the living standards of our country. Therefore, it is important that some of these achievements are recorded.

We have unfinished business, as hon. Santa Alum said, regarding pensions. Ugandans who work retire and expect their pension to come on time. Government has put in place reforms to ensure that this happens. We have been able because of the reforms that we put in place, to reduce the ghosts by almost up to five per cent of the money that was being spent on ghosts. We hope that we will continue this trend until the people retiring can receive their pension on time every month without going through a lot of hustle. (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. I seek clarification from the honourable minister, who is always here from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Now that we are going to celebrate Labour Day and you expect us to be in Patongo, have you made any arrangement at least for next month, to pay teachers and other civil servants on time so that they can enjoy that day? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, honourable member. We release money on a quarterly basis. On the 10th of the first month of every quarter, we release a percentage. It is the responsibility of the spending agencies to ensure that these salaries are paid on time. We do expect that there is no civil servant who should not receive their salary by 28th of every month. I am sure that by that date, people will have received their money to celebrate Labour Day on 1st of May. I wish the workers the very best on that day. Thank you.

10.34
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to thank the minister for the invitation and for all the arrangements at the national level. 

Let me also take this opportunity to thank Government because for us, pensioners, they have made improvements in paying us in time. I thank Government for that.

Mr Speaker, Let me also take this opportunity to say what I wanted to say yesterday. We were talking about Social Assistance Grant Empowerment (SAGE) yesterday. I thank Government because with the assistance of our development partners; we are giving the elderly Shs 25,000 per month. We have just heard a colleague say that our primary teachers, who we pay Shs 400,000 plus a month, are saying the money they get is too little.

Whenever I go to my constituency, I am asked, “When will the elderly in Luweero District start accessing this money?” My answer has always been, “Please, forget about that money”. 
Let the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development concentrate on the cultural values of Ugandans. I have travelled all over Uganda and concluded that in all corners of Uganda, those who are still able should be in a position to help those who are not able to help themselves. What can Shs 25,000 do? 

People go and collect this money but sometimes they are told it has not come and yet, they would have spent about Shs 10,000 on transport. Therefore, let the ministry concentrate on inculcating cultural values in our people so that those who are in a position to help the elderly and those who are not fortunate enough can do so. 

In my view, Shs 25,000 is very little and we should forget about it; 80 per cent of that money is given by donors. If they pulled out today, what would happen? If one day the elderly came to the streets to demonstrate about the low pay of Shs 25,000, what would we say? I think this Shs 25,000 will one day become a problem to us. I do not know whether we shall teargas the elderly when they take to the streets.

Therefore, I appeal to Government to find ways and means of increasing this amount to at least Shs 100,000 per month -(Interruption)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, hon. Byandala, for giving way. Honourable member, you are aware that sometime back, even the Shs 25,000 was not there. I think we should appreciate that this is the beginning. We should instead advocate for exploring different avenues on how to increase the Shs 25,000 rather than telling your constituents to forget about it. Therefore, I think we should appreciate and agitate for an increase. I thank you.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, hon. Bakkabulindi. I appreciate the information you have given me -(Ms Nakiwala rose_)- I have not allowed her.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has to allow you.

MS NAKIWALA: Can I clarify, please?

MR BYANDALA: Why can’t you wait, please? Let me conclude before I forget this. Mr Speaker, I appreciate the information given to me by my honourable colleague, hon. Bakkabulindi that we should be patient. Yes, we have been patient and this programme has been on for about a decade. We are about 150 districts but not even 50 districts have accessed this. Therefore –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure -

MS NAKIWALA: Mr Speaker, we are talking about Labour Day. The SAGE programme is a very different synergy; it is about rewarding the elderly and not workers. Are we proceeding well when we talk about a different department while considering something else? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our rules are fairly clear on issues of relevance and if you stray out of the angle of relevance, you face problems. However, when these workers grow old and retire, probably they become beneficiaries of SAGE. To that extent, there is a remote linkage but do not hit on it too hard because you might get out of line. Honourable, would you like to conclude?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope the message has been got. Government appears not to be ready to sustain this programme –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. Whereas hon. Byandala is lamenting, the project he is crying about was launched when he was in Cabinet. I do not know why he should laments when he was part of the decision makers who made these resolutions. I do not know whether hon. Byandala is in order to begin lamenting.

In addition, I do not know why whenever people leave Cabinet, they begin siding with the Machos and other people. Why didn’t he lament when he was still in Cabinet? Is he in order to begin lamenting in front of us when he was part of the Cabinet that made resolutions on this? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable engineer Byandala is a member of this Parliament and he has a right to say what he has to say. He is in order.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. Moreover, my friend does not know what I said in Cabinet. He does not know that there is collective responsibility. What I am saying is what I said there and I still believe in it. However, Mr Speaker, we should not deceive ourselves in this House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still on the SAGE thing?

MR BYANDALA: No, I am on Labor Day now. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR BYANDALA: I think we should tell our labourers that nobody can help them other than themselves. They should know that they should work, put in effort and we should progressively start reducing on giving free things. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

10.43
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been provoked to make this observation. 

As we commemorate Labour Day, we must be concerned about the rewards to these workers. I have been looking at the policy statements of various ministries and what strikes me is that people do the same work in the same ministry and have the same salary scale but they are paid different wages. A driver in one ministry earns Shs 73,000, another Shs 100,000 and another Shs 180,000. They are on the same salary scale and driving the same vehicles bought by the same ministry. We are going to celebrate Labour Day and these workers are asking why there is no equity in the reward for efforts that they put in serving their country?

Mr Speaker, even in this Parliament, you will find clerks serving us in the same capacity but they are not earning the same. They will tell you that others joined earlier, or it depends on how you bargained when you were joining or where you came from - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not correct. Please, resume your seat. Do not use Parliament to say things you do not understand.

MR OTHIENO: Since I cannot substantiate, I withdraw that - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please resume your seat. Please, do not use Parliament to say things you do not understand. I seat on the Parliamentary Commission and there is nothing like that. 

MR OTHIENO: I withdraw that statement, Mr Speaker. However, there is one thing I can substantiate because it is on record. Can I seek an explanation from Government why there is no equity for workers doing the same job? Why is it that those doing the same job across the board do not get the same reward? Wouldn’t it be fair for these workers to get an explanation on why they do the same jobs but are never given equal treatment across the board in the same Government? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  

10.45
GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification on what we are celebrating. Is it worker’s or International Labour Day? There is a distinction between a worker and a labourer. A worker owns the job while a labourer is hired for the job.

Are the people that work in Government - the civil servants – are they workers or labourers? If we get that clear, we would see how to talk about it. A worker owns a job. He has a sense of responsibility and wants the thing done while a labourer works on his time and is a wage earner. After that, he goes away; so, he does not mind whether the job is finished or not. I have raised that question with Mr Mitala. I asked him if we are workers or labourers. In the local languages, the distinction is there; there is a “mukozi” and a “mupakasi.” 

I would like clarification on what we are celebrating. Are we celebrating labourers or workers day? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, please, conclude this side and I go to the Minister.

10.47
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving us this statement. Honourable members, let me say it again - because I have said it in a number of ministries, which celebrate important days. 

I have always prayed, through you, that when ministers are making statements, they should give us the performance statistics; the evaluation of International Labour Day. I am saying this because when you read this statement, it is just definitions on what the theme is. However, some of us know what a theme is and we can interpret it for ourselves. 

I expected the minister to come here, read to us the statement and tell us how the laws within the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development are dealing with labourers whose rights have been violated. Who the people that have violated such labourers’ rights are and how the ministry has handled those entities that have violated workers’ rights. That is the kind of report to be read to Parliament. 

Otherwise, whenever we get statements from these ministers, they only talk about things like where the function is going to be, who the chief guest will be; for example, His Excellency the President and that we should attend the function.  

Honourable members, I can testify that when I was in primary school during Obote’s regime, I saw what used to happen during the International Labour Day celebrations. People would match from Entebbe. You would see different companies such as Nile Breweries, Nytil, Uganda Railways Corporation and Uganda Airlines with their vehicles - of course, all those are defunct as you know, courtesy of your regime. During that time, children would line up along the roads to look at these vehicles. 

Whenever we got to Kololo, people would enjoy the International Labour Day celebrations and have a feel of it. Right now, what motivation are you giving these people for the day? I went for a conference in Dubai recently and one of the best teachers from Kenya was given a lot of money for excellent service in his profession. We know very well that when one gets out of this House, just opposite Parliament, they will see buses ready to ferry people to the event venue for that day. The question however, is: how will the people of Patongo, for example, enjoy that day? 

Honourable members, do labourers know their rights? Honourable minister, could you brief us on how far the ministry has gone in educating labourers on their rights? I know of many members of Parliament who are being called on a daily basis by civil servants and workers in factories in their constituencies informing them on how they are being mishandled. They want Members to go there. When you go to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, nothing –(Interruption) 

MR MUYANJA SSENYONGA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. What I would like to say is exactly what my colleague has said. When Government is looking for people to celebrate International Labour Day, they approach members of Parliament. I have 37 factories in my constituency, with not less than 8,000 workers and they keep asking when International Labour Day will be for that level of people. 

I think they have a point because this day is only for a certain class. Those buses are going to take women, public servants, teachers and heads of schools. When are we going to consider people working in those factories so that they can also be fetched by those buses? I thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, may I find out from the minister whether she can confirm to Parliament that in Uganda on Labour Day all factories will be closed? Can she kindly explain that and assure us? This was last seen during Obote and Amin’s regime where a national day would be celebrated by everybody, with people not going for work. For once, we would like to hear from you whether factories will be closed for International Labour Day. For those that will work, what will you do because those workers want to enjoy their day. 

I raised a point of clarification to the minister whether civil servants will get their salaries before the International Labour Day and he replied in a technical manner. He said that they had sent a quarter to the districts but the fact is teachers have not got their salaries. Members, you can bear me witness; if at all they get it today, that will be okay. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that I normally do not support people from my constituency celebrating other functions other than the national ones. However, I recently accepted women in my constituency to celebrate Women’s Day. I invited the RDCs in Kalungu but none of them appeared. 

However, I was very impressed by these women because they had a function that was not coloured by any political party colours such as green for DP, yellow for NRM or blue for FDC. It was really a Women’s Day. I wish politicians would visit Kalungu West to see how women celebrate Women’s Day. 

On International Labour Day, people are going to match in yellow and everything will be yellow. How will you cause someone like Ssewungu to come and join your Labour Day, when it has ceased being a national day to a political party day? 

I know that on that day, the President is going to invite the ministers - and you ministers, I am warning you in advance - the President will ask them to explain the status of electricity in certain places and they will give misleading information. Then someone will tell the President how his ministers are liars. We have to leave all that behind. 

Since I am speaking in the capacity of the Leader of the Opposition, I urge you to kindly – ministers, next time you give statements, kindly, provide the status on how far you have gone – (Interruption) 

MS SSENTONGO: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I am giving is a supplement to the issue of one party monopolising national events.
I have got an experience to share.

Last year, Kyotera District hosted Independence Day celebrations and I was part of the organisers, right from the start. People from my party kept on saying they would laugh at me on the final day and indeed, I narrowly escaped being laughed at because on the day of the celebrations, I nearly failed to get where to sit - I went about looking for where to sit, the chairman advised me to sit in the VIP section –(Interjections)– no, please, there is no need for a point of order here. Let me complete before she gives the order –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of order, please.

MS NAKIWALA: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member in order to mislead Parliament that national functions are organised annually whereas she is very much aware that people are invited to venues and are accredited and all people move with their invitation cards and know where they are to sit. 

Is the honourable member in order yet she did not attend the National Organising Committee (NOC) or district organising committees because I was there. Is she in order to come here and claim she failed to get where to sit?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are now asking me to use my experience. (Laughter) What I have seen in these national functions is that at least there is a place designated for members of Parliament. (Applause) Therefore, if you go somewhere else, you might not find where to sit. However, if you go where members of Parliament are supposed to sit, you will definitely find somewhere to sit.

MS SSENTONGO: Mr Speaker, thank you for your ruling. I am giving my experience. I later found somewhere to sit. The occasion went on and my name was not mentioned at all as the Woman Member of Parliament hosting the event. It was until the President started speaking that he said, “Can the Woman Member of Parliament for Kyotera get an opportunity to come and talk?” He further said, “Can my daughter who does not know how to dress in yellow come and give her speech.” That is the truth. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, I think we should not have arguments about this. These are common and let us give all these international days attention. They are general days, which do not deal with political issues. 

I would like to thank the honourable minister but my prayer still remains that next time, we should have a detailed report where the rights of these people - people are burnt in factories; they do not have safety gadgets but nothing is being done. Otherwise, let us meet at Patongo. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy to learn that hon. Joseph Ssewungu will attend the International Labour Day celebrations and you are most welcome. From his submission, I would like to agree with him when he said that next time, we should come up with a detailed report. I would like to request here that we submit to Parliament in the coming days a full report of what has been attained and achieved in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Hon. Othieno-Okoth was concerned about rewards. There is an exercise of synchronisation of pay rates by the Ministry of Public Service and it has already gone to Cabinet. I hope that soon, it will get to Parliament. It is true and I would like to request him to be a little bit more patient for the detailed report.

Hon. Byandala was concerned about the former workers who are now earning the SAGE. I would like to inform him that Shs 25,000 was a calculation of the 30 per cent of household expenditure. It was a not a figure plucked from heaven but it was a figure arrived at statistically as 30 per cent of the average household expenditure in Uganda.

The honourable Member from Oyam was concerned about why they were not invited and the cards were disseminated by the National Organising Committee (NOC). I am happy to report here that NOC handles these functions day in and out and it is a multi-sectoral committee. The issue of how people will travel from their districts and local governments to the public venue is an issue between NOC and the local government organising committees. They normally pay attention to the host communities where they give part of the budget to heads of districts who commute from their districts.

We are not talking about people coming from all over the country to be ferried by buses to the celebration venue. That has a connotation to the budget and if Parliament so wishes, in the next year, they can enlarge the budget for the day and we can ably ask factories to close and they can be ferried to the venue. 

Hon. Pentagon Kamusiime talked about an in-house issue and I would like to thank you for the answer you gave him. 

About Public Service, I am very happy that the honourable member brought out the fact that the public relations of public servants is still lacking. I am with you on this and as an individual, I pay more attention to service delivery than any other thing. I call upon the public that is watching us especially the women, to ensure that children and youth as they approach these offices, are really given the due attention they deserve.

Hon. Macho was concerned about externalisation of labour and the people that are bruised and mistreated while out of the country. I have heard some of these stories and for some, I have interacted with the new systems that we put in place. 

Recently, hon. Albert Lokoru alleged that there is a lady who is seriously sick and has been requesting to come back home but they refused to let her come back home. I went online and I implored the companies to go where she was so that they can get me a video of what is happening. When they got there, she was jubilant and moving on well with her job. She said that she was not aware where the allegations are coming from. 

Mr Speaker, these are coming up now and then and it is a challenge to us as a ministry to go deeper into investigations to find out. However, in case there are any concerns from you and the people outside this room, as a ministry, we are willing to look at them case by case.

Hon. Babirye was concerned about the universities and this is true about people in higher institutions of learning. We are going to look into this and get back to you.

Finally, about hon. Ssentongo’s concern about the districts, I am sorry if you were not recognised on your day, maybe it was at that level and I do not know what happened and I do not know whether they thought you were not relevant to what was going on. We will find out about that and next time we come back to Kyotera, you will be recognised. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you are invited to go to Agago to celebrate International Labour Day. A question was asked whether it is for labourers or workers. Whether you are a labourer or a worker; the question is what do you supply? You supply something called labour and that is what they are celebrating. 

A worker in Government supplies labour and a worker in an industry supplies labour. A casual worker in the villages supplies something called labour. Labour is a factor of production and therefore, they are celebrating International Labour Day. Thank you.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE SUGAR BILL, 2016 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3) (b) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this morning, we have members of the Uganda Sugarcane Growers’ Association from Busoga, Bunyoro and Buikwe. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, let me just establish a few things and then, I will invite the minister to present the motion and the committee will report. 

Honourable members, this Parliament passed the Sugar Bill on 22 November 2018. The Clerk, after compilation, transmitted the assent copy of the Bill to the President on 15 February 2019. The President, by a letter dated 1 March 2019, returned the Bill for reconsideration by this august House. 

Therefore, honourable members, in terms of procedure, the return of the Bill was within the timelines provided in the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The Bill was returned within time and it is here for our reconsideration. The committee has also acted within time in the circumstances which we were confronted with, which concerns dealing with the budget.

11.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Mr Michael Werikhe): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Sugar Bill, 2016” as returned by His Excellence the President for reconsideration, be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means “be reconsidered”. Honourable members, is the motion seconded? 

HON. MEMBERS: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by hon. Maj. Susan Lakot, Member for Zombo District, Member for Pakwach District and the Member for Nyabushozi County. Would you like to speak to your motion, now that it is properly established?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Speaker, Parliament on 22 November 2018 considered and passed the Sugar Bill, 2016 and the Bill was transmitted to His Excellency the President for assent. However, the President did not assent to the Bill and subsequently, returned it to Parliament on 1 March 2019 in a letter to the Speaker, which was read to the House.

The President alluded to the fact that lack of implementing the zoning policy was responsible for the decline in production and productivity of the sugar industry in the country. The President specifically mentioned certain clauses in the Bill, namely; 

    a) Section 19, which was to do with licensing of mills or sugar plants; 
    b) Clause 20, which was about application for a licence to operate a mill or sugar plant;
    c) Section 21, which was about processing, grant or refusal of licence to a miller; 
    d) Section 22, which was about modification of a mill or plant;
    e) Section 23, which was to do with sugar industry agreements;
    f) Section 29(2)(b), which was about regulations.

It was in this spirit that the Bill was returned and the committee has duly considered the reconsideration views. 

The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives appeared before the committee and I think the committee can lead us in the presentation so that we can debate. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate now is for a motion for reconsideration of the Sugar Bill, 2016 as returned by His Excellence the President in accordance with Article 91(3)(b) of the Constitution and Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. That is the question that I propose for your debate and the debate starts now. 

In order to kick off our debate, this matter was referred to our committee and the committee will report and guide us on how we can deal with this matter.

11.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY) (Mr Robert Kasule): Mr Speaker, as the minister has stated, the committee sat within the prescribed time. This is the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Sugar Bill, 2016. I am not going to read the background because the minister has already given a brief.

Issues raised by the President that called for reconsideration

The President substantially raised the following issues in his objection to the assent:

    1. Sugarcane zoning;
    2. Licensing of sugar mills;
    3. Sugar industry agreements;
    4. Provision on regulations;
    5. Smuggling and money laundering in the sugar industry;
    6. Concerns on drop of sugar production for Kakira alone from 180,000 tonnes in 2014 to 125,000 tonnes in 2017;
    7. Encouragement of medium and large-scale farmers to grow cane and to enhance household income.

Findings

The committee, during its work, found out the following:

Cane poaching

Rampant cane poaching due to proximity of mills as there was a lot of pressure by jaggeries and small millers on the farmers. This has led to farmers selling canes that are less than 18 months old to get quick money. 

The committee established that Kakira Sugar Ltd operating outgrowers’ schemes do not buy canes from farmers that are under 18 months old and they have a mechanism and record of tracking farmers from initial stages to harvesting. This ensures higher yield per hectare.

Low yields

There was low yield because of pressure to sell immature canes, which in turn reduced the tonnage of sugar produced per acre. In Uganda as a whole, there was a drop in sugar production from 438,000 tonnes in 2014 to –(Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Mr Speaker, the chairperson of the committee has said their findings were based on literature. Given how contentious this issue is –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a matter of debate. Mr Chairman, proceed.

MR KASULE: Mr Speaker, on the low yields, we have said –(Interruption)

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We are moving into debating a report on a Bill, which was returned to this House. This means that the decision of the committee must have been founded on very solid points. I am, therefore, wondering whether the committee took time to consult the stakeholders, especially the farmers in Busoga and Bunyoro before taking the decision.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That, again, is a matter for debate.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Is the chairperson procedurally right to insinuate that he contacted farmers for consultation but they did not turn up yet farmers wrote to you, Mr Speaker, seeking for audience to make another presentation to the committee but the committee did not give them that audience. Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is still a matter of debate. He will lay the documents when the time comes. Please, let us listen to the report and then we take a decision on this matter. We are not going to debate by procedure.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You guided us well and said we are responding to the letter from the President and the person to begin the debate is the chairperson of the committee.

I expected the chairperson to come and tell us that the first point the President raised was this and that. We did our research and found that what the President wrote was this. Mr Speaker, what is happening is that the chairperson is reading what he read in the previous report. Can we be guided on whether what the chairperson is reading is what they consulted after receiving the letter from the President?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is still a point of debate. It is not a procedural matter but a matter for debate. Please, let us listen to the report and then we debate it.

MR KASULE: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance. 

Loss of tax revenue

According to the ministry and the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), there has been a steady decline in tax revenue. For example, Uganda Sugar Manufactures Association figures on Kakira and Lugazi resulted in a loss to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by Shs 144 billion. For Kakira alone, the committee established from URA in 2017 that they anticipated taxes of Shs 214.54 billion; however, they paid Shs 165.91 billion, creating a shortfall of Shs 48.63 bi11ion.

The smaller millers all pay a tax of Shs 5 billion a year and they are elusive on taxes and do not have a nuclear estate and therefore, afford to deceptively offer slightly higher prices. 

Pressure on land

The same pressure arising out of the small millers has caused a lot of pressure on land. Therefore, the smal1 farmers are renting their land to big growers. Secondly, there is no land being left for subsistence and other crops’ production.

Electricity supply

The committee established that in 20l4, Kakira alone was producing 215,738 –(Interruption)

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from the sugar growers but the chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, hon. Kasule - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does that mean you are a sugar grower because you said you come from the sugar growers? 

MR WALYOMU: I represent sugar growers and some of my relatives are sugar growers. Even some of them are here; the chairperson of the sugar out-growers is my voter.

The point of order I am raising is: hon. Kasule is saying that some of the small farmers lack land to grow food to supplement food security. In Kampala here, we see people have food. I do not know whether they have gardens in Kampala, where they grow their food. Therefore, is the chairperson in order to insinuate that people in Busoga do not have food because of lack of land as a result of growing sugarcane? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to say this for the last time. Busoga is not the only sugar growing area. The experience may be different. 

This report has been brought by the committee. Civility demands that you listen to those you disagree with; that is the only moment you earn your right of reply. Let us be civil and listen to the report and then we shall air out our disagreements to the report. Otherwise, that is what civility demands. Unless we are changing the rules of this place -

Secondly, I even see a minority report. Why don’t we listen to each other? We are not going to express disagreements as if we are not members of Parliament. There are rules on how we express our dissent to these issues; you do not just do what you are doing right now. That is how we always end up in chaos. Please let us use our ears for now; listen, process and then debate. Do you fear to debate? Then wait and debate. Chairperson, please finish.

MR KASULE: I was saying that on the matter of electricity supply, in 20l4, Kakira was producing 296,881 megawatts per hour. In 2018, the committee established that Kakira alone was producing 215,738 megawatts per hour recording, which has declined to 81,143 megawatts per hour.

Mr Speaker, with maximum cane production, it can produce 391,680 megawatts per hour on the national grid, which alone can light Kampala city. However, due to a drop in supply of cane, there is drop in electricity supply to the national grid.

Extra Neutral Alcohol 

With a reduction in cane, there will be reduction in extra neutral alcohol, which will further cause losses.

Committee observations

Impact on non-cane zoning:

    (i) The committee observes that there is loss to out-growers due to lower yields as cutting underage cane results into loss of five tonnes per hectare –(Interruption)

MS AVUR: Mr Speaker, our Rules of Procedure provide that we should not read newspapers while we are in the House. Is hon. Pecos Kuteesa in order? (Laughter) The public is watching us and the Member is reading newspapers in the House. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is important for us to observe the decorum of the House. For as long as you are a Member of this House and you are in the Chambers, observe the decorum of this House.

Therefore, the Member who is allegedly reading a newspaper is not in order. (Applause)

MR KASULE: Mr Speaker, I was interrupted by that point of order. 

The committee observed that there is loss to out-growers due to lower yields, as cutting underage cane results in loss of five tonnes per hectare. Harvesting young cane leads to less sugar recovery and there is a decline between six and nine per cent.

ii) 	Loss to manufacturers due to less crushing machine hours remaining redundant and yet fixed and overhead costs continue to run. 

iii) 	There is loss on export earnings.

iv) 	Loss of employment due to downsizing of companies. The committee observed that in Tanzania, the zoning policy is being enforced at 80 kilometres radius. For example, in Kilembero, Matibwa, Kagera, Arusha and the latest in Bagamoyo, the mills are more than 80 kilometres apart. 

The lack of zoning led to the collapse of the sugar industry in Kenya; Mumias Sugar as well as in some states in India and Mauritius. For this reason, their governments decided to consolidate the mills for the reasons of economies of scale. 

Misconception of sugarcane zoning 

The committee established that there is a lot of local politics in sugar growing areas. There is a general misconception that zoning is meant to create monopolies. This provision of zoning is not to stop out-growers from selling their cane to whoever they want; they are free to sell to whoever they want. Zoning is only meant to regulate the sugar factories and mills to operate in a sustainable and viable manner. There is no zoning for farmers but only for millers. What this means is that there are no restrictions to out-growers on selling to whoever they want.

The committee established that the Uganda Investment Authority, at the Investors’ Confidence Building Breakfast Conference in 2001, issued paper licenses to encourage investors. They did not envisage that they were creating a problem. The licenses should be recalled and the ministry, prior to licensing, should ensure that applicants fulfil conditions of minimum nuclear estates of around 2000 hectares, a 25-kilometre zoning requirement and protecting out-growers on food security.

The cost of relocation, if Government is to do it

The committee established that since Government had already licensed millers, it would conservatively cost around Shs 50 billion to relocate factories outside the 25-kilometre radius. This cost would cover civil works, dismantling and re-erecting, transportation and commissioning. The source is Uganda Sugar Manufacturers Association.

The cost can be recovered in less than two years from the gain in taxes by the major players and would be a lesser cost, compared to a loss of Shs 144 billion in tax revenue in a year. Therefore, if the zoning area is enforced, the cost of relocation can be recovered in a financial year of increased taxes.

Committee recommendations

    1. The committee recommends that a 25-kilometre radius be stipulated in the Sugar Bill as a minimum distance between millers. 

    2. The factories that fall within the radius will be relocated at a cost met by Government that had earlier issued the licenses.

    3.  Encouragement of medium and large scale farmers to grow cane and enhance household income. The committee recommends that 67 per cent of the total land acreage of each farmer be used for cane and the balance can be left for subsistence production. This should be enforced through regulations.

    4. The committee recommends that new licenses issued after 2004 should all be recalled prior to licensing, and the ministry should ensure that all applicants fulfil all conditions of a minimum nuclear estate of 2000 hectares.

    5. The 2000-hectare nuclear farm will ensure that there is minimum sugar cane supply to enable the sugar mills continue operating, should the out-grower farmers fail to supply cane for any reason. 

    6. The committee strongly recommends that Government takes deliberate steps to support out-grower farmers to form cooperatives to protect them from bad commercial practices of unscrupulous sugar mills.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, the committee supports the propositions by His Excellency and recommends that they be adopted with amendments that small growers are not completely blocked out of economic participation in the country. I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, although a majority of the committee supported the matter, there are other Members, led by hon. Kabanda, who deferred and have a minority report. I call upon her to read the minority report. I beg to move. (Applause) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the minority report is going to be presented by the Member for Masaka. Is that correct? Please proceed.

MR KASULE: Mr Speaker, as she comes, I beg to lay the minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture a copy of the minutes of the committee meetings. Hon. Kabanda, proceed.

11.33
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Mr Speaker, allow me to present a minority report on the Sugar Bill, 2019 by the movers, hon. Babirye Mary Kabanda, Member of Parliament for Masaka District; Andrew Kiiza Kaluya, Kigulu South MP; hon. Centenary Robert, Kasese Municipality MP and other Members.

Introduction
Parliament passed the Sugar Bill, 2016 on 22 November 2018 that seeks to regulate the industry but rejected Government’s proposal to provide operating zones for mills in the country, a contentious clause in the original Bill. 

His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, declined to assent to the Bill and therefore, returned it to Parliament in a letter to the Speaker urging Parliament to include the zoning clause in the Bill while emphasising that failure to implement the zoning policy is already destroying the sugar industry.

Mandate

We avail ourselves the Parliament’s oversight role in promoting accountability and transparency. To this end, we are moving under Rule 202 of the Parliament Rules of Procedure, which provides thus: “(1)Any Member or Members dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent and the statements of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee. 

(2) The Member dissenting from the opinion of the majority of the committee shall be given time to present the minority report at the time of the consideration of the committee report. (3) In preparing a minority report, a member shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the Office of the Clerk,” which they did.

The point of dissent from the main report is as follows:

    1. Zoning or ring-fencing policy, contradicting the liberalisation policy or free market economy. 
    2. Relocation not feasible and unattainable.(Applause)

Justification for the dissenting from the main report

Zoning/ring-fencing policy versus the liberalisation policy/free market economy which was adopted by Government
 
The Sugar Bill, 20l6 sought to provide for the development, regulation and promotion of the sugar industry to ensure there is sustainable, diversified, harmonised, modern and competitive sugars sector but while encouraging monopoly in a liberalised economy by protecting the big millers and erase off small millers. This spirit is not pro Small Medium Enterprise (SME) growth yet most economies in the world developed majorly through good SME foundations.

Zoning in the current circumstances cannot be fairly, effectively and economically implemented as so wished by the President. Currently, there are areas with more than one mill in the radius being proposed under the Sugar Bill, 2019 for zoning. These mills were duly licensed by Government and have over time, heavily invested in the development of their mills, including building capacity of their out-growers.

Mr Speaker, any attempt to relocate established millers, which are currently within a 25 kilometre radius will certainly be a disaster to the national economy and image, especially in this era of liberalisation. (Applause) It will equally erode investor confidence if the already licensed bonafide investors cannot be protected by the very government that licensed their operations legally and as a result, it will tantamount to the Government of Uganda overstepping its mandate and exposing itself to legal battles and heavy compensation to the affected citizens.

Mr Speaker, currently, in the Busoga region, there is excess sugar-canes that is not being crushed. (Applause) The big millers are not buying the sugarcanes because they are not willing to pay farmers the current market price, driven by competition and more efficiency. Indeed, farmers are ferrying sugarcanes on lorries all the way from Bunyoro to Busoga in search of higher prices. 

If sugarcanes are being transported from Bunyoro to Busoga, then canes are available and the assertion by the big millers of unutilised installed capacity, low production and revenue losses needs to be thoroughly investigated.

Mr Speaker, with regard to restricted zones - what will the big millers do if farmers or out-growers choose to supply their cane out of their zones say, in Bunyoro in the search for higher prices than in Busoga? 

Also with restricted zoning, a situation may arise where a sugar mill will be incapacitated to buy sugarcanes at l6 months for the second crop and l8 months for the first crop and may create disaster where farmers with sugarcanes way over the maturity age and are not allowed harvesting permits just because their supply is restricted to a particular zone.

Otherwise, if it was not for a liberalised economy, a situation where Chinese hawkers, the lead investors, have established kiosks and are selling sandals and pancakes in close proximity of already established trading centres –(Applause)– yet slowly pushing Uganda citizens out of business moreover without work permits and investors’ licenses should not have been encouraged.

As Parliament, we must be seen to adhere to the highest standards of legality and constitutionalism, short of which we will be legislating in vain. 

It is therefore, the considered view of the authors of this minority report that Parliament should not be drawn into selfish motives of individuals –(Applause)– that are against the freedom of economic development of the economy of Uganda through activities of upcoming small and medium enterprises.

Relocation is not feasible and unattainable

Whereas the committee, in its report recommended that small millers be relocated and compensated by Government for fear of loss due to heavy investments established therein, there is no clear budget source for such compensation. Practically it is not possible to quantify the amount of losses that will be incurred, in terms of income, plant, machinery, unemployment and land that is likely to result from any form of relocation. 

The rough estimate of Shs 50 billion as proposed by the committee to compensate all the small mills, within a radius of 25 kilometres cannot be proven scientifically and systematically. Therefore, logically one cannot just merely guess the amount of money to be compensated on such huge investments.

On the issue of electricity, Mr Speaker, Uganda has enough electricity. We are even able to export some of it to Rwanda and Tanzania. (Applause)

Our recommendation 

The Government is already highly indebted with a public debt totalling to approximately 42 trillion. The country does not have the capacity to mobilise domestic resources to finance its own annual budgets thus, a very clear indication that the Government may not be in position to ably compensate the small millers in case of any reallocation.

In order to create effective Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) growth and development and further boost investor confidence, the initial position in the Bill, Clause 22 (5), which reads that section 22 (1) does not apply to a sugar mill existing immediately before commencement of this Act, should be maintained.

Zoning ought not to protect inefficient millers at the expense of out-growers to the extent that where signals of inefficiency at the mill are apparent, out-growers should be given an outside option.

Poaching or theft of cane can be easily abated through traceability of out-grower sugarcane, having their clear contractual agreements between millers and out-growers in place and through assistance of local administration.

In conclusion, poor planning is very disastrous and the fact that Government did not carry out due diligence on the proximity of mills before issuing out licences to small millers after 2004 is highly regrettable. The most affected will be the small millers and out-growers. If this matter is not handled very carefully for the benefit of all Ugandans, history will repeat itself where Ugandans will be subjected to perpetual slavery in the hands of foreigners in the name of investors and increased perpetuated tax revenue to Uganda’s economy. (Applause) 

I beg to move. Allow me to lay on the Table -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They were already laid the other side. The minority report is always part of the main report. 

Honourable members, you can see that this is a fairly emotive matter. We need to understand the issue properly and then do a proper debate. The circumstances are such that we will proceed to debate this matter and I have already proposed the motion for debate.

Honourable members, when things are this complex, it is not the strength of the voice that should carry the day; it should be the sharp arguments to win. Let all the ideas be brought in the market place and compete and the weak ideas will fail as the strong ones survive. (Applause)

Therefore, it is not a matter of loud voices. No, it is a matter of sharp arguments with reason that helps. Sometimes, I get discouraged when I see Members beginning to behave as if shouting or doing other things can facilitate the debate. It does not because the record does not capture those ones. Those who are going to read the records in future must be able to see that Parliament came to this decision because of the arguments that they can read and understand.

However, if we resort to methods other than debate then it cannot help us that much. It puts us in lights that are not necessarily proper. Therefore, because of the nature of this matter, we are not going to have a debate now. Please go, internalise the two reports – we will have a full debate and a decision on Tuesday.  

We will debate this matter – honourable members, I see more than you do. You only see where you are seated but I see all of you and establish the situation. We will not be able to take a decision on this matter right now so let us do this – please, debate on this matter is deferred to Tuesday next week at two o’clock. Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2019/2020 

11.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have five minutes.

MR MUSASIZI: Only five? Mr Speaker, I do not know where to start and end but I think the most important thing is if I can begin with the figures –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MUSASIZI: The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development covers a number of Votes. 

a)  Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
Recurrent -  483,010,427,325 
Development -  154,792,80O,907

b) Vote 108: National Planning Authority
Recurrent - 25,008,762,368 
Development - 1,044,167,988

c) Vote 129: Financial Intelligence Authority 
Recurrent -  Shs 12,824,514,459 
Development	-  Shs 465,000,000

d) Vote 130: Treasury Operations 
Recurrent -  Shs 10,386,967,266,249 
Development 	-  0

e) Vote 131: Auditor-General
Recurrent   -	Shs 60,933,281,168
Development -	Shs 3,975,509,736

f) Vote 141: Uganda Revenue Authority
Recurrent  - 	Shs 394,615,413,125
Development - Shs 36,639,695,827

g) Vote 143: Uganda Bureau of Statistics
Recurrent  - 	Shs 39,699,038,446
Development -  Shs  20,409,485,946

h) Vote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority
Recurrent - Shs 13,847,377,620
Development -	Shs 10,994,000,000

i) Vote 310: Uganda Investment Authority
Recurrent  - Shs 14,357,545,000
Development  - Shs 103,012,871,139
Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

Mr Speaker, I have an important observation on capitalisation of Bank of Uganda on page 33. In the Financial Year 2016/2017, Bank of Uganda was capitalised by Shs 100 billion. The proposed budget allocation for the financial year is Shs 484.21 billion.

Whereas the bank needs to be capitalized from time to time to maintain a sound capital base, the committee found an increase from Shs 100 billion to Shs 484.21 billion representing an increment of 384 per cent in a period of two years unjustified. The committee noted the need for gradual and consistent increments in budget allocations for capitalisation of the bank.

The committee recommends that Shs 284.21 billion be reallocated from Treasury Operations (Bank of Uganda capitalisation) to other priority sectors to meet the funding gaps as will be identified by the House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. That is a solid recommendation.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the original copy of the committee report together with the minutes that were captured during the committee proceedings. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report and the minutes of the meetings of the committee. Thank you. 

Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 for that sector be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now.

11.59
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, just on the issues of capitalisation of Bank of Uganda, the minister said that earlier on was Shs 100 billion in 2016/2017, the following two financial years, there was nothing.

Mr Speaker, my suggestion is that we at least take Shs 100 billion for the two years and make it Shs 200 billion instead of Shs 284 billion away from the committee recommendation to allow the saving of Shs 84 billion to support other areas for government service delivery. This would make us operate at a normal rate of Shs 100 billion per financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, is capitalisation an annual event or is it as the need arises? That is the issue.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, like you have stated, capitalisation is not an annual event. It is done as and when there is need. However, our argument is- yes, it is true there is need to capitalise Bank of Uganda, but at what range? In the committee’s opinion, Shs 200 billion for this year is good enough to keep it stable and sound. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I put the question to this matter now? Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members, for this. In the circumstance, we have done fairly well. We are now left with three reports. The key sectors of health are not yet here - are we ready with education? Please call education.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, please come and utilise your five minutes. 

12.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not sure whether it will be five minutes. As a committee, I am expecting more documents coming that I will lay here but I have a copy of my report here. I beg your indulgence that I proceed as the documents come.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, proceed with the figures first then you come to the key recommendations that you want to make. Thank you.

MR OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, the committee considered the budget proposal for the 15 votes under its docket and I wish to propose that the House considers the following budget as has been proposed for amendment by the committee.

a) Vote 013: Ministry of Education and Sports Headquarters 
Recurrent  - Shs 334,806,000,000
Development  - Shs 390,392,000,000
Total: Shs 725,198,000,000

b) Busitema University
Recurrent - Shs 35,459,000,000
Development -	Shs 1,694,000,000
Total: Shs 37,153,000,000

c) Muni University 
Recurrent  - Shs 13,094,000,000
Development -	Shs 4,550,000,000
Total: Shs 17,644,000,000

d) Uganda National Examinations Board 
Recurrent  - Shs 87,861,000,000
Development -	Shs 9,482,000,000
Total: Shs 97,943,000,000

e) Education Service Commission 
Recurrent - Shs 9,240,000,000
Development  - Shs 352,000,000
Total: Shs 9,592,000,000

f) Makerere University, Kampala 
Recurrent  - Shs 304,037,000,000
Development  - Shs  12,446,000,000
Total: Shs 316,483,000,000

g) Mbarara University of Science and Technology 
Recurrent  - Shs 43,467,000,000
Development -	Shs 3,786,000,000
Total: Shs 47,253,000,000

h) Makerere University Business School
Recurrent  - Shs 72,871,000,000
Development -	Shs 4,170,000,000 
Total: Shs 77,041,000,000

i) Kyambogo University 
Recurrent   -	Shs 131,788,000,000
Development -	Shs 723,000,000
Total: Shs 132,511,000,000

j) Uganda Management Institute 
Recurrent  - Shs 31,412,000,000
Development -	Shs 2,160,000,000
Total: Shs 33,570,000,000

k) Gulu University 
Recurrent  - Shs 41,168,000,000
Development  - Shs 4,923,000,000
Total: Shs 46,091,000,000

l) Lira University 
Recurrent    -	Shs 14,416,000,000
Development  -	Shs 2,500,000,000
Total:		-	Shs 16,916,000,000

m) National Curriculum Development Centre 
Recurrent    -	Shs 7,373,000,000
Development  -	0
Total:			Shs 7,373,000,000

n) Kabale University 
Recurrent  - Shs 31,764,000,000
Development -	Shs 600,000,000
Total: Shs 32,364,000,000

o) Soroti University 
Recurrent  - Shs 11,788,000,000
Development -	Shs 6,000,000,000
Total: Shs 17,788,000,000

Mr Speaker, unfortunately, in this, we were not able to capture the budget for KCCA. Much as it was provided for in the Budget Framework Paper, it was not reflected in the ministerial policy statements. We assume that that budget is captured under the Committee on Presidential Affairs, as it has been reported. However, it is also a little strange that KCCA is reflected as a government in a Government.

As I said, the committee has considered 15 Votes under its jurisdiction but we would like to make a few observations:
As far as gender and equity compliance is concerned, Soroti University and Uganda Management Institute were not assessed. We feel that this was an anomaly and these two should be assessed accordingly.

The committee observed issues with salary enhancement. The committee made observations on the issues with disparities in salary structures, which Cabinet has considered. Unfortunately, there is no provision for money to implement the proposed revised salary structure. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides the money for the implementation of the harmonised and enhanced salary structure. This would cater for the disparities both among the science and the arts teachers but mostly in the pay for instructors and lecturers of other tertiary institutions.

The committee urges that the required Shs 49,000,000,000 should be provided for under this financial year under consideration. 

The committee also observed a big problem with the management of appropriation-in-aid for the universities. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has revised its approach to the management of budgets in universities and now appropriation of NTE, which is popularly known as NTR. It was being collected and budgeted for by the universities but it is supposed to be collected by URA. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development just makes allocations to universities in relation to their estimate of what should be given. 

We have realised that this is a very big problem for universities because what the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is providing is much less than the actuals that the universities have collected and also much less than their forecast.

We have also realised that this decision seems to have been taken without due consultation and engagement with other stakeholders. When we interacted with the Ministry of Education and Sports, they said they did not know at what point and how Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development made this decision.

Mr Speaker, when we talk of Ministry of Education and Sports, we are also talking about a ministry headed by the First Lady of this country and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not engage them. Therefore, they were not party to the decision. The universities and other institutions were not involved. The Committee on Education and Sports was not involved and even efforts to write to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come to the committee were futile because there was no response or apology.

Hon. David Bahati promised me that he was going to write and I am still waiting and hope that the letter is going to come as I present here.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development halts the new policy and a thorough engagement with stakeholders be held so that owning up is ensured but also a better understanding of how to proceed is achieved.

Mr Speaker, the committee also observed that despite engagements with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Education and Sports on the issue of vote status for some entities like National Council for Higher Education and National Council of Sports and a commitment by finance to grant them Vote status, which commitment was also supported by a written communication, this has not yet taken off because of the proposed merger of a number of entities. 

However, at the same time, it is affecting the performance of these institutions, especially in terms of management of resources that we appropriate to them because in many cases, the ministry headquarters holds their money and reallocates it without their consent.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development fast tracks the process of giving Vote status and the necessary autonomy to these institutions. In addition, it should also provide resources to the National Council for Higher Education and National Council for Sports to offset the pending shortages that they have. I will submit a breakdown of –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I think your time is up. Chairperson, before I propose the question for debate, a petition was brought to this House about the purported closure of Busoga University. This arose from difficulties that they face because money that should have been paid to that university from the Government was not paid. It was either threatened to be closed or it was actually closed and students were being reallocated to other institutions. What is the situation of this?

Secondly, concerning Gulu University, particularly Kitgum Campus, there was a matter here in the House about the issues of financing that had also not come from Government. Did you have the opportunity to talk about these matters and how have they been resolved, if at all?

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As far as Busoga University is concerned, the task force handling the takeover of Busoga University was recently advanced Shs 4.3 billion to handle the process. The process is on-going just like it is for Mountains of the Moon University. For Gulu University Kitgum campus, the campus stays as before. It is going to be operational and it is provided for in the proposed budget allocation for Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate –

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the minutes of the proceedings of the committee and a copy of the report of committee on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the full text of the report of the committee and minutes of the meetings of the committee. 

Honourable members, the question that I now propose for your debate is that the report of the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the education and sports sector for the Financial Year 2019/2020 be adopted. Debate starts now.

12.19
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municiplaity, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I have only three issues. One, the issue of appropriation-in-aid is across the board and everybody is lamenting. As a Parliament, we must get an idea on how to deal with this. We had problems between NEMA and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development over issues of the environment fund. Now in education, universities are also crying. Across the board, everybody is crying. I wonder whether we have a policy on this appropriation-in-aid or we need to review it because there is a problem and people are crying every day.

Secondly, one time I visited the Lugogo Indoor Arena where we have basketball, volleyball and the like. There is a dormitory, which is supposed to be for those who are camping for the various sports. Recently, I visited the place and found people with disabilities there. I was shocked to find that the place has bedbugs and the windows of the building are almost coming down. The place is dilapidated and it is not befitting for Uganda. 

Somebody said that countries that are good in playing volleyball like in Egypt and Italy cannot come to play here because of what is happening there. I wonder whether there is anything in this policy towards maintaining that place because it does not really need a lot of money.

Finally, concerning the work of the Committee on Government Assurances, we have noticed that there are several pledges made by His Excellency the President to give buses to several training institutions. To date, people are lamenting in most of these places as the buses are not forthcoming. As the Committee on Education and Sports, what have you done towards helping the President to fulfil his desire –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would like to give the honourable member, who is my good friend, is that presidential pledges do not come to the Committee on Education and Sports. They are for the Committee on Government Assurances. Indeed, the system of presidential pledges is not channelled through the ministries. 

We have a similar problem and I think we should work together and go to the Chairperson, Committee on Government Assurances to see how far we have gone with these pledges because they are growing day by day.

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, for the information. Meanwhile, I would like to give you some information –(Member timed out.) 

12.22
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the report. Whereas I heard reports about other universities, which I was happy to hear about, I have not heard anything about Karamoja University. Mr Chairperson, could we get to know how far that has gone because there was a problem about Karamoja University?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it in existence? 

MR TERENCE ACHIA: It was discussed the other time that at least Shs 3 billion was to be provided for Karamoja University. However, it is not in the report that has been presented in the House.

12.23
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Education and Sports for the presentation of the report. Mr Chairperson, I listened closely but I did not hear you talk about money for renovation of schools, which are in a sorry state. When you go down to our districts, there are schools which were built long ago and there are schools, which have been built and others have developed cracks. Therefore, if the committee has not thought of identifying funds for the renovation of those schools, we shall have a bad picture in this country.

My humble prayer is that the committee tells us what plans they have to ensure these schools are renovated. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is also the issue of removal of asbestos roofing in schools; has this been captured?

12.24
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for the good report. However, I noted with concern that the money for schools in Kampala has been taken to Presidential Affairs. I would like to know the circumstances under which this happened. 

Schools in Kampala belong to the Ministry of Education and Sports and, therefore, have to be under the education sector. I would like to know why schools in Kampala have been shifted to Presidential Affairs.

In addition, Mr Speaker, if I got the chairperson right, the old schools will not be revamped but it is sad to note that the very-well-to-do schools have been given money for development and yet, the old ones that are in need have not given been any money. An explanation needs to be given. For example, Namagunga has been given Shs 700 million. Parents in these very-well-to-do schools pay a lot of money for development and other activities, so, one wonders why the ministry gives money to such schools when other old schools up country are neglected. Thank you.

12.25
MS LOWILA C.D OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson for the report. I wonder whether there is any recommendation the committee came up with as far as the Students Loan Scheme is concerned. If you follow critically the way students have been benefitting from the scheme for the last three or four year, you will realise that there is a lot of imbalance. 

It would be good if we came up with a policy like for the district quota government sponsorship system where a number is allotted per district. (Applause) Otherwise, as it stands, there are districts that have over 50 students benefitting but also there are districts where no students are benefitting from this scheme. We would like to understand from the committee if there is any recommendation that they have come up with. Otherwise, there is imbalance and unfairness. Thank you.

12.27
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report presented. I have three things to raise. First, what is the committee’s position on the coding of schools? This is a big problem countrywide and in Ngora, I have over six schools that are not coded.

Secondly, I would like to get clarification from the committee on the issue of recruiting primary school teachers. As we talk, some teachers have died and some have left the profession while others have retired but there is no replacement. I would like to be informed about what is happening.

Finally, I would like to ask the committee chairperson whether they have allocated enough money for Soroti University so that it starts this year. Thank you very much.

12.28
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report. We are glad to hear of an enhanced salary structure for teachers although it has not been funded. I hope the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will find money to fund it because it is very important.

Mr Speaker, while we say we are providing Universal Primary Education and Universal Secondary Education, it should be clear that the Shs 10,000 Capitation Grant for pupils in primary and the Shs 17,000 for students in secondary schools cannot sustain kids in schools. We get perturbed when we see children being sent out of schools over schools fees, understandably because the schools must raise money to be able to run. 

Really, is there nothing Government can do to ensure that we increase on the funding of the education sector? I would like to get clarification from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on that. We would like to see an increment on an annual basis so that we lessen the burden on the parents. 

We know that the primary responsibility for taking care of the children lies with the parents and indeed, they provide uniforms and school requirements, including meals. So, since we offered UPE and USE, we should be mindful of meeting that obligation. Thank you.

12.30
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the good report. However, I have a concern about Government not emphasising technical education. Yes, I appreciate that Government has constructed several technical colleges and schools. However, when you visit some of these schools, there are no students in these colleges.

At one time, I appealed to the Government that maybe we attract students to go to technical schools from say, primary seven, senior four and senior six – those who do not proceed to higher institutions of learning like secondary schools and universities. If it were possible, it could be made free for those people because when you inquire from existing schools, they will tell you that parents do not have sufficient funds to sponsor students in technical institutions. 

Therefore, my humble appeal is that Parliament should help Government to emphasise and popularise technical education just like we are doing for universities. Sometimes, when you get youth from universities who do not have skills, they do not get employment and they cause problems.

I further appeal that we should also encourage people who have completed university to join technical schools because they are still young and they can acquire skills to help them get employment in factories that are being set up. I see many industries coming up and all these will require students with technical skills not just university courses, which will not help them to get technical jobs. That is my humble appeal, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

12.33
MS BETTY AWOR (NRM, Woman representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chair for the committee report. There is an outstanding issue that needs to be addressed in regard with early childhood development programme. This is our resource base for tomorrow.

Mr Speaker, I do not know how the committee has budgeted for that programme. I thank you.

12.34
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman representative, Kween): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of the House that I have not seen anything to do with the high altitude camp. It was supposed to be done by 2018 but as we speak, the camp is inaccessible and our athletes are getting problems in doing their practices.

Secondly, we have realised that athletics is a sport that is raising the flag of Uganda high out there. However, in terms of budgeting, it is not considered anywhere. The budget is very low and the districts that bring up the athletes need to be considered when you are budgeting. Please, budget for some money there so that it can help to identify this talent that is dying in the villages. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.35
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson and his committee.

My observation is on the school inspectors. I wonder whether the committee has provided for funding for transport for school inspectors. We realise that most of the schools are in hard-to-reach areas. They are far from districts where the inspectors come from ad because they do not have transport, it becomes very difficult for those who are monitoring them to pin them on inspection.

There is a new policy on teachers re-applying every two years. I would like to find out the current status from you, on that new policy. I would like to also request you to educate us on skilling and whether the provisions in schools for equipment have been given and how these schools are going to benefit. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, please, briefly.

12.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If we had gone through this report word by word, you would be able to get a number of these questions answered.

I will begin with Karamoja university. Mr Speaker, I am not aware of such university but I am aware of Gulu University, Karamoja Campus, which is being handled under Gulu University. We even agreed with the Ministry of Education and Sports that the money for this university will be shifted to the vote for Gulu University. Therefore, it is being handled.

On the issue of schools for renovation, that budget is under unfunded priorities. The Minister of Education and Sports will answer it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us start with the Minister of Education and Sports because it is your report. I had not seen him and he had not made his presence felt.

12.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (EDUCATION)(Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable chairperson for that report.

I have been noting down some of the points that have been raised. Some will be answered by the chairperson but let me go specifically to those that require my answers as the minister.

The first question as about Lugogo indoors hostel - my colleague said he went to that hostel and found there were bedbugs. Mr Speaker, the National Council of Sports is doing a marvellous job. If you look at the structures of the officers under the new programme we have, they are now befitting where the centre of sports should be.

We worked together with MTN Lugogo Indoor and their period is expiring next year. That is why you find the indoor games and even other activities can now take place in that place in a proper way.

Our next phase is the hostel, which we are talking about. Otherwise, it is our desire that some of the activities which require people with disabilities and those who come from very far can be accommodated. Mr Speaker, you are right and that issue is soon going to be handled by National Council of Sports. Everything will be refurbished the way you expect it to be.

An issue was also raised about the presidential pledges. My colleague clarified that it is handled by the Committee on Government Assurance and State Enterprises. However, some have been handled. He talked about buses being promised. Of recent, some of you could have seen on televisions that we handed over to Uganda Cranes the latest module of buses that had not reached in this country.

MR ABALA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. You are saying that you have been giving out buses to Uganda Cranes.  However, in Ngora, Mukula Memorial Senior Secondary School has not received. Kumi University has also not received. We have Kideto and Kobwin Seed Secondary Schools, which have all not received their buses. When are you giving us these buses? I thank you.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, my colleague. We do things according to the availability of finances. We are aware of all those pledges you have mentioned. Actually, to fulfil some of them, we shall be using even our existing facilities and I can assure you that it is our concern that we fulfil those pledges.

On the issue of money for renovation of schools, which are in sorry state. We have a programme, for example, if we find that an existing secondary school in sub-county needs renovation and equipping, we do that. However, if we find that it is in a sorry state and it cannot be renovated, we come up with structures. That is the way we are moving now.

Regarding whether schools in Kampala are under the Ministry of Education and Sports or not. Honourable colleagues, for a long time, Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) controls most of the schools in Kampala under vote 122 and they are properly catered for. My colleague will elaborate on that.

As far as student’s loans scheme is concerned, it has been alluded to that there is a lot of imbalance. I need to check it but all along, I knew that the student’s loan scheme was doing well. What was lacking was to give it more funding so that it could cover a bigger number.  

However, now that that point has been raised, we shall go back and if possible, the Committee on Education and Sports could interact with us so that we work out mechanisms of how it will be improved.

On recruitment of teachers in primary schools, you are aware about decentralisation and where the primary teachers fall. However, we shall also look into that and see how it can be improved.

You talked about Government not emphasising technical education and yet, a lot has been done by Government, including coming up with programmes like Skilling Uganda. We still have a problem of the mind-set of parents. Some believe that the only place where a student can go after Higher School Certificate (HSC) is university, regardless of the course that the student is going to do. In fact, that is why we have a lot of problems. We have many graduates every year but some end up on the streets because they study courses that cannot help them, yet, we tell them that the way forward now is to acquire skills that can help them.

So, together with the parents, we need to – when we talk about vocational institutions, it is not only for those from high school alone. Primary seven and senior four leavers can join at different levels like certificates, diplomas and above. The Ministry of Education and Sports is doing its best and the levels of enrolment are increasing. 

Initially, the first complaint was that we had established technical institutions but there was no equipment. We have now put the equipment but there are no students. However, we are slowly working on the mind-set of the students and parents to see that they emphasise the issue of skills.

On the High Altitude Training Centre in Teriet, it is not true that there is nothing in the budget for that project. Recently, I gave a report and as we talk, Teriet is supposed to be in three phases. The first phase –(Interjections)– on Teriet - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you state your point, honourable minister?

MR BAKKABULINDI: Let me first finish with Teriet because recently, when I went there - for some of you who have ever been there, even the community is benefitting. Water and electricity have been extended there. There was a primary school, which was relocated to the peripheral end and it is now well built. The first phase of the hostel is at 80 per cent completion. What is remaining is the dining area but the kitchen is already complete. 

We are left with putting the turf on the ground where we are going to have some of the indoor games like volleyball and basketball. The drainage is complete. Sixty per cent of the jogging track of three kilometres is now done. In light of the recent achievements by our athletes who got gold medals, when I went to the camp, they were doing some training from up there. 
The second phase will have the swimming pool and other hostels, then we shall come to the third phase where we will have a four-star hotel because Teriet is supposed to be the best in East and Central Africa. Therefore, there is progress and work is going on. 

It was not simple to start any work up there in Teriet because of the road. On that one, Government has put so much emphasis. Recently, I was speaking with the Permanent Secretary that people have complained that the monies are not enough. He said that it is them who have failed to utilise the money because the money is there. We are waiting for them to say they have finished this programme and they come for this money.

Therefore, as far as Teriet is concerned, that is our hope and we are looking towards that. (Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. If they are failing to utilise that money the other side, Inzikuru Stadium is waiting. We already have the land title and the land is available. We have been waiting for your promise since 2005. So, if there is money lying idle, send it to Arua. (Laughter)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, my colleague. We have a programme for regional stadia and we are going to reach there. You can see the way the money is coming in. Teriet is going to be an exceptional project but regional stadia like Aki Bua, on which you raised some issues here last time, are going to be handled. It is true that Gulu, Arua –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, prepare to wind up.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. There is an issue, which was raised by one Member about Kampala schools. At an opportune time, the committee should sit and look at the issues of Kampala.

There are now two conflicting laws; the KCCA Act, which does not have a component talking about education in it and the Education Act. 

As a committee – because I cannot debate my report but because of clarification – we noted the problem we are facing. We have always been meeting KCCA on that component of education. For the last two years, we have failed because it is moving to KCCA.

However, if you look at the performance of KCCA schools, they are dwindling day by day, yet, we have a big number of children there. We need to look at those laws because I would think that the Education Act, 2008 is the one managing education. That is why the structures of KCCA right now in education are finding it a problem to run education.

Therefore, could we find time, honourable minister, and we look at those two laws so that we see your department coming in to supervise KCCA because that money was coming from you? It is UNEB, which is under you, that sets and marks exams. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, as I said, the issue of money is clear. KCCA has no problem; it is manning that money. The laws were passed in this Parliament but let me finish this issue on inspection so that my colleague can talk about that.

An issue was raised about school inspection. That is crucial and I agree with you 100 per cent and we have discussed that, including with our top management and in the committee and provisions have been put. It is not about transport for those who are in hard-to-reach areas because without inspection, you cannot get quality education. So, we do not mind whether you are in a hard-to-reach-areas or not; what we want is maximum inspection of education institutions. I agree with you on that one and we are putting much emphasis.

Mr Speaker, can I invite my colleague to answer that issue of KCCA? Thank you.

12.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I will give a brief clarification on this; that our colleagues were wondering why the Budget Framework Paper (BFP) carried the budget for KCCA schools instead of appearing in the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports.

When we are preparing the BFP, the procedure, which is given by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is that it is prepared according to sectors and Kampala is not a sector. When we are preparing the BFP, our budget for KCCA is split into various sectors. In BFP, you will find the money for agriculture under the sector for agriculture, the money for roads in works, the money for hospitals in health and we do not prepare a BFP as KCCA. That is why that money in the BFP is split.

However, when it comes to the policy statement, then we prepare it according to vote and the money for KCCA schools is under vote 122, which is a vote for KCCA. For further clarification, when KCCA receives this money, we manage it almost the same way districts manage this money. It does not mean that we are failing to manage or reflect it but that is the arrangement by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and we go by those guidelines.

For BFP, we split it into sectors and for policy statements; we then consolidate under Vote 122. Today, I think we shall comment on the report for Committee on Presidential Affairs. That is where the money for KCCA for all directorates and sectors will be contained. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, please, briefly.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Of course, what is obvious is that there was no explanation about the shift because these BFPs and policy statements have been there for the time I have been in Parliament here. Therefore, there was no explanation and also local governments are captured under the Ministry of Education and Sports. Why would KCCA be a different story?

I have already talked about Karamoja; the money is under Gulu University. There is no budget for renovation of schools and it is under unfunded priorities and we have recommended that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides the money.

We have also urged the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide money for removal of asbestos from the schools. That is one reason we even had a query on the Asbestos Industry Association (AIA) approach because Kyambogo University is a big culprit. My former chairperson mentioned the issue of better schools getting in the names of centres of excellence but also maybe those who have will always be added; I do not know whether it is the approach.

I agree with the proposal on students’ loan scheme of having a quota system, which the committee has recommended. However, the committee has also recommended more outreach to increase awareness among the population because there are districts where there is not even a single person.

The committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation of all the scholarships being brought under the loan scheme as per what the law provides. The law provides that all scholarships and loan arrangements should be managed by the loans board and this would help reach more students countrywide.

Hoarding of the schools - this is also an unfunded priority because it has a big budget implication. 

Recruitment of primary school teachers, it is an unfunded priority. The ministry needs Shs 132 billion to recruit teachers, starting with 6,000 teachers next financial year but there is no budget provision for that. 

And we need about Shs 42 billion for that and we have recommended to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide.

Then in Soroti University, the assurance we were given is that it will start by 10th of August. I am not very sure of whether what is budgeted for is enough but there is an allocation to that effect. I agree with the honourable minister on the high altitude training centre; there is a lot of work that is going on and most of the materials needed to do the first phase are already up at the hill but the Budget provides for it.

In our recommendations, we talked of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development providing more money for the sports sub-sector because from the Shs 17 billion that is provided for the sports associations, out of the 48 associations, FUFA is taking Shs 10 billion. If you look at other costs, the other 47 are remaining with Shs 4 billion. The committee recommended that more money be given to National Council for Sports to handle that. That will cover athletics as well because the committee observed that most of the medals are brought by athletes and are the ones that are making us shine. Therefore, they should also be equally attended to.

On the issue of inspection, the committee recommended an internal reallocation of resources to cater for transport for district inspectors of schools starting with the most hard-to-reach and the worst performing districts so far. Therefore, we shall finalise this in our engagement with the Committee on Budget and in the House here.

As I conclude, in a nutshell, we would like to appeal that as far as the sector is concerned, there are issues of appropriating aid; the dental school Mulago, issue of salary enhancement for teachers, issue of library allocations for the universities, which they are neglecting, the issue of rollout of lower secondary curriculum, which we have been grappling with for about 12 years now without a breakthrough.

There are also issues of projects that were transferred from the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the Ministry of Education and Sports but without allocation of money.

Poor performance of Biology in Uganda Advanced Certificate of Education (UACE) exams and the need for continuous assessment, lack of the development budget for National Council Curriculum Development Centre, recruitment of the 22,000 primary teachers that are needed, harmonisation of student scholarships and inadequate funding of the Students Loan Scheme and insufficient funding for sports as well as strengthening of inspection of schools at local governments should be the issues that we need the House to come in and join us. For the issue of Kampala, we can leave the final decision to the Committee on Budget. What is important is that resources are provided for. Thank you very much. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson for a very good report. I now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the education and sports sector for the Financial Year 2019/2020 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we extended this debate to allow the Committee on Presidential Affairs to make its report available. Are they ready now? - They are not ready with their report.

Honourable members, we have two sectors - health and presidential affairs - that are not yet ready and today is Friday. We had said that we would meet on Monday but there may be no need to meet on Monday. We have these two reports. Instead of meeting on Monday, I would like to suggest that we start the debate on Tuesday in the morning so that we compensate for what we would have lost on Monday.

I said that all the reports that have already been adopted, the figures should be sent to the Committee on Budget. While they wait for the comprehensive reference from the House on 30 April 2019, they should already start working on this. I met the chairperson of the Committee on Budget who said they have started the preliminary meetings to prepare the ground for the final report from the House on what they should do.

We still want to try and catch up with time. Therefore, if we are able to finish with all the reports by 30th April, we will have caught up and then we give sufficient time to the Committee on Budget to work and report within time in which case, we will have a more comprehensive debate because there will be time enough as structured by the law for us to have that debate. Therefore, there will be no rush.

I would like to apologise again for how we have been handling the ministerial policy statements. You remember last year, some of them just had to be laid without reading even one word or question. However, we have kind of improved on that that they at least make a presentation, however short. In the previous year, there was no time at all - you would just come and lay the report.

As I said yesterday, the Government’s executive branch should help us with this, particularly the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that the policy statements come to Parliament in time - Not just in time. The date is known, the 15th of March. On or before 15th March, all the ministerial policy statements should be there to give Parliament sufficient time to deal with them.

If we had three weeks for our debate, we would have debated all the ministerial policy statements and the reports of the committees comprehensively but we do not have those days now. Therefore, this is a learning process. Let us use it to improve on what we do next year. But for now, let us pause here and I adjourn this House to Tuesday. Should it be 10.00 a.m. or 11.00 a.m?

Chairperson for the Committee on Presidential Affairs, are you ready? 

MS ABABIKU: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then, let us proceed. We tried to wait for you. Were you in the building waiting for us to adjourn? (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have five minutes. You can give us copies so that we can also follow. Proceed.

1.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We apologise for the delay but we were harmonising a few things.

Our clerk has gone to upload the document and I believe that by now, this has been done.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we proceed and receive it later?

MR SSEWUNGU: Since we have been waiting for them and the chairperson has appeared, we cannot wait for the upload as the internet may not be on. However, as the Leader of the Opposition, I need a copy because that is why I am here. 

You know, I am a Government in waiting but we have to proceed. (Laughter) We are about to take power, as you know. If possible, I can get a copy as I wait because I will have to respond to some issues. There is no internet and we all know the problems the House is facing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They will arrange a copy for the Leader of the Opposition and the Speaker. In the meantime, chairperson, proceed, within five minutes.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are coordinating for hard copies to be availed.

I request that I go to the specifics where the votes are instead of the preambles. We are on page three –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would propose that you deal with the actual proposals you have made to the House on the figures first, then, you come back to the text.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Under vote 122; Kampala Capital City Authority, we have this observation, which is related to the figures. In the financial year –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I will propose that you go to actual figures you are proposing then you come back to those issues.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you.
a) Vote 001 -    Office of the President
Recurrent expenditure – Shs 135,780,000,000 
Development expenditure - Shs 3,567,000,000

b) Vote 002 - State House
Recurrent expenditure	-Shs394,800,000,000 
Development expenditure -Shs 12,338,000,000

c) Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister
Recurrent expenditure	-Shs 74,414,000,000 
Development expenditure	-Shs513,919,000,000

d) Vote 017 - Uganda Aids Commission
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 6,731,000,000
Development expenditure -  Shs 128,000,000

e) Vote 112 - Ethics and Integrity
Recurrent expenditure	- Shs 6,605,000,000
Development expenditure	-Shs  2,110,000,000

f) Vote 122 - Kampala Capital City Authority
Recurrent expenditure -Shs 83,650,000,000 
Development expenditure- Shs419,830,000,OO0

g) Vote 159 - External Security Organisation
Recurrent expenditure- Shs 37,601,000,000 
Development expenditure	-  Shs3,892,000,000

Those are the specifics.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, are there some serious recommendations that you would like to present?

MS ABABIKU: Yes, we even made reallocations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS ABABIKU: Mr Speaker, allow me to go to the observations and recommendations. 

KCCA, according to the ministerial policy statement and other information provided to the committee, Kampala Capital City Authority requires Shs 865.42 billion, of which only Shs 509.63 billion is proposed allocation within the Medium-Term Expenditure Framework ceiling. This results into a total funding gap of Shs 355.79 billion, which represents 49 per cent of the required amount.

Poor sanitation conditions in KCCA

The committee undertook on-spot assessment and observed the following:

    1. The committee noted with concern the deplorable sanitation conditions in some parts of the city, which was attributed to poor garbage management, inadequate public toilets, dirty water and poor drainage maintenance. 
    2. The committee was informed that KCCA requires 65 trucks to collect garbage and therefore, we are recommending that Shs 20 billion be availed to ensure that this item is purchased.

Solid waste management under Kiteezi Landfill 

The committee recommends that the funding gap be spread over multiple financial years and that an allocation of Shs 20 billion be allocated for this item.

The committee calls upon KCCA to speed up the process of enabling the project under Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme - Project 2 (CAIIP II) to regain its implementation pace because if not done, we are going to lose a lot of money.

Roads and drainage improvement

We are recommending that an additional fund of Shs 42.4 billion be availed to KCCA to work on the roads. 

Under NTR, we observed a lot of challenges where KCCA, for many years, has failed to generate expected revenue for this country. We are recommending that the Chief Valuer and Office of the Auditor-General expedite the valuation of physical assets and business losses for compensation, especially on the issue of city abattoirs over which Parliament took a decision.

We also recommend that Government identifies Shs 54.18 billion to ensure that the staffing structure of KCCA is implemented fully. KCCA is using much of the local revenue for paying some of their staff, which is not sustainable.

Under Information and Communication Technology, we are recommending that Shs 10 billion be availed to support the ICT system in KCCA.

On the presence of schools with asbestos sheets in the Kampala, the committee recommends that Governments takes it up and removes asbestos because they are a health hazard.

About co-curricular activities, the committee recommends that Government should prioritise safeguarding these fields and other facilities for co-curricular activities.

Vote 003 - Office of the Prime Minister (OPM)

Under the protection of Government land reserved for refugee settlements, the committee recommends that Government ensures that all Government land is protected.

Under the resettlement of the affected people because of landslides and other factors, we recommend that the Government reactivates the Shs 8 billion it had promised to ensure the affected people are resettled.

We also observed that there is a looming disaster due to various factors and we recommend that Government provides for adequate funds so that we remain proactive to address the disaster cases.

Mr Speaker, we did reallocation under consultancy services - short term. When we had interactions with the OPM, they informed us that for the running financial year, they used the money allocated under consultancy for doing assessments under local governments, holding barazas and Government retreats.

We felt we were betrayed because we believed consultancy services are where we need special expertise and this cannot be in barazas or retreats because we have provided for the money for workshops and seminars. Therefore, we propose a reallocation.

The committee recommends that Parliament maintains Shs 6.11 billion and have Shs 6.267 billion reallocated to other unfunded priorities.

Under workshops and seminars, we propose a reallocation based on the guidance we have been getting. Workshops and seminars are proposed to take place in an incremental over medium term. In financial year 2017/2018, the allocation to this item was Shs 3.4 billion and in 2018/2019, it was Shs 4.7 billion and for this year, the budget is Shs 12 billion.

We recommend that out of this money, Shs 2.2 billion be reallocated to other priorities because it is a consumptive accord and permanent secretary of the finance ministry and secretary to the treasury has given a circular that we need to reduce on workshops and seminars.

On post war recovery support to selected vulnerable categories of people in Northern Uganda, this House made a resolution and we had several debates on this matter but it was proposed at zero amount meaning, it was not treated as a priority.
The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 20 billion to cover this item. The committee further recommends that the vulnerable children be identified in not only Northern Uganda but in other regions as well.

On support to refugee hosting communities, we had interactions and observed that there is a big conflict in Moyo District among the leadership over the allocation of projects. We recommend that OPM intervenes and holds a special meeting in Moyo District to harmonise the position so that the projects are fairly implemented.

On the construction of the Eriaji Bridge in Pakelle Sub-County, Adjuman District, we noted that Shs 900 million was mismanaged in 2015/2016 and so, the bridge was not constructed. We recommend that Government follows it up. The people of Adjumani need the bridge.

On the citizens’ participation in monitoring Government programmes - barazas, out of the money we have talked about, baraza activities have been appreciated where they took place in the various districts. We are reallocating the Shs 1 billion, the one we moved, to this item.

On strategic coordination, monitoring under OPM, we found a gap and so, we recommend that Government funds the Shs 5 billion for effective coordination. 

On affirmative action, we have a table. We noted that many of the regions have not been well facilitated. For example, Bunyoro, Teso, Busoga, Karamoja and Northern Uganda have not been considered. Government promised to implement the development plan but many of these plans have been there without the provision of adequate funding. Therefore, we recommend that more funding be provided for these plans to and ensure other regions are brought to a fair level.

We are reallocating Shs 1 billion to Bunyoro Region because it is the least funded with only Shs 800 million under direct funding. 

Vote 001- Office of the President

The committee recommends that Office of the President undertakes internal re-allocation of Shs 1.845 billion from item 212102 -pensions for general civil service - to enhance the procurement of transport equipment for Resident District Commissioners (RDCs).

Mr Speaker, this decision was arrived at after we realised that money under this item was over budgeted. We interacted with the staff from Office of the President and noted that last financial year, they returned Shs 1.1 billion. Therefore, having reconciled with them, we made a proposal that Shs 1.84 billion be reallocated to purchase vehicle for RDCs.

We have over 200 RDCs in this country but with only 38 good cars. So, while we pay them salaries, they cannot do good work.

On facilitations for RDCs, the committee recommends that they should be given Shs 5.5 billion to enable them do their work. RDCs represent the Office of the President and have a provision in the Constitution that mandates them to do oversight on behalf of the Office of the President. As Members of Parliament, I know we relate with them and we know their activities. The committee recommends that facilitation to the Office of the President of Shs 5.5 billion to enable the RDCs do their work. 

The committee further recommends that Shs 23.87 billion be identified to procure more cars for them and on manifesto implementation, we request that Government avail Shs 2 billion to enhance their activities.

Under economic monitoring, we recommend that Shs 6 billion be identified so that we have value for all Government programmes.

Under Internal Security Organisation (ISO), we recommend that Government considers procuring motor vehicles and motorcycles because this item has not been considered, yet these are the people who play a big role in providing security.

Under the Poverty Alleviation Programme, we are proposing a roll out of model parishes to the entire country. They have a shortfall of Shs 20 billion. We request that this money be provided.
On the youth economic empowerment programme, we are proposing for a rollout of this activity and the amount needed is Shs 35 billion. We recommend the provision of that amount of money.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. I will now propose the question for debate.

Ms ABABIKU: Mr Speaker, under HIV/AIDS, we have observed that the spread is on increase and they have not been given adequate funding. We recommend that Shs 2.5 billion be provided for HIV/AIDS programmes. 
Under ethics and integrity, there are many challenges and moral decadency in this country. We request that money be availed to ethics and integrity to run its activities.

Under External Security Organisation (ESO), we are reallocating Shs 3 billion, which we picked from consultancies. As concerned citizens of this country, we are aware of the threats in and outside the region. We need to strengthen our security positions.

Mr Speaker, allow me only read a summary of the reallocations because I did not mention them:
 
    i. From Vote 003, we are reallocating Shs 1 billion to Bunyoro region; 
    ii. From the same vote, we are reallocating Shs 1 billion to enhance baraza activities; 
    iii. From the same vote, we are reallocating Shs 1.5 billion for Apaa resettlement; 
    iv. From vote 001, we are reallocating Shs 2.057 for RDCs’ cars and facilitation; and
    v. From Vote 159, we are reallocating Shs 3 billion to cover programs under ESO. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. 

MS ABABIKU: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a copy of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS ABABIKU: Mr Speaker, we also have copies of our minutes and other related annexes and documents. I beg to lay. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and your committee for making it today. 

Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020 for that sector be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now, with some clarification points and not full debates.

However, going by the numbers, honourable members, it is already a half past 1 o’clock and I will not be able to sustain the debate. Therefore, I will put the question. I put the question that the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020 for that sector be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. We have an outstanding report of the Committee on Health. As I had communicated earlier, we will not be meeting on Monday as earlier proposed. I have pushed the Sugar Bill, 2016 reconsideration, as sent by the President, to Tuesday. I think we will deal with that on Tuesday. I cannot assign the time but it will depend on how we start with the last report of the Committee on Health. I am hoping that by that time, they will be ready. 

Honourable members, considering the circumstances, the House has been adjourned to Tuesday at 10 o’clock.

(The House rose at 1.28 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 30 May 2019 at 10.00 a.m.)
 
