Thursday, 9 April 2015

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency the Vice President, the honourable Prime Ministers and Members of Parliament, I welcome you to what should be the last sitting of the Third Meeting of the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament.

I would like to remind Members that we introduced facilities for e-voting, e-roll call and so on, but 96 members have not registered yet. Consequently, those Members have disabled the commencement of these activities. I am going to read out their names so that they can go and register:

    1. Hon. Alex Onzima
    2. Hon. Achieng Sarah Opendi
    3. Hon. Achia Remigio
    4. Hon. Freddie Ruhindi
    5. Hon. Sam Kutesa
    6. Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba
    7. Hon. Wafula Oguttu
    8. Hon. Odonga Otto
    9. Hon. Sezi Mbaguta
    10. Hon. Rukutana Mwesigwa
    11. Hon. Elioda Tumwesigye
    12. Hon. Frank Tumwebaze
    13. Hon. Akena Michael Jimmy
    14. Hon. Acire Christopher
    15. Hon. Akora Maxwell Ebong
    16. Hon. Amama Mbabazi
    17. Hon. Monicah Amoding
    18. Hon. Amoit Judith
    19. Hon. Amongin Jackie
    20. Hon. Amuge Otengo
    21. Hon. Aronda Nyakairima
    22. Hon. Atim Ongom
    23. Hon. Awongo Ahmed
    24. Hon. Ayena Crispus
    25. Hon. Baba James
    26. Hon. Baka Mugabi
    27. Hon. Nambooze Bakireke
    28. Hon. Julius Junjura
    29. Hon. Bucyanayandi Tress
    30. Hon. Bihande Bwambale
    31. Hon. Stephen Chebrot
    32. Hon. Musa Ecweru
    33. Hon. Ekuma George 
    34. Hon. Sam Engola
    35. Hon. Epetait Francis 
    36. Hon. Jacan Omach
    37. Hon. Evelyn Kaabule
    38. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace
    39. Hon. Kabakumba Masiko
    40. Hon. Kaddu Mukasa Ssozi 
    41. Hon. Kajara Aston
    42. Hon. Kamanda Bataringaya  
    43. Hon. Karungi Elizabeth 
    44. Hon. Kagwera Kasaija
    45. Hon. Kataike Ndoboli
    46. Hon. Katumba Wamala
    47. Hon. Abdu Katuntu
    48. Hon. Mohamed Kawuma
    49. Hon. Justine Khainza
    50. Hon. Khiddu Makubuya
    51. Hon. Kiiza Ernest  
    52. Hon. Kikungwe Isa
    53. Hon. Kwemara Ngabu
    54. Hon. Hussein Kyanjo
    55. Hon. Sarah Lanyero
    56. Hon. Aimat Lokeris
    57. Hon. Lubega Godfrey 
    58. Hon. Lugoloobi Amos
    59. Hon. Matte Joseph
    60. Hon. Mbagadhi Frederick 
    61. Hon. Migereko Daudi
    62. Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe 
    63. Hon. Dorothy Mpiima
    64. Hon. Mugabi Muzaale 
    65. Hon. Muhumuza David
    66. Hon. Mukasa Muruli
    67. Hon. Adolf Mwesige
    68. Hon. Nabbanja Robinah
    69. Hon. Naggayi Sempala
    70. Hon. Nalubega Mariam
    71. Hon. Namaganda Suzan
    72. Hon. Namayanja Nsereko Rose
    73. Hon. Benny Namugwanya Bugembe
    74. Hon. Aidah Nantaba
    75. Hon. Nebanda Andiru
    76. Hon. Nekesa Oundo
    77. Hon. Nyanzi Vincent
    78. Hon. Peter Nyombi
    79. Hon. Oketta Julius
    80. Hon. Okumu Reagan
    81. Hon. Peter Omolo
    82. Hon. Hilary Onek
    83. Hon. Oryem Henry
    84. Hon. Rugunda
    85. Hon. Sabiiti
    86. Hon. Ssebagala Latif
    87. Hon. Ssemujju Nganda
    88. Hon. Taaka Kevina
    89. Hon. Tanna Sanjay
    90. Hon. Tete Chelangat
    91. Hon. Elly Tumwine
    92. Hon. Winfred Kiiza
    93. Hon. Kabwegyere
    94. Hon. Bageine

Honourable members, please allow us to complete documentation of all the Members so that we can use these facilities for different activities. We are registering all the Members for voting. As for voting, we shall know who to vote here.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for reading out that list because clearly, there are lapses in the system of Parliament. I was among the first people to register and that time the technician was there. He took every detail about me; so, all along I knew that I had registered. However, since you have read my name, I will go and re-register, but you need to cross-check the system thoroughly. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us have everybody registered so that we can start using the facilities and speed up our work. The table is outside, go and register. (Laughter)

LAYIING OF PAPERS

        I) TAX EXPENDITURES FOR QUARTER THREE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to lay on the Table the tax expenditures for the third quarter of the financial year 2014/2015.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

        II) ACCOUNTING OFFICERS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/16

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in line with the Public Finance Management Act 2015, Section 13 (11), I would like to lay on the Table a list of accounting officers for the financial year 2015/2016.

        III) THE 17TH ANNUAL REPORT OF THE UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION, 2014

3.09
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker and Members, I beg to lay on Table the 17th Annual Report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2014.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, commissioner.

        IV) REPORT OF THE PARLIAMENTARY DELEGATION ABROAD TO THE ACP- EU JOINT PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY HELD IN STRASBOURG, FRANCE FROM 24 NOVEMBER 2014 TO 3 DECEMBER 2014
3.10
MR SANJAY	TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I beg to lay on Table the report of the delegation to the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly held in Strasbourg, France, from 24 November to 3 December 2014.

Madam Speaker, the delegation from Parliament of the Republic of Uganda to the above meetings was led by the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, the Deputy Speaker. He was accompanied by us, as a group. In the interest of time, I will just peruse through – 

THE SPEAKER: No, just lay it on the Table.

MR TANNA: I just lay it? Okay, I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Item i and ii are sent to the relevant committees. Item ii in particular is available for Members’ scrutiny. Item iii is sent to the Committee on Human Rights for perusal and report back. I would like to thank them for being up-to-date; they do not have any pending work except this one. Item iv - a date will be appointed for the discussion of the report of the delegation. Thank you very much.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 15 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO SUSPEND RULE 209 IN ORDER FOR THE HOUSE TO RECONSIDER ITS DECISION OF THE 3RD MARCH 2015 ON THE PETITION BY THE RESIDENTS OF KABEHO LC 1, KINOONI B LC 1, BOOMA LC1, KYATUBA B LC 1 AND BIGAAGA LC 1 IN BULONGO PARISH, NTUUSI SUB-COUNTY, LWEMIYAGA COUNTY, SEMBABULE DISTRICT

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Members. I beg for your indulgence; I beg that the mover of this motion be hon. Nzoghu William, because he authored the minority report, and I will second it.

THE SPEAKER:  Can you use only five minutes, honourable member?

3.12
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am moving under rules 15, 47 and 209 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to suspend rule 209 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament in order to reconsider the report on the petition by the residents of Kabeho LC I, Kinooni B LC I, Booma LC I, Kyatuba B LC I and Bigaaga LC I in Bulongo Parish, Ntuusi Sub-County, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule District.

“WHEREAS the residents of Kabeho LC I, Kinooni B LC I, Booma LC I, Kyatuba B LC I and Bigaaga LC I in Bulongo Parish, Ntuusi Sub-County, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule District, presented a petition to Parliament under rule 29 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure requiring that Parliament intervenes in the impending eviction from their land;

AND WHEREAS the petition was received by the Speaker of Parliament and was referred to the parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure, which investigated the assertions in the petition and authored a report;

AWARE THAT two members of the committee being myself, William Nzoghu, and hon. Gilbert Olanya disagreed with the majority report and authored a minority report in accordance with rule 194 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure;

FURTHER AWARE that on the 5 February 2015, both reports were presented to the House but debate was deferred to a later date by the Speaker;

NOTING THAT on 3 March 2015, the House resolved to adopt the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure without specifying which particular report was being adopted;

FURTHER NOTING that rule 209 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament prohibits reconsideration of any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current session except upon a substantive motion for rescission by a vote of half of all the Members of Parliament participating in that decision;

COGNISANT of the fact that rule 15 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament allows a member, with the consent of the Speaker, to move that any rule be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that:

1. Rule 209 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament be suspended in order for the House to reconsider its decision of the 3 March 2015.

2. Members debate both the majority and minority reports of the parliamentary Committee on Physical infrastructure regarding the petition by the residents of Kabeho LC I, Kinooni B LC I, Booma LC I, Kyatuba B LC I and Bigaaga LC I in Bulongo Parish, Ntuusi Sub-County, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule District.”

Moved by myself and seconded by hon. Theodore Ssekikubo. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, on 5 March 2015, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure held a meeting, which was chaired by hon. Biraaro Ganshanga, who is the chairperson of that committee. While the meeting was going on, I saw the chairman get out of the room and I did not know that he was actually coming to the House. When I came to the House, I found that the matter had been tabled by the chairperson and adopted. However, when the Speaker then asked the chairperson, he did not mention to this House that besides the majority report, there was also a minority report. Therefore, a ruling was taken on the basis that there was only one report and yet that was not the case.

You will recall, Madam Speaker, that when I presented the minority report and when the majority report was presented also, it was you who was chairing. We presented these reports towards the close of the sitting that day and you ruled that debate would ensue at the next sitting. I would like to bring it to the attention of the members in this House that both reports were never debated and, therefore, have no locus to have been adopted in the event that the Speaker then ruled on the premise that there was only one report and yet I had a minority report.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to present it to the members in this House that it is not a crime for any Member to come up with a minority report in the circumstance that you disagree with the major report. I visited these places with the members of the committee; we went to the field and what we saw is not what actually appeared in the report. My question was: why then do we misreport the situation? That is the circumstance and ground on which I disagreed. I cannot just watch this happen and not give my input.

Thirdly, when the Uganda Land Commission advertised this land, there was a time limit within which the land was supposed to have been procured; it was within the limit of three months that the payments were supposed to be effected-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you are going to the merits of the matter. The motion you have moved is for suspension of the rules. You justify why you want a suspension.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I would like to ask that this House supports this motion so that rule 209 can be suspended. I beg to move.

3.20
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Members. Once again I seek the indulgence of the House to reconsider the matter that was adopted on 3rd March. Ordinarily, we would not have gone through all these technicalities because on record there are two reports.

Madam Speaker and members, once a majority and minority report are read, they form one report of Parliament. Therefore, when resolving those two reports, the procedure we have been using is to first dispose of the minority report and then we proceed onto the majority report. In this case, what happened is that the Speaker’s attention then was not drawn to the existence of two reports. 

When he called the items on the Order Paper, you all remember, after the first and second items were over, immediately there was a Bill on trade but the minister was not ready and the fifth item was the matter for Lwemiyaga but the chairperson was not in the House also. They proceeded to the sixth item and then the chairperson came in. At that stage, the Speaker demanded to know whether the Members were ready to debate and indeed when he demanded, there was no debate on the two reports and he put the question for the adoption of the report. Now, since the two reports are contradictory and the report was adopted, it remains a question of which particular report was adopted. They all cannot go together since they opposed each other. Therefore, it would ordinarily be a correction of the record of Parliament. 

In legal terms, this could fall under the slip rule. The slip rule is square; there is an apparent mistake on the face of the record. This Parliament voted to adopt the report and we feel that there was a mistake. It should have been brought to the attention of the Speaker to guide the House to proceed with the minority report and if it was defeated, we would go with the majority report. If the majority report was rejected by the House, the minority report would become the majority report.

To that extent, Madam Speaker and members, I second the motion and I seek your indulgence to let justice be done. This matter is affecting 2,553 people and if there is a mistake in the way it is handled, it will be visited on the innocent people. To that extent, therefore, I stand to second the motion and beg the indulgence of Members of Parliament that we correct this mistake and adopt the report, whichever way it goes. We do not advocate at this stage that we adopt the minority report, no; ours is to have an opportunity for Parliament to have a fresh look at the issues and matters and then we take a decisive position which is clear. 

As we stand now, a report was adopted and that report has both the minority and majority reports and they are contradictory. I thought we needed to have this matter looked at afresh so that Parliament can take an informed position. When it comes to adopting it, let the matter be clear and we adopt it for the final resolution of the problems of the petitioners of the people of Ntuusi in Lwemiyaga. Madam Speaker, I beg to support.

THE SPEAKER: If the Speaker invites people to contribute and nobody contributes, what do you want the Speaker to do?

3.24
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that this House has discretion under rule 15 to suspend any rule and revisit its earlier decisions. However, rule 15 should be related to exceptional circumstances like when the decision was arrived at in blatant error, if the circumstances have changed as to warrant Parliament to revisit the decision, or if an unforeseen or unanticipated event occurs. 

The presenter and the supporter of the motion have said that both reports, the majority and minority reports, were on record and the Speaker then put the question on the report. It was at that particular time that somebody should have risen up to point out that there are two reports. On the contrary, they kept quiet and the Speaker took a decision. In these circumstances, there is nothing new or unforeseeable that has happened to warrant  a revisit of the decision. Therefore, it would be improper and would lay a wrong precedent to resort to rule 15 and suspend the rule.

On the issue of the two reports, since both reports were on record, as is conceded by the seconder of the motion, the clarification ought to have been sought at the time the Speaker put the question. Since it was not done, that means that the Members conceded and a decision was taken on the report that was on record.

Madam Speaker, I know as a fact that we have the discretion to suspend rules. However, resorting so much to rule 15 would lay our decisions to a lot of instability and would occasion a lot of injustice to the decisions passed by this House. I would advise that in these circumstances, it is not proper for the decision to be revisited. It is not necessary to resort to rule 15 to suspend the rule under which a decision was taken. I beg to submit.

3.28
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My colleagues have sought to suspend rules so that the matter of this petition could be reconsidered. We would need to look at the Hansard so that we can be properly guided on the business of the day and the decisions that were taken at the time. We would also need to have the benefit of the opportunity to look at the Hansard. 

That notwithstanding, we have been trying to look for a solution in regard to the problem of land evictions in Lwemiyaga. Last week, this matter came up on the Floor of the House. The Speaker then guided that this was a very important matter which needed to be dealt with such that a solution could be found. The Rt. Hon. Prime Minister was directed by the Speaker to instruct me to go and meet the various stakeholders over this land matter and come up with a way forward, which he would report to the House. 

I have been consulting with the Prime Minister who has indicated that he had a meeting with hon. Ssekikubo and Madam Kayonga and was in the process of holding other meetings involving the Attorney-General. This matter needed to be given time so that the initiatives under the Prime Minister could be allowed to take off and get to a logical conclusion, and then we report back to this. I thought that I could raise that matter so that it could also be taken into account as we consider the motion as presented by brother, hon. Nzoghu. I thank you.

3.31
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, while I respect, most fervently, the Attorney-General’s opinion and while I also consider the submission of my senior colleague, hon. Migereko, I stand here to support the motion. 

To err is human and we are brought up listening to that. Nobody here is perfect. The question was put by the Speaker then, and it was very eloquently put by hon. Ssekikubo and repeated by the Attorney-General, that it was not brought to the notice of the Speaker. For us to sit here and apportion blame – was it the Clerk’s office, was it the Speaker that erred, was it the honourable colleagues here who did not stand up and were not interested in the matter who erred - may not be the right line of argument today.

The Attorney-General’s line of argument is that if we open the can today, we may be setting a precedent for opening another can of worms. I agree with his sentiments, but these are 2,500 lives at stake. Madam Speaker, Parliament is viewed as the most supreme and most neutral and these people have come with their hopes. The committee sat and hon. Nzoghu said that the committee visited the site. He has submitted his report about what he saw; why don’t we as a House revisit both reports? 

It is true that a report was adopted, but which report - the main or the minority report? Rather than us shoving our mistakes under the table, it would only be brave of us to acknowledge them and correct the error that has been made on record. Even though it is the majority report that we want to adopt, we must do it using the right procedure. Both reports must be adopted. This happened because the report was deferred to the next day and according to what hon. Nzoghu is saying, they were in the committee meeting and the chairperson rushed out to present the report without other colleagues, especially hon. Nzoghu, being notified. 

Now, if what my honourable colleagues are saying is true, then I would like to urge honourable colleagues that we revisit this so that whichever way the decision goes, it shall be procedurally right and the petitioners’ minds will be put to rest that we did handle this matter in an impartial way. From the manner in which we have handled it at the moment, it appears to be is as if we have sided with one side and not considered the other side. So, bring it back and we handle the matter on its merits. I beg to support the motion.

3.35
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise to support the motion.

Madam Speaker, on the issue before us, it is actually Parliament to redeem itself in the eyes of the affected people. The motion does not seek for much; they are only saying that we take a decision on this matter but act fairly. As far as I am concerned, there were two reports and I do not mind whether we vote against the majority report but we must take a decision on the report.

To allay the fears of the Deputy Attorney-General, there was a blatant error on our part as Parliament because our rules spell out how reports are dealt with. When the Speaker called for the adoption of the report, he did not pronounce himself on the minority report. I am actually on record as having risen to tell the Speaker, when hon. Ssekikubo raised this matter - Even rule 209, which the Speaker was relying on, in my humble opinion, did not relate to this matter. Rule 209 is about a matter that has been concluded and in my opinion this matter was not concluded because we did not deal with the minority report. With the indulgence of the Speaker, we could have actually dealt with this matter then.

In the circumstances, we are going to take a decision on something that affects thousands of people basing on a technicality other than substantively looking at the issues raised in these reports. We can have this rule suspended, reconsider the report and take a decision on the report. The people of Lwemiyaga will have no problem with that. I am sure that they have no problem with this Parliament voting against the minority report. All they want to see is fair treatment of their matter before this House.

Madam Speaker, having said that, I would like to invite my colleagues to belong to my school of thought; let us support the motion, debate it and take a decision. Even if we vote against the report, there will be no problem because it will be right according to our judgement. Deciding otherwise would be to occasion a miscarriage of justice on the people of Lwemiyaga. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move.

3.37
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue at hand is unprecedented. It is a tricky issue and I sympathise with you, Madam Speaker. First, the day this issue was on the Order Paper, it was not you chairing. Now, whether the merits in the report were genuine or logical like members have stated, a scenario is being created where we are being asked to undo what was already done when somebody else was chairing. 

I feel that we may, as a House, be misunderstood by you, our chairpersons, by the public and more so it would affect integrity. Somebody may wake up one morning and say that whatever this House considered sometime back should be revisited based on a precedent like this one –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You are the Speaker of this honourable House. The institution of Parliament is under your leadership; whether you are chairing a session or not, you are in charge of this institution and its procedures. 

Is the member in order to allude that you are not aware of what happened in a previous sitting which you did not chair and yet you are in charge of this institution whether you are in the chair or not? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I am not going to rule on that one. (Laughter)

MR MUWUMA: I thank you very much. Like I said, the situation is tricky. My prayer and proposal is that since this House already considered this report –(Interjections)- Members, It was presented -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion has been moved, let members contribute the way they want. 

MR MUWUMA: Madam Speaker, I was saying that although there could be merit in the report of the committee, now that the House already pronounced itself on the report, I oppose the motion. This is because this would be a precedent that we would create in this House that would not augur well in the eyes of the public.

3.41
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When people bring petitions to Parliament, they come for guidance and rely on the decision that this House makes. The decisions that we make must be very clear so that they can be referred to in matters that may come subsequently.

It appears that the circumstances that we are dealing with are unprecedented. Our rules are very clear on how reports must be determined. If two reports are presented, they must put the question on the minority report first; if it is carried, we do not even proceed to the next. However, if it is not, then you go to the main report.

Under the circumstances, it appears the Speaker in the chair then was not properly briefed by the clerk’s desk and we have found ourselves in the circumstances we in now. I propose, Madam Speaker, that this matter be referred to the rules committee so that they can give us the proper way on how to navigate out of this. The rules committee will interact with the Speaker, they will refer to the Hansard and come back and advise this House on how this matter can be resolved. If we begin blaming each other, it may not be productive. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I am softened by the assertion that there were two reports on record and at the time of presentation of the report, neither the mover of this motion nor the author of the minority report were in the House and nobody brought that fact to the attention of the presiding Speaker. However, these are matters which have just been alleged here. I therefore buy the proposal by hon. Dombo that to get to the root of this matter, we need the rules committee to look at the Hansard, to ascertain what exactly happened and then we decide accordingly.

Alternatively, we can do this like we did yesterday - we access the Hansard, look at exactly what transpired that day and we make up our minds accordingly. I am prepared to concede that if it is true that there were two reports and this was not brought to the attention of the presiding Speaker and he ruled on one motion, then that was an error apparent on the face of the record. The other interpretation could be that since we begin with the minority report, then it was the minority report which was carried.

I think the solution now is to look at the Hansard either by ourselves today or the rules committee can do it, in order to arrive at an informed decision. Otherwise, my concern was to resort to rule 15 in circumstances which are not clear. 

3.46
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had intended to raise an objection and then on second thought, I thought that I should let it go. This is because the honourable Deputy Attorney-General was speaking on the same topic for a second time, which offends our rules.

Having said that, when matters arise from a petition that was brought to this House or to your office, you refer them to the relevant committee to report to the House, the House debates the report and comes up with a position. Madam Speaker, you are obliged to communicate the decision of the House to the petitioners. I am now wondering what position you are going to communicate to the people who petitioned this House.

My view is that everybody agrees that we are caught in a difficult position and we need to have the record clear. The point of departure is: how do we correct the record? Everybody knows that there is a problem with our record and it offends the rules; so, how do we do it? Do we go the hon. Nzoghu way of suspending the rules and going back into the reports, debating them and take a decision or do we refer it to the rules committee?

My view is that we do not have to prolong this debate. We need to take a decision one way or the other and we correct our record, other than having this debate and eventually going into the merits which hon. Migereko is trying to drag us into. At this point, we are not looking at the problem in Lwemiyaga; we are looking at our record and how to correct it. Madam Speaker, rather than degenerating into a detailed debate, I think you need to guide this House on how we should proceed and we close this debate and go to the next business. I beg to propose.

3.48
MR TONY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The day a decision was taken on this motion, I was in the House. The minority report was presented but not discussed. On another day, it was now the majority report that was considered; nothing was said about the minority report and no decision was taken on it. On that day, the mover of the motion, hon. Nzoghu, was not in the House. He came when the decision was already taken. The Speaker then found it difficult to rescind the decision there and then when the House had already taken a decision on the majority report. That is exactly what happened. When he tried to ask the Speaker to revisit the decision, the Speaker ignored his request. 

This requires us to look in the Hansard so that we can take a decision, but that is exactly what happened. No decision was taken on the minority report and yet we are supposed to take a decision on a minority report first. This will guide you on how to proceed, but I think we need to reconsider it because there is no way we can proceed and ignore a minority report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it would not be appropriate for us to continue this debate especially since it touches the work of the Office of the Speaker. I want to believe that the matter was on the Order Paper and everybody was on notice. Equity also assists the vigilant. 

However, taking into account that there is a petition for which an answer is being sought, we will ask the rules committee to go back and examine the Hansard so that they can give us a report about what transpired and then we shall move on. The rules committee is assigned this responsibility. Thank you very much. Let us go to the next item.


MOTION TO SEEK LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL, THE HUMAN RIGHTS (ENFORCEMENT) BILL, 2014

3.50
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I rise to move a motion to seek leave of this House to introduce a private member’s Bill entitled, “The Human Rights (Enforcement) Bill, 2015”. I beg that the year be 2015 and not 2014. The motion is moved under Article 94(4) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda 1995, and rule 111(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution and rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognise the right of a member to move a private members Bill;

AND WHEREAS Article 93 of the Constitution recognises Parliament to proceed on a Bill or motion that does not impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund or alter taxation otherwise than by reduction;

AND WHAREAS Parliament is required under Article 50 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to make laws for the enforcement of the rights and freedoms by all persons, institutions and organs of Government under Chapter Four of the Constitution but has not done so since 1995 when the Constitution was promulgated;

NOTING that in order to fill the gap created by the absence of a law made by Parliament for the enforcement of human rights, the rules committee established under section 40 of the Judicature Act issued the Judicature (Fundamental Rights and Freedoms) (Enforcement Procedure) Rules 2008, Statutory Instrument No. 55 of 2008;

NOTING FURTHER that the aforementioned Judicature (Fundamental Rights and Freedoms (Enforcement Procedure) Rules, 2008 were challenged in Bukenya Church Ambrose against the Attorney-General, Constitutional Petition No. 26, 2010, and were set aside by the Constitutional Court when it held that it was not the role of any other body other than Parliament to make laws except under authority delegated by Parliament under Article 79. In effect, finding that in making Statutory Instrument No. 55 of 2008, which clearly provides for the enforcement of the rights and freedoms under Article 50 of the Constitution, the rules committee usurped the powers of Parliament;

CONCERNED THAT the Judicature Act, Cap 13, under which the statutory instrument was made is not a law for enforcement of rights and freedoms, as it is a law intended to consolidate, revise and take account of the provisions of the Constitution relating to the Judiciary in obedience to Article 150(1) of the Constitution;

CONCERNED FURTHER that in the absence of a law passed under Article 50(4) of the Constitution, there is no legal framework for the enforcement of human rights and freedoms;

RECOGNISING the role of Parliament under Article 79 to make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

Now, THEREFORE, I move that:

1. This House accepts the introduction of a private member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Human Rights (Enforcement) Act, 2015” and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded; justify. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill would be to give effect to Article 50(4) of the Constitution by providing for the procedure of enforcing human rights under Chapter Four of the Constitution and related matters.

Article 50(4) of the Constitution requires Parliament to make laws for the enforcement of the rights and freedoms guaranteed under Chapter Four of the Constitution. However, since 1995 when the Constitution was promulgated, Parliament has not enacted any law under Article 50(4) providing for the enforcement of human rights by all persons, institutions and organs of government.

In order to fill the gap created by the absence of such a law, the rules committee established under Section 40 of the Judicature Act issued the Judicature (Fundamental Rights and Freedoms (Enforcement Procedure) Rules, 2008, Statutory Instrument No.55 of 2008. However, these rules were challenged in Bukenya Church Ambrose vs the Attorney-General, constitutional petition No. 26 of 2010, and were set aside by the Constitutional Court. The Constitutional Court held that it was not the role of any other body other than Parliament to make laws except under authority delegated by Parliament under Article 79.

Since the power to make laws for enforcement of human rights and freedoms in Chapter Four of the Constitution is specifically given to Parliament by the Constitution, in making Statutory Instrument No.55 of 2008, the rules committee usurped the powers of Parliament. The Judicature Act, Cap 13, under which the statutory instrument was made, is not a law for the enforcement of rights. The Bill, therefore, would seek to provide a law on enforcement of human rights as required by Article 50(4) of the Constitution. 

The Bill seeks to provide a framework for the enforcement of human rights and freedoms and also empower the rules committee to make rules in respect of the specific procedural matters relating to the protection of human rights and enforcement of the fundamental rights and freedoms. The rules committee does not have the authority now, but this Bill seeks to give it authority to make such laws.

Madam Speaker, I would beg that this Parliament finds it fit to grant leave to the committee to introduce a Private Member’s Bill to bridge the gap. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Kakoba, the seconder, please use five minutes.

3.59
MR KAKOBA ONYANGO (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. 

I must point out that I am a member of the Committee on Human Rights and at the Pan African Parliament I chair the Committee on Justice and Human Rights. Therefore, in secondment of this motion, I will make comments at two levels, the national level as well as the international level. 

This motion is intended to enforce what we provided for in the Constitution. I think this is proper because much as we have a provision through which people are supposed to be defended on issues of human rights, there is no enforcement mechanism. Therefore, it is very important that we put this in place, and we know very well that it is Parliament that has powers to do this. We believe that once this Bill is passed into an Act, it will help the people whose rights might be abused.

At the international level, Madam Speaker and honourable members, I must point out that the proposed Bill is in line with international instruments on human rights, particularly the African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights and also the protocol to the statute establishing the African Court on Human and Peoples Rights. Under Article 1 of the African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights, state parties commit themselves to recognise human and people’s rights, duties and freedoms. Under the same article, they undertake to adopt legislative measures to make sure that these provisions are put into effect. I believe that this is one of the ways in which we can do that. That is why I support this motion.

However, Madam Speaker, allow me to point out that as I was scanning through, I found out that much as Uganda ratified this instrument in May 1986, we have never domesticated it. That is a lacuna that we need to look at. Related to that, this Bill will also enforce the provisions of the African Court on Human and Peoples Rights. This court is intended to handle issues of human rights. However, another lacuna that I have noted in respect to Uganda is that under Article 5, the accessibility to this court is limited; it is only state parties, the African Union Commission -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now going into the merits of the proposed law.

MR KAKOBA: I am trying to build a preamble.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, the rules are clear; what you want is leave. You might go into the merits and people start opposing you here.

MR KAKOBA: Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I want to say that we do believe that this instrument is very important in implementing the provisions of the Constitution locally in Uganda. It will also be very important in enforcing the international instruments that Uganda is a party to. I support the motion. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion is seeking for leave. The debate will follow when they come for the first reading. Is there any objection to this leave?

4.03
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights for this initiative. No wonder she is the chairperson of the committee. Accordingly, I thank the members of the committee with whom she works.

I just would like to inform the House that there are many initiatives of this nature which have been going on, particularly in the Uganda Law Reform Commission. A lot of work has actually been done by the Uganda Law Reform Commission, particularly on revisions of certain laws which have been declared unconstitutional. We were actually thinking in terms of having an Omnibus Bill that we would bring to Parliament and ensure that every Act of Parliament is constitutional. 

In that particular regard, I have looked at the statutory instrument, which was nullified by the Constitutional Court, which was made by the rules committee chaired by the Chief Justice. I agree with the chairperson, hon. Jovah Kamateeka, that this private member’s Bill will address those areas that even the rules committee itself wanted to put in place. Therefore, in supporting her, I would like to encourage her to work with us, particularly enjoined by the necessary constitutional provision, Article 94(4) of the Constitution.  I encourage her to work closely with us, the Attorney-General’s office, so that whatever comes to the House is not found wanting at a later stage. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.05
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kamateeka for this initiative. 

Madam Speaker, I have a lot of respect for the learned Attorney-General but I sometimes get worried. Over half a year ago, on the Floor of this House, hon. Felix Okot Ogong came up with the Administration of the Judiciary Bill. At that time, we gave hon. Okot Ogong leave to present a private member’s Bill. The learned Attorney-General, who was then the Deputy Attorney-General, requested this House, in the very terms he is suggesting to hon. Kamateeka, that “Please, come work with us; many other institutions of Government had gone ahead, including the Judiciary, with proposals.” The Speaker directed hon. Okot Ogong to work closely with the Attorney-General’s chambers but up to now, that Bill has not seen the light of day. I do hope that the hon. Kamateeka’s initiative does not become a victim like that particular Bill. 

We need to encourage honourable members who have come up with these initiatives because it is a constitutional mandate; it is provided for. We need to assist them to have the proposals legislated into law other than being tied up by government bureaucracies and so on. That is my only worry. Otherwise, I support the motion and I hope the learned Attorney-General, who this time is the substantive Attorney-General, undertakes in this House that he will facilitate hon. Kamateeka’s initiative to have that Bill see the light of day. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my brother, hon. Abdu Katuntu, for that observation. I would like to assure him and the House that the consultation with hon. Felix Okot Ogong was not in vain. As a matter of fact, our advice all along had been that let us have an effective administration of the Judiciary Bill. Had we not taken that route – By wanting to amend the Constitution first, then we would not have had an effective administration of the Judiciary law. 

This is because the powers which we wanted to give the Judiciary Service Commission to appoint, in addition to the Judiciary staff - According to one of the Articles of the Constitution, we wanted the Judiciary Service Commission to be able to appoint, discipline and even remove other support staff within the Judiciary who are core to the Judiciary such as clerks, interpreters, process servers, researchers and even secretaries. We could only achieve that by first amending the Constitution.

I would like to assure the House that Cabinet finished considering the constitutional amendment proposals. As I speak, the Bill is ready for the signature of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I look forward to having this by the close of this week. We were actually working towards a target of the Gazette of Friday because the Gazette normally comes out every Friday. We wanted to put it in the Gazette of Friday so that we can engage the Speaker to see how best we can actually bring it here to be moved for the first reading and be considered for discussion by the relevant committee. Otherwise, that consultation was not in vain.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to protect the right of private Members to bring their Bills here. I just want to re-state the provision of rules 111 and 112: 

“111. Procedure for Private Members’ Bills 
(1) A Private Members’ Bill shall be introduced first by way of motion to which shall be attached the proposed draft of the Bill. 

(2) If the motion is carried, the printing and publication of the Bill in the Gazette shall be the responsibility of the Clerk. 

(3) Following the publication of the Bill in the Gazette, the progress of the Bill shall be the same as that followed in respect of a Government Bill.”

I do not want to stop hon. Kamateeka from working with the Attorney-General but she is protected within our Rules of Procedure to proceed with our Bill because I have given you leave. I now put the question that this House gives leave to hon. Kamateeka to move a private members’ Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you and the House. I want to give assurance to both the Attorney-General and the House that we shall work together so that the resultant Bill that comes to the House is for the benefit of the people of Uganda. I thank you.

DR LULUME BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I am so delighted that hon. Jovah Kamateeka and others have been granted leave to introduce a private members’ Bill and they have been protected by our Rules of Procedure, so that the process can continue.

Madam Speaker, you will remember that in this House I also sought leave of Parliament to table a private members’ Bill. It was in this House that debate ensued and Members of Parliament sought not to grant me permission to have leave. Therefore, I was not protected by our Rules of Procedure.

Madam Speaker, I asked for your indulgence not to take a decision then to vote that I should not introduce a private members’ Bill and it was granted. It is in that vein that I am still curtailed to reintroduce the Bill because I fear it might be voted out and yet it had a lot of substance in it. (Laughter) Are these Rules of Procedure selectively being applied? Could I still be curtailed to ask for leave of Parliament? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, first of all, you are protected and that is why you were able to bring that motion and a debate ensued here. It was not concluded because you asked for time to discuss with the members on the government side before you could come back. I am waiting for you to come back. If leave had been granted, you would be protected in the same way. However, it has not yet been granted. Therefore, discuss with hon. Nankabirwa, the Government Chief Whip, and when both of you are ready, you can come back.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE EDUCATION CENTRE BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received the report of the Bill and we deferred the debate to this afternoon. Let us have contributions on the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013. 

However, before we do that I have been asked to inform you about the death of one of our silverbacks. Maybe, honourable minister, you could inform the members about Rukina as they think about the Bill.

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Akiror): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like, on a sad note, to inform you about the sudden demise of Rukina, one of our dominant male silverback gorillas of the Kyaguliro Research Group in Bwindi.  (Laughter) 

Rukina is suspected to have been struck by lighting and is survived by four females and 10 offspring. He was buried in Ruhija, near the Institute of Tropical Forest Conservation. Lukara, another silverback, has already taken over the family of 21 gorillas. The tourism fraternity shall forever miss Rukina.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you, honourable members. The Bill’s Second Reading.

4.16
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a list of 50 people who were eaten by crocodiles and I have been stuck with that list for four years. I have been to the Uganda Wildlife Authority so many times and they said that they could not give financial assistance to the families because the law does not allow them to. They told me to wait for the Bill. I have looked through this Bill but I do not see any provision where people can be compensated if animals eat their plants and people. 

Madam Speaker -(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKIBIRWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform hon. Majegere that probably the issue he is raising is under a different Bill, which was debated sometime back. We have now embarked on the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013. The issues cannot be handled under this particular item we are debating.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, speak to the Bill, please.

MR MAJEGERE: This Bill actually establishes regional wildlife centres. These centres are going to have animals and these animals can likely go off and eat people and their plants. What I am saying is true. We are not only looking at Entebbe; the Bill is establishing regional wildlife centres. We are not going to keep saucepans in those centres but animals. These animals can go over the fence and eat people and plants in the gardens. 

We need to include that provision here because the other Bill is for the Uganda Wildlife Authority but this one is for the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre. If one Bill could serve both purposes, we would not even need this Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013. We would have one Bill to cater for the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre. 

If we are establishing regional wildlife centres, then we need to also include a provision to ensure people are compensated in case animals go over the fence and eat their plants and people. I thank you.

4.19
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to take time off to thank Government for its dedicated role in conserving wildlife and also for introducing this Bill, which will go a long way in implementing policies that are designed to protect wildlife. It is also my sincere hope that the Bill will lead to the protection of wild plants, animal species and their habitats. 

I also applaud the committee for its proposal to introduce regional wildlife educational and conservation centres. It is my belief that these centres will promote awareness about the need to conserve wildlife nationally. My colleague, hon. Majegere, is invited to benefit from the regional centres that will be established.

Madam Speaker, there are many wildlife species currently that are endangered and are becoming extinct. I believe that through awareness, we can promote wildlife conservation by advocating for a stop in killing of wildlife and trafficking. Whenever I look at the way ivory is being trafficked and the demand for wildlife products, I always get perplexed. I get taken aback when I see forests burning. What runs through my mind is how we can rescue wildlife. 

The regional wildlife education centres will involve young people and the wildlife. I believe that the emphasis in these centres will be about awareness creation, appreciation of the existence of human beings and wildlife, understanding wildlife needs and importance and their relationship with the people and the environment. This is one way of promoting education, training the public and promoting the value of wildlife to all. Once this is achieved, then increased enforcement of wildlife laws needs to be emphasised to ensure compliance. I beg to submit. 

4.22
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the chairperson of the committee, for the report. My emphasis will be on the recommendation by the committee for the ministry to ensure that wildlife education centres are established across the country and particularly for the West Nile region.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will all attest to the fact that every time we host students from across the country in Parliament in the gallery, they do not only visit the Parliament but they also visit the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre in Entebbe. All this comes at a cost. Sometimes as Members, we have to dip our hands into our pockets to see that we facilitate these students to come here. 

Therefore, the idea of the different regions having wildlife education centres is a pleasant one. I would pray that immediately we pass this law, the ministry should endeavour to allocate resources or to plan to have these education centres functional and established. We welcome this particularly for the West Nile region. Arua is ready to host a centre like this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was just going to put the question because I think there is general support. It is a dry Bill. We can debate during the committee stage.

Honourable members, I put the question that the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre Bill, 2013 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE EDUCATION CENTRE BILL, 2013

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, clause 2 is on the objects of the Bill. I believe there is a mix-up with clause 5 because what is written as “Objects of the Bill” are actually functions of the centre; for example, (d) is a function of the centre and not an object of the Bill. Indeed, it is again listed in clause 5 as a function. It is duplicated. 

If you read critically, you will find that there is a mix-up. What ought to be functions of the centre are somewhere written as objects of the Bill and where there are objects of the Bill they are written as functions of the centre. Read it in tandem with clause 5. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what is your problem? Do you want to delete? What do you propose? 

MR KWEMARA: I propose that clause 2 (d) is shifted to the functions of the centre equally with (g) and (h). Those are functions not objects of the Bill.

MS AKIROR: Madam Chairperson, we concede. We can move them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do we move them to clause 5? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall consider clause 3 last. Let us go to clause 4.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to be sure that my concern is handled. I am not objecting to the regional wildlife centres but my concern is compensation. Recently, during the passing of the Bill for the Uganda Wildlife Authority, they made that mistake. The Uganda Wildlife Authority is now in a dilemma. I would like my fear to be addressed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want it to come under clause 2 as an objective? 

MR MAJEGERE: I do not mind whatever clause as long as my fear is addressed. (Laughter)

MS AKIROR: Madam Chairperson and honourable colleague, the issue of wildlife compensation will be handled under the Uganda Wildlife (Amendment) Bill, which is at the First Parliamentary Council. Therefore, honourable member, I humbly request you to be patient and look at the Uganda Wildlife (Amendment) Bill. I would like to reassure you that your concern will be catered for. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any harm if we include it here?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think this one is basically dealing with conservation and education. I would concur with the minister that we handle the compensation under the Wildlife Act, which has a broader spectrum in terms of management of wildlife. This one is about conserving particular species. 

Honestly, about the fears as put forward by hon. Majegere, I have not heard of any situation under the Entebbe Zoo where we have had wildlife escape and harm anybody. All those incidences you have heard where wildlife has harmed somebody have been under the conserved areas under the Uganda Wildlife Authority.


MR MAJEGERE: Mr Chairperson, let us debate as we look ahead even for the future. I have just given you an example; I have lost over 50 people, eaten by animals and with animals you cannot predict their behaviour; it is very difficult. If we are going to have –(Interruption) 

MR KAMARA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Majegere is worried because of the crocodiles. I would like to give him information that this one is the Uganda Wild Life Education Centre Bill; there is also another Bill, which will come and that is the UWA Act. This question also came in the committee and we found out that the Constitution will be handled under the UWA Act.

You clearly know that the UWA Act has been in existence for so long and this provision was not included but with these education centres, these are the likes of the zoos of Entebbe and others. Meanwhile, the complication hon. Majegere is alarmed with – I understand must be handled under the UWA Act. Those are two separate Bills and I believe they will be handled very well. I thank you.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, as you gestured loudly, even in law from the case of Raylands Vs Fletcher, if you bring something in a particular area and it causes more problems to the people in that particular area - I we could have caused another endanger to the species in that area. 


 We should kindly find a way of accommodating the concerns of hon. Majegere in this Bill because from nowhere, an education centre is going to be created in the middle of nowhere with lions, crocodiles, among others. Therefore, in the unlikely event that they escape to the outside environment, probably towards the end we could put a clause on a duty on care on the officials to ensure that the animals do not escape and in the event that they escape, the people affected should be directly compensated. It would not cause much trouble. I would like to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to clause 2(d) which provides for promoting the rescue, rehabilitation and release of wild life. I do not know whether that does not worry you. If you are to arrest, where do you arrest from? Which is the vicinity? Where are you releasing to? I think let us try and find a way of accommodating all these variables. This centre will be in a community.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Let me start by thanking the Ministry of Tourism and Wild life. As we speak, one of the dangerous crocodiles that have been tormenting my people has been captured and  it is going to be relocated to one of the education centres that we are talking of. I therefore do not want to agree with chairperson of the committee that these animals are going to be confined. Even in confinement, we must protect our people. They can break a fence and in the process harm our people. We have seen so many cases where tourists have been attacked by animals. I therefore do not want to agree that that can come in the other law. I feel that it is better we put it in this law and we protect our people.

Whereas hon. Majegere says that he has lost 50 people, my number is coming to 200 people. Many people have been eaten by these animals and there is need – I even raised it here to the Prime Minister just in passing and he said that we should have reported, as leaders, from such areas. I think this is the time.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to propose something; suppose we make a provision to include here a clause saying that compensation will be as provided for under the Wildlife Authority Act. We can put it here and also ensure that it is in the other law. Is there no Wildlife Authority Act?

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, whereas your counsel could help us, we need to look beyond the destruction that these animals in confinement can cause to the community when they escape. In this House, we have got members who are veterinary doctors by qualification. You know how dangerous the urine of a lion is to a dog. This means that when these lions urinate wherever they are confined, the dogs within the vicinity will smell the urine and become impotent; they will never act, they will never perform as dogs, and they will never bark –(Laughter)- veterinary doctors here can help me with that. How do you address that? 

You have got your dog which is supposed to alert you in case of wrong elements coming but because they have sniffed the urine of a lion, they go into hiding, day and night. How will you address that?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us try to find a solution to the concern raised by hon. Majegere. How do we secure the population besides having an education centre?

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with hon. Majegere. Here, we are looking at a situation where we anticipate animals to escape and go outside. However, there is also another perspective; these are centres, these are zoos, people go there to watch them. Suppose by mistake an animal escaped within the zoo and hurt the person who has gone to watch, what happens? We therefore need to make provisions for all those eventualities and that is why I support hon. Majegere that there should be a provision for compensation.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Chairperson, in the unlikely event that any harm is caused to the visitors who would go to these wildlife education centres - like they come to Entebbe in the zoo - is it what everybody here is concerned with. We accept that we must put a provision that will protect and ensure – I would like to request that a few people help us to draft that provision so that we ably find out where we can fit it. 
This will ensure that we are all safe. This is what I suggest; otherwise drafting is very difficult. All of us cannot draft. Maybe the Attorney-General and the chairperson or somebody else can help us draft a clause that will save us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us stand over that provision and go to clause 4. Let us ask the Attorney-General and the chairperson to cook something in their heads.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the way I see this Bill, it deals primarily with the establishment of the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre. The emphasis is on education. By the way, even putting a paragraph like 2(d) and (g), in my view, was a bit superfluous but what we are talking about here is the establishment of an education centre. If you bring in issues of compensation, who will be responsible for the compensation? Is it the education centre to compensate? 

Yes, it will be a body corporate; it can sue and be sued. Maybe if you want to say that, for example, in relation to (g) where they promote the rescue, rehabilitation and release of  wildlife. It would therefore be better if they said that the wildlife that has been rescued, rehabilitated and released causes danger - I think that can make sense. However, issues of compensation as such should be handled in the Uganda Wildlife Act. If you look at the Objects of this Bill; “to establish the Uganda Wildlife Education Centres…” -(Interjection)

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support hon. Majegere. Even domestic animals at times attack their masters. These animals that we are going to keep in the education centres in different regions, who knows; they can sneak out of the education centres and attack the public. We must put in the law. If we say that we are going to put in UWA, it does not help us in this Bill. I do not see any problem why we cannot include it because these are animals and an animal can sneak out from the education centre, cause havoc and attack a person. Even these children who go to visit these education centres can be attacked. Why don’t we put it in there; that in case this happens, the education centre must compensate those victims?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, on that note, I concede that we can get somewhere under (g) to provide for compensation in case any animals which are rescued, rehabilitated and released cause harm. These are animals from the centre and not the wildlife in general -(Interjection)- if we are talking about the animals released by the centre, then I concede. We should provide for that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, we need to find a home for it. It will not be under objectives. Let us stand over it while you design the home and the wording. Hon. Carter Anywarach, can you, together with the minister and hon. Mulimba help us to design that provision? Let us stand over it. We have asked the Attorney–General, the honourable chairperson and hon. Anywarach to work out a provision.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to. 

Clause 5

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you have an amendment?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, under clause 5, we suggest to insert a new paragraph (j) to provide as follows: “To collaborate with other institutions in the execution of the mandate of the centre”. The justification is to mandate the institute to collaborate with other institutions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a proposal on clause 5. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed. Is there another amendment?

MR KWEMARA: Yes, Madam Chairperson. The issues we raised in clause 2 lead to consequential amendments of clause 5 because we pointed out that what was written as objects of the Act are actually functions of the centre. Equally, I have a problem with 5(e),(f) and (g) in the wording “to provide for rescue, to provide for wildlife breeding, to provide for…”- it is as if the wording was meant for the objects of the Bill. I suggest we amend the wording so that they qualify to be functions of the centre.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your exact proposal? What do you want to delete and what do you want to add?

MR KWEMARA: One, as the consequential amendment because we proposed that it should be moved from clause 2 to clause 5 and that was (d), (g) and (h); those are functions. When you come to clause 5, the wording of (e), (f) and (g) begins with “to provide for…” To me, it sounds better if they were objects of the Bill but we need better verbs other than “to provide for.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which ones? Give us the words if you have something better. Honourable member, where are the offending words so that we can remove them? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed. 

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, in 5(e). I would omit “to provide for” and say, to rescue, rehabilitate and release wildlife species. Then, “to breed with a focus on rare, endangered and endemic species, as well as for commercial purposes to stock and restock indigenous and exotic wild life species.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any objections to that? What the honourable member does not want is the word “provide.” He says he would like to say, “To rescue, rehabilitate and release wildlife species…” I think that is okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed, first by the chairperson and then by hon. Kwemara.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR ODONGO-OTTO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 6, they say, “The Minister may, in writing, give policy directives to the Board and the Board shall comply with the directive.” yet earlier, we said the Board is a body corporate. Why are we compelling the Board to comply mandatory with any directive of the minister whether it is ultravires or not?

I am of the opinion that the minister may, in writing, give policy directive to the Board and the Board may comply with the directive because the power of appointing is already with the minister. You may want to tell them what to do and if they cannot do what you want them to do then you appoint another person. Suppose you are wrong in your directive? Would you want them to continue because it is in the law?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank hon. Odonga- Otto for the innovativeness for the clause in respect of the policy. It is not about the operations of the Board but the policy direction because Government may have a policy as far as wildlife is concerned and once they give the policy that is the direction the Board must take. However, other affairs of the Board, it will be autonomous and it will operate the way they want. That is how I understand this clause.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I understand. In the circumstance, we then add the word “”policy” before the word “directive” so that we say the Board shall comply with the policy directive because there can be a distinction between a normal directive and policy directive. Just for emphasis.

MR RUKUTANA: Well, it is harmless but superfluous because we have already said we shall give policy directives. If we say, “with the directives” we mean the policy directives.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to redraft clause 7 as follows: 

(1) There is an established board of directives, which shall be the governing board of the centre. 

(2) The board shall be appointed by the minister and shall consist of:
(a) Chairperson 
(b) Vice Chairperson
(c) Representatives of local governments association
(d) A representative of the Uganda Wildlife Authority
(e) A representative of the ministry responsible for wildlife
(f) A representative of the ministry responsible for finance
(g) Three persons appointed by the minister from the Public or    Private sector
(h) The Executive Director who shall be an ex-officio, and     non- voting member.

(3) The Executive Director shall be the secretary to the board.

(4) The chairperson and the vice chairperson shall be designated from among the members appointed under paragraph (d) of sub section 2.

(5) The vice chairperson shall deputise the chairperson.

(6) The minister shall appoint the chairperson and members of the board at least three months before the end of the term of office of the incumbent chairperson and members of the board.

The justification is to empower the minister to appoint the board, its chairperson, vice chairperson and members basing on their suitability and designate secretary to the board.

MS LANYERO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In 2(g), “Three people appointed by the minister from the public or private sector...” I thought I would be better if we put it as three persons appointed by the minister from the public and private sectors so that the minister can be obliged to appoint from both sectors. If we leave it like that, the minister can just appoint from the public and then there will be nobody from the private sector, considering the wording.  I also wonder why it is in quotation marks. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, from the public sector, you have the local government association, there is UWA, someone from the ministry and another from finance. Do you still need people from the public sector to add to all these? Wouldn’t you just go with the private sector?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, that was a debate which ensued in the committee but we felt like since we are going to have these education centres for the first time in different places and also looking at the function, we wanted to give wider latitude for the minister to select from; given the stability of these members as proposed, either from the public or the private sector, whichever is applicable.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have two observations to make on this board. One, you have a representative of the ministry responsible for wildlife and you have a representative of the Ugandan Wildlife Authority. The Uganda Wildlife Authority is an entity under the ministry responsible for wildlife. What is the intention of the committee by putting two representatives on the board, who represent similar interests?

My proposal is that since we have a ministry responsible for wildlife; let us delete “Uganda Wildlife Authority -(Interjection)- you are saying no but we recently concluded a Bill on the tourism and hospitality training institute and we deleted “wildlife authority” and we maintained Ministry of Tourism.

Secondly, on the three people appointed from the public or private sector, since we have all other representatives coming from the public sector, let us leave this space and restrict it to people from the private sector to provide for a balance. When you say “or” it means the minister can still bring in people from the public sector and you find private sector eliminated completely. Thank you.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This centre is small; we do not need to have a big board. I agree with the chairperson on (g) about the three persons. According to the justification given by the chairperson, it is not the board which is going to do the management. The chairperson says that since we are going to have regional centres, we need these people. It is not the board to do the management; we can do away with (g).

Secondly, we can either remain with 2(a) and (b) and delete 4, or delete (a) and (b) and remain with 4. If you look at No.4, it says, “The chairperson and vice chairperson shall be designated from among the members appointed…….” However, they have already listed the chairperson and even the vice chairperson. I suggest that if we are to leave No.4, then we should delete 2(a) and 2(b) because it is already provided for in No.4. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What they meant was that the chairperson and the vice chairperson should not come from the government representatives. They should not come from local government, UWA, the ministry responsible for wildlife or the ministry of finance; that is what they had in mind.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like you to add No.5 - that is section 5 - to say, at least one third of the board should be women. In wildlife, we also need to be represented that is a constitutional matter and we should be represented everywhere. I thank you.

MR KABAJO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. On the issue of representation of local government associations, I request that we change that to the local government of the area where the centre is located. If you leave it as it is now, you may have officials based in Kampala on the local government association being on boards of wildlife education centres from other places. 

Normally, the local area where the centre is has got specific interest and that is why in the Wildlife Authority Act, they are now providing some of the tourism revenue from the centre for example, Kidepo National Park or other centres like Murchison Falls Park; some of the revenue they collect is given to the local government.  Therefore, I propose that a representative of the local government where the education centre is, should take this position and not -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, if we are going to have five centres, are we going to have five boards so that my board in Iganga can qualify, then the one in Kisoro can also qualify?  

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, in that case, at least the person should be a representative of a local government and not necessarily the association. 

I would like to make another proposal. On the issue of representation from the Uganda Wildlife Authority, that is correct because when the animals are rehabilitated, they have to be released back into the protected areas which are under the Uganda Wildlife Authority.

So having the Uganda Wildlife Authority and the ministry, I think the ministry acts at a much higher level. I do not see any reason why you cannot have both the ministry and the Uganda Wildlife Authority being represented. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Those were my main observations.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose an amendment from section 7(6) by adding that the minister shall appoint the chairperson and members of the board at least three months before the end of the term of office of the incumbent chairperson and members of the Board, which appointment shall take effect upon the assumption of the office.

The justification is that if the appointment is to take three months before, that means that upon appointment, these people may claim salary or enumeration as a result of that appointment because we have also seen here ambassadors being appointed and they are just loitering in Kampala. They say we are ambassadors from China etcetera and they are being paid. Therefore, we want to avoid that situation.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I have three amendments; I 10 members of the Board is too huge. I would move this way:

    1. We do away with the representative from the Uganda Wildlife Authority and we will be left with nine –(Interjection)- There is a ministry responsible for wildlife already here. We either do away with a representative of the Uganda Wildlife Authority or with the representative from the ministry responsible for wildlife.

    2. We do away with a representative from the ministry for finance. We do not need it here. How do I achieve - my point is at least we come to seven. Therefore, in the three persons under paragraph (g) let us have two persons appointed by the minister from the private sector. However, the private sector should be defined. If we are talking of professional bodies, they should be defined clearly here so that we do not just hand pick on any of our relatives, friends and so forth and bring on the board.

    3. The other one is under section 4. I am not sure I get the writing clearly. I will disagree with hon. Majegere when he says that we should not provide for chairperson and vice chairperson, (a) and (b) there is to provide for a legally, structurally present position. Therefore, the problem now is with (4), the chairperson and vice chairperson shall be designated from among the members appointed under paragraph (b) of subsection two.

I am looking at the paragraph which provides where to get the members from; the chairperson and vice chairperson should have been in paragraph (g). I am not seeing the (b) because it is talking about the vice chairperson up there; unless otherwise I am not seeing it clearly. I beg to move. Thank you, very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before the chairperson comes in, I would like you to join me in welcoming the children from Mayuge Child Development Centre, represented by hon. Idi Isabirye and hon. Nakadama. They are the ones up there –(Applause)– you are welcome.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank all those who have proposed amendments. I would, however, like to reiterate that (a) and (b) like it was clarified by you, Madam Chairperson, should be maintained; (d) and (e) for those who are proposing to merge them; we shall be fusing between policy and management.

The distinction between the two is that the Uganda Wildlife Centre is for management and the ministry is for policy and therefore, both of them should stay. The other, as proposed by hon. Baba Diri, we concede after all it is constitutional. We provide for at least one third of the Board members to be women. Also as proposed by hon. Mwiru, that is the same spirit under which we provided for this. It does no harm if we provide for the appointment taking effect upon commencement of office. I concede with that. 

Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with members proposing deletion. However, in our interface with the ministries of Tourism and Finance, in many cases ministries have had a problem. If you do not have Finance which is the giver of this money in many cases sitting –(Interjection)- just hold on. I would have no problem if we deleted Finance but that was the justification which was moved.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us ask the minister; was Finance your proposal or the minister’s proposal? We would like to understand the rationale for the Finance person being on the board.

MS AKIROR: Madam Chairperson, the person from the Ministry of Finance was our proposal and the committee also adopted it. However, the members are not 10. They are only eight and then the Executive Director is an ex-officio so that we have seven members.

MS EKWAU: Madam Chairperson, in fact I would applaud the issue of having the Ministry of Finance - if it has been dropped and there is already concession that would be good. Having the Ministry of Finance as the financial basket, means all these other bodies are going to say that the Ministry of Finance should be represented in all the boards in this country.

I think it is the practice that the drafters of Bills that come to this House should never even dream of - even for an instance because we have had problems with Ministry of Finance already in many cases. Therefore, having them represented in boards would be the worst precedence ever. I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, currently the Board members are 10. However, if you critically look at No. 4, it leaves the number at eight because No. 4 reads: “The chairperson and vice chairperson shall be designated from among the members….” - those members who are already listed there without the chairperson and the vice chairperson.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know why this is creating confusion; the substantive members are actually seven plus the Executive Director who is an ex-officio who is the eighth. They are seven because there are three persons appointed by the minister representing the Ministry of Finance and that makes it 4: a representative from the Ministry of Wildlife to make 5; a representative of the Uganda Wildlife Authority to make 6; and a representative of Local government and that is 7. I do not know where honourable members are getting 10; they are seven substantive members and one ex-officio member.

Sub-clause (4) states that the chairperson and vice chairperson shall be designated from among the members appointed under paragraph - only that it is not (b); I think they meant (g) of subsection 2.
Having a board of seven members, which includes an ex-officio member as the eighth is not a big problem. (Interjection) No, even when you maintain a representative for Finance, they remain seven substantive members plus an ex-officio.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, experience is the best teacher. As hon. Ibi Ekwau said, if you want to know where problems are coming from in Uganda here, it is the Ministry of Finance -(Laughter)- I am an Anglican and I was baptised and I want to be honest with myself.

Madam Chairperson, I would not want to see anybody from the Ministry of Finance being on this board because these fellows are dangerous money eaters. Everywhere they have gone, they have caused us problems. I want us to remove to these guys so that we can have the chairperson and vice-chairperson and somebody from the Wildlife Authority and the public sector but from Finance, I am not very comfortable with them.

Honestly, they have hurt us on several occasions. I thank you very much and I want my colleagues to support me on this one and I am being honest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should look at this rationally. There must be reasons why the Finance people are there; they could be advising on taxation and revenue policy.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the committee. We decided that Finance should be included in the board because of many reasons. First, their role in this institution is very important. When we look at investments because the institution will be collecting funds and they might have excess funds which maybe –(Interjections)- can you listen to what I am saying; I think listening is very important.

We decided as a committee, when you look at the remuneration of the board members it provides that: “The members of the board shall be paid remuneration determined by the minister in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance”. When it comes to the investment of the money, any money to be invested must get permission from the Ministry of Finance - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The work of the Ministry of Finance, irrespective of whether they are on the board or not, is to dispense money. This is blackmail; they always want to have somebody from Finance on the boards. Their work is to dispense money and this Parliament appropriates and we will tell them to send money so there is no need on such a small board to have a member from the Ministry of Finance. I do not support and agree that we should have somebody from the Ministry of Finance.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I will agree with members who are saying that we should not put a member from Finance here because, first of all, we shall be appropriating money for this centre.

Secondly, the activities are going to be budgeted for and if a finance representative on the board influences a decision, he will go back and then implement it as a finance activity; that is what we call conflict of interest because if it is bound by the decision, this will not deny it even if it is good or bad - (Applause)- so, we rather keep it away.

Secondly, even section 19 on what my honourable colleague was talking about of the investment surplus fund; in the Public Finance Management Act, we said all the monies should be collected and put at the Treasury. Therefore, there will be no need in even investing money that the Board should use the money to be invested as tax revenue.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us proceed by way of elimination. First, I put the question that the clause be amended, as proposed by hon. Baba diri.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the clause be amended by deleting sub-clause 2 (f).

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Under (g), I do not know whether we are dealing with 2 or 3; there was a proposal to reduce the number to two rather than three under 2(g).

MR MUSASIZI: I propose that we remove “private sector” and maintain “three representatives from the private sector.”

MR ONYANGO: Madam Chairperson, on the same, the honourable member for Pader suggested that we should qualify what the private sector is to avoid situations where someone can put there anyone. In that view, I suggest that we link it to those related to the area of tourism or wildlife conservation.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to move an amendment that instead of saying the chairperson and vice chairperson should come from the members designated; we should say that the board should consist of a chairperson and vice-chairperson appointed by the minister and then these other members so that there is clarity.

The members appointed are from the private sector. The reason I am proposing this is that if the minister is given leeway to appoint, then he can appoint from the public or private sector but have a chairperson who he thinks is suitable for the job. No; he does not appoint from among these but appoints somebody who is suitable - any Ugandan - who is suitable to be chairperson of this board and then have representatives from the Wildlife Authority, the ministry responsible for Wildlife and then the people from the private sector. I beg to propose.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I have no problem with deleting under (g) “public” to leave “private”. I would like to concede. Others as, proposed by hon. Kamateeka, I think let her read from clause 2. If you look at clause 2, “The board shall be appointed by the minister and shall consist of…” we wanted to put clarity on the structure and we are saying, consists of the following representatives; then the minister should appoint from among those. We are deleting private. I think that one provides for clarity.

As proposed by hon. Onyango, I want to concede and say we put “private sector with knowledge” or aligned with the tourism sector or industry and we leave it as such. 

MS KAMATEEKA: I thank you, chairperson. If you say that “board shall be appointed by the minister” who I suppose is just a rubber-stamp, then, who is nominating these members? – (Interjections) no, who is selecting these people to have them on the board so that the minister can appoint? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: The minister.

MS KAMATEEKA: I am not satisfied with the explanation and so, can I get one, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that the minister has responsibility to procure and I am sure that he or she will write to individuals and ask if they know anybody who is good at tourism, hotel management or something like that and the names will be proposed. (Members rose_)Honourable members, we really need to conclude. Hon. Nzoghu -

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like the chairperson to qualify this (b) because he is saying “a representative of the veterinary scientists.” This needs to be qualified because the subsequent, you could say “Local Government Association”, “Uganda Wildlife Authority.” So, is it Veterinary Scientists Association? What are you referring to?

The other aspect I would need clarity on is the representative of the Local Government Association could also be qualified further. There are, for example, those from the major wildlife protection areas and it would have been fair to qualify it in that perspective –(Interjections)- yes. So, if the chairperson should shade light on that.  

MR MULIMBA: I think hon. Nzoghu is operating backwards. We have already passed that provision of the Local Government Association. We said we are not going to have as many Local Government Associations as there are wildlife education centres. And above all, we have only one Local Government Association combining all associations and so, we shall have a representative from that association.

On the one of (d), we deleted the one of veterinary scientists and provided for a representative from Uganda Wildlife Authority because the authority, which has the mandate of conservation and protection, has the expertise and also hosts veterinary doctors and people with the necessary and requisite qualifications. That is why we deleted it.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the normal practice is that when we have a board, it should be an odd number. Now, we are going to have a board, if we do away with the Minister of Finance, we will have a board of six members from their explanation. 

Therefore, I propose that as we eliminate the Minister of Finance, we insert a representative from the Ministry of Education. My justification is that the Ministry of Education works with many institutes – and this is an education institute. When it comes to upgrading curriculum and other issues, they will be useful. 

That said and done, I will disagree with hon. Kamateeka on this grounds and I pray that Members can understand my direction of reasoning. If we have a board, which seemingly from the beginning is composed of members from different institutions, which may result into giving us very technical people from for example, the Ministry of Education or the wildlife authority – these are technocrats. 

It will, therefore, be dangerous to leave the minister to pick from among those technocrats who should be the chairperson and the vice-chairperson. I am in agreement with the committee’s amendment that whoever will be the chairperson or vice-chairperson must come from the private sector so that we do not end up with a situation where the chairperson and vice-chairperson are appointed from the technical wing and public institutions that we have named. They should strictly be from the private sector as amended by the committee. I thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like an answer as to whether in (g) we are retaining the three or two people.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Three.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We go with the three. Okay, honourable members, I now put the question that clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR MULIMBA: I propose to amend clause 9(e) by inserting the phrase, “wildlife conservation” between the word “promote” and “education” and also deleting the word “training” appearing in line one. It should be redrafted to read, (e)”to promote wildlife conservation, education and public awareness of wildlife existing in the centre.”

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chair, for purposes of clarity, to include “public awareness of wildlife existing in the centre” is a bit restricted. I wish to suggest that the sub-clause reads, “To promote wildlife conservation, education and training in Uganda.” This is simply because I would like to draw the chairperson and committee members to the memorandum and also to draw them to clause 5. 

When you go to the memorandum, they say that “to provide for promotion, conservation ……….of wildlife resources through wildlife conservation, education and wildlife breeding and other related matters.” Then when you come to clause 5 (a), the say “to conduct and manage conservation, education in Uganda.” So, when you just say, “public awareness of wildlife existing in the centre”, someone may interpret it in a very restrictive way. For clarity, let us say “in Uganda.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any objection?  We are supposed to market Uganda. Do you have an objection to that? 

MR MULIMBA: I have no objection to that. I only had another amendment, which is on a subsequent page in paragraph (g) by substituting the entire paragraph with the following, (g)”to appoint, remunerate and discipline all staff of the centre.” The justification is to be as clear as possible. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR MULIMBA: On clause 10, we propose to amend clause 10(1) by substituting the word “may” for the word “shall” on line two. And also by substituting the phrase “only one consecutive” for the phrase “one more” in line three to be redrafted as, “A member of the board other than the Executive Director may hold office for four years and he is eligible for reappointment for only one consecutive term.” The justification is that we wanted to have clarity.

The other is sub clause 3, by inserting a new paragraph (g) as follows: (g) “failure to declare a conflict of interest in the execution of his or her duties.” The justification is to require disclosure of conflict of interest by members of the board. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I want to disagree with the chairperson on this word “may”. Madam Chairperson, you are a lawyer. The word “may” means that even “may not” is accommodated in this word. The chairperson is trying to remove the word “shall” so that he can give these board members chance to stay there. It says that “the executive director may hold office for four years…..” which means he may not. I wanted us to say that, “shall hold office for four years and is eligible for reappointment for one more term” and we finish. I want it to remain as it is.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Best practices require that members of the board or the tenure of the board should be three years. I propose that we reduce the tenure of the board from four to three years.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is that practice coming from?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, for the purpose of substituting the word “may” for “shall”  - we know that a member appointed may opt out or resign along the way in the four years. If you use the word “shall” that means that you are conscripting that member to stay there for all the entire time. That is the reason we used “may”. 

The proposal about best practices, I do not know one but the reason behind proposing four years is that a member who has been appointed for four years, he will have sufficient time to grasp, internalise and be able to do whatever you are supposed to do. (Interjections) I do not concede to three years. I still maintain that we keep four.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, I do not know where that corporate practice is from. We are here for five years; now, we are saying it is acceptable corporate practice.

MS AMODING: Madam Chairperson, the issue of the tenure is not something that we should restrict because we know of many other boards that stretch beyond three years; they actually go up to seven years. I would rather suggest we maintain the proposal as it is, that is the four years. There is no harm with it. My issue on the use of “may” which the chairperson is insisting that we should change. His issue is already addressed in the subsequent clause, clause 2; “a member of the board may resign at any time” and then clause 3, he can as well  be removed from office by the minister.

The issue of “shall” is more appropriate because you also do not want to leave these members vulnerable to any person especially to the minister. The minister can remove this person anytime even after serving one or two years. Therefore, in terms of protecting members of this board we should maintain it the way it is. However, they are provided for in the subsequent clauses. Mr Chairperson, your proposal collapses because it is catered for here.

MR MWIRU: My understanding is that “shall” is qualified in (2), whereas it is “shall” but it as if it is “may” for one reason; it is qualified in (2) where they are saying “a member may resign.”

For proper drafting, I want to agree with the committee that “may” is okay. When it comes to the issue of time, the way these boards are managed, it is not like a job. I know in Uganda, we are used to being on these boards as a job but under corporate governance, you must go there to add value and if you cannot add value, we cannot bear you for four years; actually, within three years you must show that you are a performer.

If you cannot perform we should cut your term short for three years such that you get another person. The issue of learning, being raised by the chair of the committee, we do not appoint people to learn of these boards. I appreciate the way we appoint people on our boards, they are people of impeccable integrity and demonstrated experience in matters on this nature.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, something we need to concern ourselves with is the mandatory command of “shall” and “may”. The question is; are we trying to define how long an officer irrespective whether it is Joshua known by name or not, he should be in office then I disagree with those who say we should use “may”; it should be “shall”. It is defining the upper most limits. However that is the general rule, it will be four years, if you want to resign or step out we are giving provisions in other clauses.

My other issue is how can we have a board for four years? We have been on boards in this country although at minimal level, somebody said for two years and maximum three years. The reason is that the board determines how the organisational performance should be measured. If their level of determining this performance is corrupted within the second year or third year it should not be promoted to fourth or fifth year to detriment of the organisation or the institute. I would think that three years is really good enough.   Thank you very much.

MR MULIMBA: May be, your question will determine but it may not be learning as in grasping but acquainting with himself with the dynamics in order to value. It is not learning the concept but acquainting yourself with dynamics in the environment. We felt that four years is good. I don’t want to concede on this but may be your question will solve the matter.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, unless there is some other sound reason other than saying best practices. Best practices, you do not know why in other places they recommend one year, two years or three years. Probably if we had benefited more we would see that the board is not a permanent employment. The rationale for us to restrict it to three years, you can fire any board member in that time for incompetence, misbehaviour. There are checks and balances.

We have boards which are more than four years; we have boards for five years; commissions for seven years. Electoral Commission goes for how many years? Seven years. Madam chair, this is from information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: And human rights.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, if this is put to vote, this is being selfish to ourselves, that we as Members of Parliament, for some reason, are saying “it should be three years.” We are about to say “three months”, I hope it will not be for one day. I want the Member who is suggesting three years to tell me that we are in breach of some statutory Act in this so that I can concede. However, for this, I would invite Members to support this as it is.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The argument for three years is based on the reasoning that we do not want to promote inefficiency where people are there and not performing but you leave them there. I am saying this because sometimes, boards in corporate organisations are given two or three years and they have to work to deliver within a short period of time other than thinking that there is so much time there and you are not doing much. However, if the House believes in Government where boards are not so much efficient, then we can go with four years.

Madam Chairperson, on the tenure of office of the board, the chairperson should know that we should give the board legitimacy by using the word “shall” so that they have confidence in their work. Not discretionary, you may do four years. Then if you want to resign, clause 2 is saying, “you may resign”. Then clause 3, is giving reasons under which you can be removed because of misbehaviour or misconduct or if you take conflict of interest or incompetence, then the minister will take action. 

So let us use the word “shall” there then the rest; clause 3 and 4, will deal with how a member can exit from the board so that they have confidence in the work other than saying “may”. The whole thing will look unserious.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR KATWIREMU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have been a chief executive under a board and also been on boards in big organisations like National Water, Micro Finance and so forth.
I would go for three years. Why? Because you want a board for vibrancy; two, you do not want members of the board to over stay and almost become part of management. 

Therefore, it is normally safer to have a short period for vibrancy and change the thinking of the boards because you need to direct the development of the organisation. But to have four years, if you have two terms, you are talking about eight years for a member being on a board or if you give five years, you are giving 10 years to a member in an organisation. You will not create vibrancy if you make board members overstay.

MR MUTENDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In considering the duration of the tenure of the board, I would like us to look at relatively unique functions of this centre. 
We can look at many other organisations, which make decisions that have relatively short term impact and for which you can see quick results. If you are talking about, like my brother talking about National Water, you can quickly say, “in two years’ time we will have extended water coverage to so much and you achieve it” as long as resources are available. 

However, we are looking at an institution, if you just look at its functions, you are talking about conservation. We are looking at eco-system.

The people we have chosen to be on this board, if you look at the quality of the members, for example under clause 7(3) when it says: “The members of the board shall be persons of high moral character, proven integrity….”. (Interjections) You cannot expect to get people of this kind of character, put them on such a board and then say, “in only three years, we should have seen restoration of the eco-system”, if there has been destruction, “we should have been able to see that conservation has been achieved” and all that. This is not a board which is going to expect quick results. (Interjections) Please, let me complete. 

 If you look at other institutions, I like the way the Member raised on the issue of bringing someone from education on this board. Look at institutions of higher learning; go to university councils, for example, they have five years and that is when you can actually achieve results and begin evaluating the performance. Therefore, I suggest that we retain the four years.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also disagree with the chairperson of the committee. When you look at the composition of the members of the board, they all have experience and expertise. You cannot tell me that these people are going to learn on the job so that we give them more time. (Applause) They have the expertise, so, they need three years at most.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can we go for three years? [Honourable Members: “Yes.”]I have been thinking that permanent secretaries are also three years.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, if the wider opinion is for three years, we concede. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.)
 
Clause 11

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, you cannot go to clause 11 when I have an issue with sub-clause 3. Madam Chairperson, when you look at clause 7(4), they are saying, “The minister shall, in consultation with the relevant bodies, appoint the members of the board and shall in so doing insure that there is balance of skills, experience and gender.” But when you come to clause 10(3) they are saying, “the minister may, at any time, remove a member of the board except the executive director from office for…..” the listed aspects.

I am looking at this scenario as a contradiction of clause 7 (iv) because we shall be having members of board very vulnerable to the decisions of the minister. I suggest that we would have it as sub sequentially amended to say that “the minster in consultation with the relevant bodies” - (Interjections)- Yes, we are saying, “the minister shall, in consultation with the relevant bodies, appoint the members of the board.” And so, when you are removing a member from the board, it would be prudent also for the minister to consult those relevant bodies. (Interjections) Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when the President appoint ministers, he does not consult the voters; when he is sending them away also he does not consult the voters. Why do you want to take away the minister’s powers? You are tying the minister’s hands totally.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, let me tell you the challenge. The minister may wake up one morning, just because he is annoyed with you as an individual, and remove you from the board. (Laughter) Yes.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, what we only need to do is define what amounts to incompetence. For the rest, there are reasons. If you are deformed in the mind, really, the minister cannot leave you in office because people think you have been victimised. We only need to go to the defining section and define what amounts to incompetence. The minister can only abuse incompetence because if it is not defined -

THE CHAIRPERSON: How do you want to define it?

MR MWIRU: Maybe when we go to the defining section -

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I am afraid that when we attempt to define what “incompetence” is or what should be taken as “incompetence”, we would be rewriting many laws in this country. “Incompetence” is not an objective test. It could be a subjective test that would mean many things. If somebody else comes late, it could be incompetence. If he is not able to attend meetings twice - it is an area that is both in the Constitution and I believe it is not defined. 

However, I understand with a lot of pleasure what hon. Mwiru is saying. I believe my friend, hon. Nzoghu, is about to concede immediately I sit down so that we move on. 

MR NZOGHU: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have an amendment on clause 11?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes, Madam Chair. I would like to get clarification on the remuneration of board members in clause 11. It should have been, “The members of the board shall be paid remuneration determined by the minister in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance.” I thought it should be the other way round that, “The minister in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance shall determine the terms of the board”, but not “remuneration” specifically. It should be “terms” not “remuneration.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why?

MR KAKOOZA: Because for the minister, once terms are set, these are put under the terms and conditions of service. However, for remuneration – somebody would correct me - I have not heard where the minister determines allowances and it is put specifically in the law.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, why would a minister holding a portfolio first have to consult another minister on the terms of reference or employment or service of a board under him? For remuneration, you can consult the Minister of Finance. However, for other terms of service, it is not necessary.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we have seen appointments where they are saying, “You are appointed and transferred with your salary to an organisation.” We have seen -(Interjections)- yes, former MPs -(Laughter)- I have seen that on presidential advisers, where the President appoints you and says, “I have appointed and transferred you with your salary to this organisation.” 

What hon. Kakooza is saying is that the Minister for Finance is in position to advise on whether Government can commit such an amount of money. Otherwise, they will just appoint you and say Shs 30 million and the Minister of Finance will have no say because the power is conferred on the relevant minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kakooza was talking about the terms not the remuneration.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, whereas I understand what hon. Kakooza was saying that the minister should be consulting on the terms, we have just legislated on some of the terms. We are stating the number of years, the competencies, the characters,  and qualifications. Here, I believe this piece of provision is specific and I thought that was in order. However, hon. Kakooza is an accountant – unless I am told to the contrary – maybe he has a problem with that –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I always hold my brother, hon. Oboth, in high regard. However, today he has erred. To be an accountant, you must train in a professional field of accountancy. In this House, we have very few accountants, whom I can count. We have hon. Musasizi, Bahati, Mzee Mpuuga and Nandala. Is hon. Oboth-Oboth in order to say that hon. Kakooza is an accountant yet he is not? Do you have your own school of accountancy? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think he was saying that he has some knowledge of accounts. (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, thank you for having a good ruling in that regard. At least, I took it from him, not that I have professional knowledge.

Madam Chairperson, this is not a matter that would be left to either Minister of Finance or - He had basic other legislations we have made in this regard. The line minister consults with the Minister responsible for Finance for purposes of determining how much but not any other terms because that cannot be the role and obligation of the Minister of Finance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have already voted on clause 11. Let us go to clause 12.

Clause 12

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 12 as follows: “The meetings of the board shall be conducted as provided for in Schedule II.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 14(3) to be re-drafted as follows: “A person shall not be appointed executive director unless that person has at least 10 years of experience in wildlife management, environment administration, financial management and law or business development.” This is to widen the range of qualifications required for a person to be appointed executive director.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The chairperson’s justification is very wrong. In fact, if you go by this recommendation, then you are just closing down on the range of qualifications. Why do we go for 10 years of experience? We are closing down the younger blood.

If l can give you an example; Public Service had a Standing Order that to be a Permanent Secretary, you have to have served for 15 years, until the President appointed the late hon. Mayombo who did not even have any experience of serving as a permanent secretary. Public Service was beaten hands down. Therefore, let us not close out the younger blood. We do not need the ten years’ experience, Madam Chairperson. We can even go for three or four years. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I would beg my colleagues to remove this issue of the executive director having at least ten years of experience. 

We have had a problem in this country where young people are on our necks that we are using experience to knock them out. Right now, I have a young person with whom I studied, though I was slightly ahead of him. However, he has done a very good job in Entebbe Zoo. He does not have ten years of experience. 

I wanted us to say “if somebody has got an experience in wildlife management, environment and administration…”, we leave financial managements, lawyers and business. This is because if you talk about law, it means even doctors can also be employed here.

I want us to remove the ten years experiences and we make it five. Let us remove these issues of lawyers, business administrators and tax evaluators; leave it for environmentalists and wildlife conservationists.  I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the young people. Let us hear from hon. Ogwang.

MR OGWANG: Madam Chairperson, first of all, it is a vote of no confidence to some of us by putting the word “experience” even in the law. For us to begin legislating by using the word “experience” puts us out.  I would like to seek clarification from the Chairperson. Where is the school of experience?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, we are legislating and we are setting a threshold. I would be very disappointed if my daughter who has just left university is given that post of executive director. Running an organisation where we have set a very high threshold for the board members and you have somebody who is even shy to look at the eyes of the board members by virtue of experience will kill t that organisation.

An executive director is an executive director. This is a technical position. It is not a political position like Secretary Publicity or Vice Chairman. (Laughter) These are people who will rub shoulders with fellow executive directors like that of KCCA at certain functions of executive directors. 

Therefore, let us accept what the committee chairperson has recommended. Maybe, we reduce it to minimum five years. 

However, to open up everything, where you are a minister at 24; it is very detrimental for yourself in future. If at 24 you are an ED, what will you be at 50? (Laughter) Can you imagine me, I have been here for 14 years but I am still even young for certain positions. What are you then talking about? (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern is with regard to specification on the qualifications. I remember in this House, we stated that we should not be specifying qualifications because we would be limiting and taking on the role of Public Service Commission.

Madam Chairperson, isn’t sufficient to just specifically state that “the relevant professional qualification” so that we leave the leeway for describing or prescribing - because we are not competent enough, I can say. (Applause) 

Now, the accountants are rising up saying they want accountants here. The medical doctors will say the lawyers are not needed, when we know there are only few professionals in this world who are learned and educated. That debate can be very disheartening for this House.

Madam Chairperson, my proposal to that is that we could leave it as “with relevant professional qualification and experience.” (Interjections) The timeframe for experience, hon. Odonga-Otto made a very wonderful submission, which I do not want to dilute. Mine is on prescribing qualifications. Are we competent enough to envisage the kind of persons? Hon. Odoi says “Behind me that we are, if we are; let us go on.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that there are now people who are specialising in particular disciplines. When you say “relevant”, you will lock out people who have made efforts and gone out of their way to study environmental law and conservation. I do not know, but it is your decision, but -

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. First of all, I was also about to say with “relevant experience” because it is very important. 

Madam Chairperson, if you took at an example; somebody who has graduated at 22 years and you made him an ED, it means at 32, he must retire from work. However, that is the real prime time of that person’s life. 

The reason they would prescribe ten years experiences, Madam Chairperson, is, if you leave the university at 22, you grow up in the ranks and after ten years, you would be 32. You would relatively be better to take up administrative roles.

The youth should not get worried. You do not need to start from up. You should be asking for the lower jobs so that you climb up. Hon. Otto, you spoke very well. (Interruption)

MR OGWANG: First of all, I want to thank hon. Mafabi, for the information he is giving this august House. He is assuming that at 22, you will come out of the university and get a job.

Let us take an instance of the current Uganda. If you get out of university at 22 and return home, it might even take you ten years to get a job on the streets of Kampala. Again, from there, you are going to ask the same young person that he must have an experience of ten years to get that job. How are we going to live in the current Uganda? To be honest, we shall be knocked out.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have discovered people do not know experience. Even in managing a home, you will be getting experience every day.

MR KAMARA: Madam Chairperson, it is clear that when someone is being interviewed, he will present relevant papers and qualifications. My brother hon. Nandala has continued to say that even managing a home is just an experience that you will present to be given a job position.

Sincerely, is hon. Nandala in order to say that even managing a home is an experience to qualify someone to become an ED?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I also want you to look at managing a home as very important. You bring up people and make sure things are moving. It is also a very good experience. Please, conclude hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, maybe, I want to give my colleague a personal experience. I was supposed to be promoted to a principal. I had grown in the ranks very fast in the ministry. Then they said, “Nandala is not yet married.” That was in 1994, and I was not a gay so I had to get married. So, marriage also adds people more points in life. Managing a home does not only mean managing the house. You could have your own personal business. The way you manage your personal business can be used on your curriculum vitae. You can say, for example, that you started a business of Shs 10,000 and grew it to Shs 10 million. That is experience. Why do you want to assume that experience is when you are employed by somebody? Experience can also be when you are self-employed. So, learn to do work.

That is why I want to ask the young people to learn to work. The ideology that you are going to get jobs and then start walking on the streets instead of going to grow coffee is a waste of energy. 

Ten years of experience is very vital. You cannot get a young person of five years’ experience and tell him, “Go in and learn to do something.” You find somebody living a young life, for example, he leaves the club at 5.00 a.m. The next day, he goes to the office to sign cheques. That is not necessary. People should grow up.

The other point is the relevant experience. It is important to talk about it. This business of saying you want people in wildlife management - that is also restricting. Relevant experience in administration is very vital. You can get an engineer to become an executive director. 

Take a look at the permanent secretaries or the accounting officers in ministries. Are they accountants? No, they are economists, engineers and agriculturalists. They are doing the work of accounting officers. What we have to do is say, “At least 10 years’ experience with relevant skills in management.” That is it. 

MS AMODING: Madam Chairperson, I would like to disagree with the members that are suggesting that 10 years’ experience should be legislated upon by Parliament in this instance. 

Here is an experience of a young person who graduates. The person goes back for another technical course, qualifies, gets a job and works for two years. In my view, he is technically able to take on a job that requires this kind of duty as an executive director. 

I would like us to put in mind and in context young people that go out of their way to prepare themselves for those jobs and positions. Saying 10 years’ experience is a requirement by law is being unfair to the young people of this country. 

Hon. Otto came to Parliament at 23 and you are trying to belittle the position of politics as one that requires less experience. I think that belittles Parliament generally as a whole especially - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I rise on a point of order. It is true I came to Parliament at 23. I had never worked anywhere else. That was just three months after university and since then I have not left. I have now been here for 14 years. 
The point of order I am raising is that in Parliament we were 380 at that time. I was not the sole person on the ED. I was together with others learning from the senior members. It took me 14 years to learn from them. That is how I managed to be among the senior members after 14 years. (Laughter)

Is she in order to raise an irrelevant example to this particular situation we are in? We are talking of one person that is the executive director to manage a big organisation in the whole country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, different members look at it from different perspectives. Please conclude. (Laughter)

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, my point of contention is 10 years is a little too far. We need a bit of relevant experience. Two, three, four years is not bad. Somebody can prepare themselves for this task. It is true. A person can prepare themselves in terms of qualifications, skills, and so many others in that short time of three years and be able to take on a position of an executive director. I can give you examples of such young people. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is not just any job. You are the head of the institution, managing the day to day basis. The board comes to support you. That is what is at issue. 

MS OLERU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In clause 10 concerning the tenure of the board that we have just passed, let us reduce the years of the executive director to be in office. Let them be only three years. The justification is that you already have all the expertise. The board works closely with the executive director. Therefore, for the executive director we also need that experience. I am still in that age bracket of young people but we should respect the people who have been there. With age, comes wisdom. Wisdom is very important. Let all of us who are below the age of 40 in this House believe that our Prime Minister is wiser than us because he has been there for some time. (Applause) 

If we have that job, he would qualify to take it. He would be a better candidate than me who has just been here for five years. Thank you. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to borrow a leaf from my fellow colleagues who have submitted. We also need to address our minds to the fact that this is an organisation, which has structures right from the bottom to the top.

We are also saying this institution is specialised and for the first time, we are going to roll out. It is specialised and its functionalities are very unique. 

I do not know whether members are addressing themselves to where we are coming from in the original Bill. Look at 14 (3) in respect to widening the spectrum for the competencies. 

If you look at (3), as proposed by Government, I think it was quite compressed because it says, “The person shall not be appointed executive director unless that person has knowledge and at least 10 years’ experience in environment and wildlife management.” That was restrictive.  That is why we went ahead to amend to provide for a wider latitude so that you can have an engineer, a lawyer, an administrator, and so many others. 

Therefore, those who are saying we are providing for a very small spectrum, please, address your mind to that.

The other issue of experience, like I submitted before, Madam Chairperson, let us address ourselves to the fact that this is a big organisation and it has different structural offices. We are talking about the executive director. 

Members of this House did pass, recently under Uganda Registration Services Bureau, 10 years. On this very Floor, we passed a law of Uganda National Bureau of Statistics (UNBS) which is 10 years. In fact, the one of National Social Security Fund (NSSF) is 15 years.

I would like to convince colleagues to look at 10 years as basic qualification and being workable. We have conceded on many issues and I would like to appeal to you honourable colleagues to concede on this one and we take 10 years. Madam Chairperson, I would like to invite you to put a question.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are dealing with the position of the chief executive of the UWA. I put the question that Clause 14 be amended as proposed.

Question put and agreed to.

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, with Clause 15, we propose to amend in sub-clause (2)(e) by substituting the word “procurement” for the word “tendering.”

The justification is to harmonise the provision with public procurement laws.

CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 15 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend Clause 16 (2) in paragraph (b) by re-drafting the provision as follows: “he or she is declared bankrupt”. The justification is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You do not want the other word?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the phrase which says that “he or she is declared or becomes bankrupt”, yes, you can become bankrupt without being declared. If you decide not to pay your creditors, you are already bankrupt. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, bankruptcy is a legal status. It follows a declaration by a competent court. It is not inert status. The position of the chairperson is the correct one. I thank you

The position hon. Nandala was talking about is, if you fail to pay your creditors, if you are keeping house, you may have committed an act of bankruptcy but you are not declared bankrupt. It cannot be said that you are bankrupt.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to know why you would not want to leave there “insolvency”? You do not want someone who is insolvent to be declared so? You have abandoned the rest and left bankruptcy only; what about insolvency? What about arrangements with creditors?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we can benefit from your wise counsel, if you so advise that we leave “insolvency” but we thought that we would provide this amendment. But if you so advise, then we shall concede, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we say that “he or she is declared bankrupt, is insolvent or has made an arrangement with the creditors”?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, Article 80 of the Constitution describes how somebody can be removed from office. In (d) it is says: “…has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged.” Why don’t we use that one so that it solves how an executive director can be removed from office?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have no problem with being declared bankrupt. My question is, are you abandoning insolvency and making arrangements with creditors? That is what I am asking.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, ideally, when a court is declaring you bankrupt, it should be declaring you so by the reason of insolvency. So, when you are talking about bankruptcy here, insolvency is automatically inclusive. The reason the court declares you bankrupt is because you are insolvent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think let us check – I am trying to look for the Insolvent Act but I have not yet found it.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Bankruptcy is for an individual but insolvency is for companies.

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is the definition of “insolvency?”

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what I was trying to say is that when you said that we put the word “insolvent”, you were right. We should put it there. Somebody could decide to use a company and defraud people, does not pay the creditors and he runs away. So, what you were saying, Madam Chairperson, is that we should also leave “insolvency” there. I think the chairperson of the committee was right to concede on “bankruptcy” and “insolvency”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to read the definition of “insolvency”. “Insolvency occurs when an individual or a firm is unable to meet financial obligations. Accounting insolvency happens when total liability exceeds total assets, negative net worth; cash flow insolvency involves lack of liquidity to pay debts as they fall due.” 

So, you can be there saying you have failed to pay your debts but when you have not been declared bankrupt but you are insolvent. So, we should retain it. 


MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, insolvency, therefore, based on that definition, is broader and it might cause us problems, in the actual application of the law. Whereas bankruptcy is narrower and the proceedings - even insolvency calls for proceedings but here, if you have failed to pay, may be somebody could only prove that you failed to meet your liabilities and then we would have no ED.

We would have difficulty in appointing an ED. But insolvency is quite broader. I would have no problem but the application of it, Madam Chairperson, these days I think in the drafting, they are literary leaving it as if the Insolvency Act does not
 exist. They are talking, even in the Constitution, about bankruptcy being declared adjured bankrupt. I think for this purpose of finding ED for this training centre, we should probably use “bankruptcy”.

It is not a matter of balancing assets and liabilities. If that was the test, even for Members of Parliament I am sure we would still be -(Laughter) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 16 be amended as proposed
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.
  

Clause 17

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 17:In the headnote by deleting the phrase “officers and” in sub clause (1) by deleting the phrase “officers and.” The justification is that it is redundant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you would say, “The board may appoint staff as may be necessary…” Is that what it becomes? Okay, I put the question that Clause 17 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chair, this clause 18 - we have passed the Public Finance and Management Act - has a lot of problems. If Parliament is the one going to appropriate money and in circumstances that the centre wants money, it has to get it either from Parliament, because that is what you have said - it will not have need to have money to invest and get interest because the responsibility of investment is not theirs; it lies with the Ministry of Finance.  They will also have no responsibility to get loans and grants without the authority because Ministry of Finance is supposed to procure money. Therefore, according to the Public Finance and Accountability Act, clauses 18 and 19 collapse because they will say, “The sources of the funds will be as per the Public Finance and Accountability Act.”

MR KAKOOZA: Let me supplement to what hon. Nandala-Mafabi has said. Madam Chair, if you look at clause 18 – you see these are resources that are mobilized by the sector. If you allow any ministry to spend at source yet this is non-taxable revenue - if all the money is collected to the Treasury and you appropriate as Parliament to the activities budgeted for, why do you give a leeway to that one particular ministry to invest the money it has collected?

I agree with the member who has amended - even in Clause 19 on the investment of surplus funds - this one is not a matter of investment. You need an investment analyst - you have to create that department in your ministry and it will be costly for the ministry to run this because they will be investing money may be on bonds and securities to get what they need to get; they will have to create other departments within the ministry, which will be costly.

Therefore, I would rather take the amendment to say that since Parliament appropriates money to all activities then let us do that job. Why do we delegate it to another ministry to do it?

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I appreciate where my good friends, hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. James Kakooza are coming from. However, when you look at the intention of the Bill, you realize that it is to create a centre, which must be supported. When you look at how this Government funds activities, it may not have a lot of interests in this.

I am only wondering whether we would not make a provision for (b) where we would specifically state that funds raised under the centre shall be spent on the centre as appropriation in aid so that they are ring-fenced for purposes of supporting the activities under this Act. This is because when you talk about appropriation, it is the Ministry of Finance that gives the ceiling; they will decide on what to release to you. Why we are making this to have a board and the vision – that is why it is a body corporate. This means that the mind and will of the centre is going to be in the board. Therefore, if they want to achieve certain objectives and they have to solely relay on the appropriation by Parliament where finance sets the ceiling, they will never take off.

I am of the considered opinion that whereas we agreed that all funds collected must go to the Consolidated Fund; they must be ring-fenced to be appropriation in aid for purposes of funding the activities of the centre. I beg to submit.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, there are two juxtaposing points of view that we have to appreciate as a House. One is that these bodies we are creating, collecting money and taking it to the Consolidated Fund yet they never get it the way they want. But on the other side, we have a situation where a body can collect so much money when the whole country needs it but because it is a separate entity, there is nothing we can do. 

Again we have situations of these commissions and bodies that we have created in this country, for example, the Uganda Communication Commission, which have so much money that it took the President’s directive - you remember there was a standoff in this House and the President recommitted that certain portions from these bodies must be sent to the Consolidated Fund because people are okay; they are earning Shs 30 million a month and are travelling every weekend yet education and other sectors are not being funded well. And I am glad this Parliament conceded to the President’s directive when he recommitted that aspect. 

What I would like to suggest is that we can probably leave the provision of the Bill as it is with the amendments of the committee chair. In case this body raises millions of dollars - we have seen what happened with the Uganda Communication Commission. We still have the powers to deep our hands into these commissions because this country is not being run by commissions; it is run by the Presidency. We can still pick that money and bring it back into the main stream to fund other priorities of Government. That is what I would like to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Just to add to what hon. Odonga-Otto has said. On this very Floor, we have complained bitterly about the failure of Government to fund to the necessary levels, organisations like the Uganda Bureau of Standards and many others. We are always here lamenting. The other day we were talking about the Foot and Mouth Disease. We asked how much they were giving for Foot and Mouth Disease - let us not cripple the institutions we are creating; let us try - the power of the purse is still there but we needed to -

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chair, thank you so much. For the record, I would like to state that consistency is important. Recently we passed a Bill that is now an Act called the Public Finance and Management Act, in which we clearly stated that all monies collected by entities of Government must go to the Consolidated Fund.

Madam Chair, we have various entities including missions that collect money and send it back to Kampala when they are suffering. The inconsistency I am talking about is that for this institution we are creating, we need to understand that there will be financial constrained if they are not allowed to spend at source. But for entity like the Uganda’s Mission in Brussels, which collects money and sends all of it to Kampala when they do not have money to meet utility bills, we do not understand that one. 

So, I would like to propose and appeal to honourable colleagues that for consistency let us stick to the provisions of the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: In respect to this, what are you proposing about these proposed amendments under 18?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform Parliament that when we are making laws, we should keep in mind what we have done before. Last week but one, we passed another law on another corporate body, and we dealt with it under the Public Finance and Management Act – the Hotel and Tourism Training Institute Bill, 2013. So, it would be wrong for us to change that today. 

Two, we have said that we have agreed - the Auditor-General’s reports have been coming to Parliament, but we hadn’t started on the process of looking at the budgets for corporate bodies. But now we have made the law that all entities - whether corporate or state enterprises - will submit their budgets to Parliament for approval. And if they have submitted and assuming their budget is about Shs 20 billion -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal in relation to this?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My proposal here is that this should remain as in the Public Finance and Management Act. So, in Clause 18 we should say that the funds of the centre will be as appropriated by Parliament.

THE CAHIRPERSON: And we delete (b), (c), (d) and (2)?

MR NADALA-MAFABI: Yes.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi except that that law provides instances where the vote for a state enterprise or public corporation may repay some money. However, those instances are not covered in this section - that is if it collects revenue in form of levies, licences, fees or fines. There the state enterprise or corporation, if it is authorised through appropriation by Parliament, would retain the money.

Consequently, we should leave 18 as, “The funds of the centre shall consist of money appropriated by Parliament for purposes of the centre.” That one is okay.

When we come to 19, I propose we delete it because there will be no surplus funds for investments - (Interjection)- no, you do not limit an institution from borrowing. There may be instances when it needs to borrow only that it has to be in accordance with Section 36 of the Public Finance and Management Act. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give my minister some information. First of all, hon. Rukutana has been around for long and he was in Finance in the Seventh Parliament when he was a State Minister of Finance for General Duties - he went to NSSF and said it must be moved to Finance. (Laughter) Unfortunately, in the next Parliament, he was taken to Gender - he went to Finance and wanted to remove it but I told him, “You wanted it there; it must stay.” (Laughter)

We must be consistent. We have said that the moment money is appropriated by Parliament to a body, which asks for it - we will appropriate it including the one they intend to borrow. And I thought the former minister of state for finance knew about it. When we pass a budget here, we say these are collections from revenue for URA and these are the non-tax revenues and so on. We also talk about the expected deficit by our financing; and the money we shall borrow and the moment we approve that, we will have given you the leeway.

The moment the centre needs to borrow, it will be included in its budget but they need to let us know how much they propose to borrow; the money has to be borrowed on their behalf by the Minister for Finance. Honourable minister, the information I am giving is that you should not forget our history.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended by deleting sub clauses (1) (b), (c), (d), (2) and (3). Is that okay?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, let us take an informed position. Are we saying that for all public enterprises we are removing what we call non-tax revenues? Is that the position? 

MR MWIRU: No, and let me give you information. What we are saying is that it must be appropriated. And even if they are going to spend it, it must as appropriation in aid where Parliament gives approval; there must be authority from Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we delete 18 (1) (b), (c), (d) and (2). 18 (3) is okay because it says that the funds of the centre shall be applied according to the plan.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to share experience with colleagues because as we speak that centre is existing in Entebbe. But we need to ask ourselves, how it is surviving? Are we really giving it money? Now we are talking about diversifying and expanding it - recently, in this very House we resolved that UCC retains a percentage of what they collect – (Interjections) - we cannot go that side because we do not know, for sure, as of now, how much they are going to collect. 

We looked through all these and our fear was that, if we closed up all these other sources in (a), (b), (c) and (d), then we would as well even have the centre closed. I am saying this because recently, there were allocations by percentages in the budget framework paper and we saw UCC being allocated zero - if you may want to remind yourselves. 

So, my fear, Madam Chair, is that if we delete (b), (c) and (d) - I would rather go with the proposal by hon. Odonga-Otto.
 
MR ODONGA OTTO: No I have changed my mind. (Laughter)

MR MULIMBA: If you have changed your mind, then I will pick it up from there that we leave it until we ascertain how much they are going to collect before we amend the law accordingly.

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi, hon. Musasizi and the rest of the members have made a compelling case that we have a legal framework that governs public finances in Uganda. That is the Public Finance and Management Act. We cannot do anything outside that law except if we want to amend it. 

We agreed that, when it comes to the management of public finances that must be our beckon; the only piece of legislation that we should look at. The minister has conceded that we delete (b), (c), (d) and (2). Madam Chairperson, can I move that you put the question and we resolve this matter and move on to the next.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended by deleting sub clause (1) (b), (c), (d) and 18 sub clause (2).

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We will note that sub clause (3) remains there.

Clause 19

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 19 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, deleted.

Clause 20

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, Clause 20 has to be deleted because we do not need to waste time of Parliament. We have said - may be even for record purpose – that appropriation does not talk about the spending side only. It also talks about the expected income and the expected expenditure. Please, appropriation includes income and expenditure. Even the fines and the collections - hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana you know - are part of the income and have to be appropriated. Is it not? 

Therefore, Clause 20 should be deleted because the powers to borrow –(Interruption)

MR ODANGA OTTO: I have seen at Gulu University, they had a very serious situation and they borrowed Shs 50 million from Centenary Bank –(Interjection)- yes that is still borrowing because an overdraft is not a deposit.
 
Now, if we have stopped them from spending any money they collect and we do not even allow them to go and get Shs 100 million for an emergency - for example, my colleague cited the example of Uganda’s Embassy in Brussels. The people in that area are demonstrating because Uganda’s property is lowering the value of the residential area because it is not constructed to the standards there. So, do you milk the cow without feeding it? Can’t we allow them some minimum powers of borrowing even Shs 50, 100 or 200 million from a commercial bank? That is the clarification I am seeking. They can’t be there waiting for Parliament.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the law we passed, the Public Finance and Management Act, 2015, does not stop a body from borrowing. It only lays terms and conditions of how a body should borrow when need arises. What does it say? It says thus: “Subject to the Constitution, the authority to raise money by loan and to issue guarantees for and on behalf of government, shall vest solely in the minister and no other person, public corporation, state enterprise or local government, council, shall, without the prior approval of the minister, raise any loan, issue any guarantee or take any other action, which may in any way either directly or indirectly result in a liability being incurred by Government.”

Now, this section, when you read it, you realise that if a corporation, state enterprise or local government has to borrow it will have to seek the approval of the minister. That is why I want to move an amendment to say, “The Board may, with the approval of the minister of wildlife and subject to section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, borrow money as may be necessary to meet the obligations of the centre.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it has been agreed that under the Public Finance and Management Act - again when the accounts have been approved by the Board, they will be taken to the minister for onward submission to Parliament. Now, there is no process to follow. Therefore, I want to amend clause 21 to read as follows: “The estimates of the centre shall be according to the Public Finance and Management Act.” The justification is that that one has spelt directly how state enterprises move their reports from the Board to Parliament for approval.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Any objections? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend this clause by redrafting it to read as follows: “The financial year of the centre shall be the same as the financial year of Government.” The justification is to align the financial year of the centre to the financial year of Government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, again clause 24 is not telling us where the Auditor-General is supposed to put the accounts. The law is very clear that the Auditor-General audits are supposed to be submitted to Parliament. Therefore, I would like to include clause 24(4) to say that, “The Auditor-General shall present the audited reports to Parliament in accordance with the Constitution.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 do stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR MULIMBA: The committee proposes to amend this clause by substituting the phrase “Section 40 of Public Finance and Accountability Act” with the phrase “Section 33 of the Public Finance Management Act.” The redraft should read: “Subject to Section 33 of the Public Finance Management Act, the centre shall open and maintain bank accounts as are necessary for the performance of its functions.” The justification is that this is to subject the power to open and operate bank account to the Public Finance Management Act.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: I would like to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. Is this Section 33 you are talking about the one which talks about the authority of the Accountant General? Is it so? If it is so, then it is okay.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 27(4) by substituting the phrase “not later than six months” appearing on line one with the phrase “within three months.” The justification is to require the minister to table reports to Parliament within three months from their receipt.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 30(1) (a) by deleting the phrase “of the” appearing between the words, “Education” and “Centre”; and in paragraph (d), by inserting the word “the” at the beginning just before the word, “rescue.” The justification is for clarity. In paragraph (e), we propose an amendment by substituting the word “the” with the word “for” at the beginning of the paragraph.	The justification is that this is for clarity.
In paragraph (f) we propose an amendment by substituting the word “matters” with the word “area” appearing on line one. The justification is that this is for clarity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

	Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.	

Clause 31

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31 –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 31 (1), the person who can change schedule one is the Minister of Finance. I propose we delete this clause because that is not under the mandate of the minister in charge of wildlife.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend paragraph (1): In sub paragraph (4), by rephrasing the entire clause to read as follows: “The chairperson shall preside at every meeting of the Board and in the absence of both chairperson and vice-chairperson, then the members present shall elect one among their number to preside at the meeting.”

In paragraph (7) about minutes of proceedings, we propose to amend sub paragraph (2) by inserting the words “and the secretary” between the words “chairperson” and “in,” appearing in line three. The justification is to require the secretary to sign the minutes of the meetings.
 
Lastly, we propose the deletion of the phrase “present at the later meetings” appearing in line four. The justification is that it is redundant.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification from the chairman. Doesn’t it matter how many members turn up for them to choose a chairman from amongst themselves for them to hold a meeting? I think it is important that we -(Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, my concern is on quorum; the requirement of having a Board to sit with a quorum of two thirds of the members. That number is very high and may impede on the smooth running of the Board. The normal practise is that the quorum must be half of the members. I so propose, Madam Chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that was one of the things I also wanted to raise that two thirds is too high. What they always do is a quorum of 50 per cent plus one - the chair. So the quorum for the meeting of the Board, if the committee does not mind, would be 50 per cent plus one member.

MR ONYANGO: Madam Chairperson, even what hon. Nandala-Mafabi is saying - if they are nine, it almost comes to the same thing because if you are going to have four and a half, which is five plus one, that is already the two thirds we have been talking about. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Numbers of persons are always rounded off to the nearest. Half of a person - for human beings, it is a full number.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do we do? We leave it at two thirds?

MR MULIMBA: I would like to concede to the proposal moved by hon. Stephen Tashobya - in the event that we have seven members, half will do because it will be very difficult for us to raise two thirds; we can leave it to half because half of the seven will be 3.5 rounded off to whole number four and that is it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the quorum be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Further amendments, Madam Chairperson. I move that cross referencing be changed because the Public Finance and Accountability Act has been amended –(Interjections)- it is not a law; no impact.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the Second Schedule, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Second Schedule, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we stood over the clause on interpretation and the objectives. I do not know whether there has been any new formulations - where is the schedule?

MR MAJEGERE: We can make it six to provide for adequate compensation in case animals cause harm to human life, death, eat or destroy plants in the neighbourhood. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairman of the committee, what do you say about that proposal? Do you agree or not? As we think about it let us go to Clause 3. I put the question that Clause 3 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 2, on the objectives, there was a proposal to add - he wanted to put it under objectives?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I was signalling my colleague, hon. Waira Majegere because the objective of a Bill is the longest title and I do not think it is actionable. But while we handled Clause 30, I saw something and I even signalled to him that this would have been the best place - when we were handling regulations on rescue, rehabilitation and release of wildlife and species - I thought that is where we could have put it other than bringing it in the objectives. 
Objectives can state this is the objective, but the main Act does not go on to show how we can reap from the benefits of the objectives. Probably, Madam Chairperson, I do not know if that comes among the recommittal proceedings, but we could insert a new 29, before the regulations to cater for hon. Waira Majegere’s concerns.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, I entirely agree with hon. Odonga-Otto because merely putting this clause here without providing a mechanism will not assist us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We take the objectives as they are and then we have to recommit that one? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 2, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

The Title

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have an amendment to the Title?
 
MR MULIMBA: There is an amendment to the Title, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where is it? Do I have it? Okay, speak to it.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, we propose to amend the Title by inserting the word “conservation” between words “wildlife” and “education” and accordingly amend all clauses where the centre name appears to be redrafted as “The Uganda Wildlife Conservation, Education Centre Bill, 2013”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
7.11

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Akiror): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.            

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Akiror): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Conservation, Education Centre Bill, 2013” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.12

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Akiror): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

THE SPEAKER: Who is recommitting?

7.13

MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence and that of the House that we recommit the Bill for the purpose of inserting a new Clause 29A to read as follows: “The Board shall provide adequate compensation for individuals and communities affected by the activities of the centre.” 

The justification comes from what hon. Majegere earlier raised - in case animals attacked individuals or a lion urinates, the way hon. Kassiano Wadri was saying –(Laughter)- or in case there is some environmental degradation – that is what we call the activities of the centre. I think those individuals should be compensated by the Board. I beg your indulgence for the proposed recommittal.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded.

7.14
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen) (Rtd.) (Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, it cannot just be supported randomly like that. Supposing somebody goes to the zoo and pushes his or her hands past the fence and they are caught by the lion, who is going to be responsible for such issues? As you are watching the animals and you are excited – I see some people offering potatoes and bananas to the animals and now as you push your hands and they are caught there, who is going to be responsible? Yes, there is a fence but it is through this fence -(Interjections)- yes but this situation must also be clear.

This compensation cannot just be because – maybe the animals could have come from outside the centre. In fact, there are more animals outside the centre than inside. So, we need to subject this to something.

THE SPEAKER: But of course there will be processes through, which you reach the compensation. One does not just wake up and say that you were bitten the previous day and so you should be paid.
 
7.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Just to add something. I think we are not going to consider what I call accidents by any wild animal that would have escaped from the centre. Isn’t it so? So, we have to restrict that to only those people injured by the wildlife in the centre. I do not know whether your proposal had captured it.

MR OPOLOT: I really need to be guided on how to proceed because hon. Odonga Otto rose to move a motion for recommittal and at this point, it is like after seconding, we have gone into debating the content.

Now if that is what we are doing, then I would not agree with what the Government Chief Whip is saying because I think that it is the responsibility of the wildlife centre to protect and secure their animals to prevent them from over lapping into other communities. 

The compensation should be restricted to those who are involuntary or outside their control, are affected by the activities of the wildlife and training centre. But if you went and you are carelessly interacting with –(Interjections)- I said training centre. Madam Speaker, I know that it is such a time that some people may not hear well but I said “training centre”.

Sometimes there are people who may want to take advantage of this law because if you say they shall compensate, some people will come and recklessly behave at the centre and when they are affected, they shall want compensation. It should only be those affected outside their will or involuntary participation.  

7.19
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): The recommittal moved by hon. Odonga Otto carries the fundamental principle in the law but the details of it as moved by the Second Deputy Prime Minister and Government Chief Whip can be catered for in the guidelines and regulations which should be able to properly stipulate the procedures, circumstances, timelines under which compensation can be made.

Let us carry the principle and leave the details to the guidelines and procedures. (Applause)

7.19
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): With due respect to my seniors, I think what is being proposed or the circumstances of accidents or one wilfully feeding his or her hand into the lion’s den – I think that those circumstances are covered under the general law of tort. If you wilfully donate your hand to the lion, there is a separate law that governs those circumstances; that is voluntary assumption of risk. There is general common law that governs the circumstances that my seniors have put forward. It in no way negates the proposals put across by the hon. Otto.

7.20
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): The institution we are handling is a Government institution and people who are aggrieved by institutions of Government have where to run to, that is the Attorney-General’s Chambers. I think we will drop hon. Odonga-Otto’s suggestion and we leave this matter to be handled generally under the AG’s Chambers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to draw your attention to clause 4, which we passed. It is a body corporate; it can sue and can be sued in its own name.

7.21
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I am a little bit apprehensive when we talk about adequate compensation. I would not like to have something, which we in the end may find difficult to achieve. Whereas some form of compensation is necessary where people either lose life, their property or crops, we had better think of something like compassionate compensation because yes, these wild animals -(Interruption)

MR KAMARA: Madam Speaker, I understand that these education centres will be transacting this business on behalf of Government; they will be having such species that can even kill people. There is an example in Entebbe where a snake escaped from the zoo and was found in someone’s home. That was complete negligence by personnel in that zoo. 

I also understand that these centres must very well manage this wildlife. Here is the honourable minister telling us to be compassionate meaning that even these centres will be more important than human life. This means that we might lose some lives. Is he in order to weigh the centres as more important that human life yet we will be subjecting our people to death?

THE SPEAKER: The subject is emotive. Let us discuss it calmly and complete it. 

MR MURULI: Madam Speaker, there are all types of wildlife - the Korea birds, the trans-boundary elephants and so on. We may find ourselves in a situation where we cannot manage and we look fools. 

I would like us to do something practical and which we can manage. In case of such happenings then we can do something but adequate compensation even where elephants have been trampling on people’s crops and we have not been able to do anything. When Korea birds ate so many hectares of sorghum in Kapchorwa, there was nothing done. Let us really be practical and talk about compassionate compensation, where something has happened and that can appear in the guidelines. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But adequacy is also a question of fact.

MR TASHOBYA: The use of the words “adequate compensation.” It means one has lost a right, property and life; these are property to somebody. It is not a matter of compassion because compassion is discretionary and subjective. This is a right, you have lost your property, life it is his right to be compensated.

THE SPEAKER: The duty of care by the managers of the centre is expected. There is a duty of care to ensure that the neighbours are not injured. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I want to say that if we talk of adequate compensation - because it is a right, the person compensating should also be considered in line with how much of the right has been affected so that they can determine how much the adequate compensation is. If the right cannot be determined then how do you determine the compensation? I am suggesting that we conclude this; the compensation should be subject to the existing law. That way it will cover us and it cover even those who will be looking for compensation because existing laws are there, people go to court, the torts are there. This will be subject to existing law.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 29 be recommitted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE CONSERVATION, EDUCATION CENTRE BILL, 2013

Clause 29

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, I beg to move that we introduce a new Clause 29 A to read as follows: “The Board shall provide adequate compensation for individuals and communities affected by the activities of the centre.”

MS AMODING: I thank hon. Odonga-Otto for the proposal he has made but I was of the view that if we create another Clause 30 with a sub title about the duty of the centre. That provision will come in - duty of the centre to the community.

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chair. In order to address the issues raised by the Second Deputy Prime Minister, I want to add to the following sentence: “…provided the loss was not occasioned by the individual or community in question.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is a question of evidence.

MR BAHINDUKA: Thank you, Madam Chair.  We are mainly looking at the communities but what of the beneficiaries? These are people who come to visit but later get attacked. When you look at Clause 29 which says, “Members and employees…” it is very specific to members of the Board. We should be more specific to the beneficiaries of the centre in that clause. 

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose that we replace the word “adequate” with “appropriate.” This is because the word “adequate” means you have to compensate more than what may be necessary. But if we use the word “appropriate” it will be proportional to what has been destroyed. So, I propose that we use the phrase, “appropriate compensation.” Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But also honourable members, the compensation is not automatic. You must file a suit, prove the damage, the extent of the damage and the seriousness.

MR RUKUTANA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to convince my colleague, hon. Odonga Otto, to drop the word “appropriate” or “adequate” because they do not add any value; compensation is compensation; it is restitution; and it has to be determined. So whether you put the word “adequate” or “appropriate” it does not add any value.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chairperson, I concede and drop the word “adequate,” accordingly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR RUKUTANA: Then secondly, there was a fear of those visitors who may negligently push their hands and then they are snatched, those ones are not activities occasioned. But if you prove that the man negligently or carelessly put his arm there, then the education centre is not liable.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in law we have a maxim volenti non-fit injuria - If you volunteered the risk, you cannot complain. So, if you put your finger there, that is your problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause -

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There are staff who will be working at the centre feeding lions, crocodiles and so on. Are they also included in the compensation proposal?

THE CHAIRPERSON: They are in the old 29. This is 29 A. Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause 29 A be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New Clause 29 A inserted.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (MS Agnes Akiror): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed and the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (MS Agnes Akiror): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House recommitted Clause 29 and introduced a new clause 29A to cater for compensation for any injuries or loss of property occasioned by wild animals escaping from the centre.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (MS Agnes Akiror): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE CONSERVATION, EDUCATION CENTRE BILL, 2013

7.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (MS Agnes Akiror): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Conservation, Education Centre Bill, 2013” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, 
“THE UGANDA WILDLIFE CONSERVATION, EDUCATION CENTRE ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, title settled and Bill passes. I want to thank the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of Opposition, the distinguished Members of Parliament and Cabinet, for the work done today. As I indicated earlier, this is the last sitting of the Third Meeting. 
We expect that the whips will mobilise members to go to their sessional committees to work on the National Budget Framework Paper and the policy statements. House adjourned sine die. Thank you and good evening.

(House rose at 7.35 p.m. and adjourned sine die)

