PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA12447Thursday, 11 April 2024Honourable members, on a rather sad note, I regret to announce the death of our very distinguished staff of the Parliamentary Service, Mr Kagoro John Bosco, who at the time of his death was a Principal Clerk Assistant. If some of you remember, he used to sit at the Table there. Mr Kagoro was a very diligent staff of Parliament who served as Clerk-at-Table and on various committees.I personally worked with him on the Public Accounts Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), together with Hon. Beatrice. He was in the Public Accounts Committee (Local Governments). At the time of his death, he was our clerk on the Committee on Appointments. On behalf of the Parliamentary Commission and on my own behalf, I would like to relay condolences to the bereaved family, his loved ones, friends and the Clerk to Parliament. Funeral arrangements are underway and we will be informing you about when the burial will be. Those who will be ready to go, we will avail transport for us to go and see our colleague off. It is really a sad note, but that is what happens. God’s timing is never our timing. The Bible says there is time for everything. I would like to thank you for everything. Thank you for coming. Can we observe a moment of silence in memory of the late?(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 23RD SITTING - THIRD MEETING Parliament met at 10.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. It is unusual that we sit in the morning, but you have to get used to it because we shall be sitting until we finish very serious business.I would like to welcome you back from the Eid festival- Hajj, welcome back. I wish and pray that you had a very good Eid. Continue living with that faith, love and unity for a better cohesion. You recall we adjourned the House until this morning to consider the remaining sectoral committees; we will straight away go to that. Government Chief Whip, I only see four ministries here. We are going to give each sectoral committee about 15 minutes. We urge you, the chairpersons, to look at the budgetary estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025, the funding priorities, the gaps that are there, the observations and recommendations. Then, we will send the report for harmonisation/reconciliation to the Committee on Budget. 12448SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much.10.09MR ANTHONY AKOL  (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru):  Madam Speaker, before I came to the House, I went through the canteen and we were discussing the death of our clerk. One of the people was talking about non-communicable diseases. In your communication, you said we cannot change God’s timing. I do not always agree with President Yoweri Museveni, but I remember when we lost Gen. Oketa (May his soul rest in peace), he asked whether it is by mistake that in the Western culture people have a longer life expectancy than some of us in Africa. It made me think about when I went to South Korea, where the government has a system of paying citizens for the more time they spend doing exercises. I think it is high time that as Ugandans, we thought about how we could involve ourselves in exercising daily. I used to be 137 kilogrammes and was always feeling very unhealthy. However, when I started in January, I reduced my weight from 137 to 107. I feel healthier and very good, daily. I think it is the right time for us to encourage the citizens of Uganda to make sure we involve ourselves in daily exercise as a way of fighting these diseases, by being physically fit and doing exercise on a daily basis. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at the time when JB passed on, I talked to the doctor who said he had low sugar levels. It was at about 3 mmol/L. 10.11THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar):  Madam Speaker, I join you in mourning your long-serving staff  of Parliament. Indeed, as you said, Mr Kagoro was one of those committed clerks. I worked with him on a number of committees. He was approachable, his work was always on time; he had very clear reports and was very helpful to Members. I am sure he does not have a tainted record from his service to this Parliament. In such a moment, we stand with the family for his demise. Madam Speaker, you have been a mother to many; the family he has left behind should continue to be part of this Parliament so that the gap of missing him is not widened. We can still make them be part of this Parliament at all levels. (Applause)  As Members of Parliament, it is good to show solidarity. Apart from going to give him a decent send-off, we can make a humble contribution. Some of us who have been here for a while appreciate his work and this will also encourage other staff to work diligently because once you become a staff of Parliament, you automatically become a family member. Secondly, my brother, Hon. Akol, alluded to the issue of exercise; the type of life all of us lead - it is more demanding for Members of Parliament, when you come here. For instance, we are starting to work in the morning, we might sit up to 2.00 p.m., resume at 3.00 p.m. up to 5 or 6.00 p.m., and then you have to run up and down in the constituency. Madam Speaker, I am proud to say that I wrote to the then Speaker, Rt Hon. Edward Ssekandi Kiwanuka, requesting for the establishment of the gym we have in this Parliament. We started well, but having Members make good use of it, including myself, is a big challenge. We should make this gym friendlier - maybe make it a routine and encourage Members to use the facilities we have for our own health, so that we benefit from it. Many times, I see people from outside benefitting from it. I had asked that in our new building, for the sake of ladies, we should have a salon established. Why? -(Interjection)- yes, listen my honourable colleagues. When you go to the gym, I am speaking because I am a lady, we look like this because we take time to prepare ourselves –(Interjections)-  one of them is my hair and nails, which are part of a woman. Therefore, if we created such -COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12449THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:  It is not part of a woman because I do not have long hair and I am a woman.  (Laughter)  So, it is for some women and not everybody.MS BEATRICE ANYWAR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am saying that if we had it, the ladies would come earlier and spend more time in the gym, knowing that they would freshen up and then go to the House. It takes less time than when they are outside Parliament. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  There is a procedural matter –MR TEBANDEKE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 82 of our Rules of Procedure, de-scribes how female Members of Parliament should dress. The provisions are therein given under personal privileges, not as would be pro -vided by this House. Is it procedurally right for the honourable member to claim for other priv -ileges in line with making good health, besides what is prescribed in the Rules of Procedure?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when quoting rules, we must be serious. We are talking about our staff who has passed on. I think you have not worked with Mr John Bosco Kagoro. He was one person who would always take new Members of Parliament through the processes of the institution. Even when you are in a committee, he would write for you a question to ask the witnesses. That is what Hon. Beatrice Anywar was raising; that as somebody who has been with us longer, for us to be able to motivate our staff who work with us and are always on that Table, and everywhere, let us see how to support the family. Parliament will take care of all the funeral services and burial expenses, but as Members of Parliament, these are people we live with every day; what are you giving to this young family? That is what Hon. Beatrice Anywar was saying. It is a choice. We can have a salon and everything. In the new building, you will have everything. Even when you want to rest, you will always have a resting place.  (Applause)  Yes, Hon. Nambeshe? 10.19MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NUP, Manjiya County, Bududa):  Madam Speaker, I particularly join you in expressing my heartfelt condolences to the fallen comrade, popularly known as JB - Mr Kagoro. As a Principal Clerk, Mr Kagoro had a character trait that captivated me. Two weeks ago or so, we were with him out of the country in Angola. My memory may not serve me right on the accurate duration of time, but I remember vividly, when we were on a delegation to Eswatini, the presiding officer had picked one of the honourable colleagues to lead the delegation. However, on an assessment by this clerk, he realised that in hierarchy, it could have required me as the Chief Opposition Whip to lead, although the majority of the delegation were NRM Members.I witnessed this humble clerk lecturing the honourable colleague into submission. Not lecturing as such, but the approach with which he used and persuaded the honourable colleague to yield for me to take up - I reluctantly took the responsibility. However, the humility with which he exhibited in that plea to get the honourable colleague to relinquish that responsibility, captivated me.Mr Kagoro was down-to-earth. If he were to be compared with other technical officers that we work with, his level of excellence in humility hit the roof. I support the earlier proposal that his family would be accorded the assistance that will be arrived at by the entire House with your blessing, Madam Speaker.I conclude by standing with the family and comforting them -THE SPEAKER:  Do not leave issues hanging. What is your suggestion?MR NAMBESHE:  My suggestion is not far from what has already been proposed, that the House finds it fit to contribute ably to the family in terms of finances.12450SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  There is a procedural matter- MR AKOL:  Madam Speaker, the Chief Opposition Whip’s suggestion is very good. I remember in the 10th Parliament the Speaker would rule that everyone in the House contributes a specific amount of money and Members would complain when deductions were made. I have looked at the figures based on the fact that we are about 529 Members-THE SPEAKER:  I am not going to rule because I want it to come from you people.MR AKOL:  No, I am not suggesting that you should rule. If we agree to contribute Shs 200,000 per person, it will come to Shs 105,800,000. If we agree to contribute Shs 100,000 it will total to Shs 52,900,000. It would be better for Members to agree to sign up for a deduction of Shs 200,000 per person and that will come to Shs 105,800,000. That motivates the staff of Parliament that we care about what they do for us.This is money that we always contribute in burials on a daily basis; so, it will be important for us to contribute for our own. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Beatrice-MS BEATRICE ANYWAR:  Madam Speaker, thank you for the second opportunity to speak. I am happy that the House is in agreement and I will not take much time over this.Honourable colleagues, for the sake of this young family, we can contribute Shs 500,000 - it is a one-off - (Interjections)  Madam Speaker, that is my suggestion.THE SPEAKER:  It is just a suggestion. Hon. Otimgiw-10.24MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi:  Thank you, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us conclude on this and move on to -MR OTIMGIW:  Madam Speaker, the suggestions being given by colleagues are all good, but my only concern is that – God forbid, this might not be the last staff to pass away; so, we need to know what precedence we are setting. Are we going to be able to maintain it for all other staff and are we saying that some staff are more important than others?Whereas we support this matter, I suggest that we reflect on the precedence we are setting and whether it will be manageable in the long-run. However, I support it. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  She - let him speak then -10.25MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is indeed very unfortunate about the demise of our staff, but through you, I propose that we do not go into the specific amounts, but rather generate a consensus that we should contribute to the family, the list passes and depending on the generosity of people - some people never give condolences and it is in their culture and belief . (Laughter)Others want to give Shs 1,000,000, but let us generate a consensus and mobilise many members in the spirit of comradeship, so that we support the family and we take it upon ourselves to mobilise as many colleagues as possible.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have somebody who has been collecting money and as Hon. Atwijukire said, somebody will want to give more and just like he also said, “What about other staff who do-?” JB was an exceptional staff, I wouldn’t contribute Shs 200,000 because of who JB was. A person like Hon. Katuntu would even contribute - because he was a clerk to Hon. Katuntu.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12451THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024As we speak, he was my own clerk and a clerk to the Deputy Speaker. The Deputy Speaker has gone to the family to see how to handle these things. However, let us generously contribute for our clerk, if you have a heart. Next item.There is a procedural matter by Hon. Nambeshe - are you the Leader of the Opposition?MR NAMBESHE:  I am holding fort for my superior who will be in anytime from now. The procedural matter that I am raising pertains to the recent pre-inspection report of Mandela National Stadium. Until now, the works are still ongoing in the exterior and interior- I would love to have the attention of the-THE SPEAKER:  Attention of the Government Chief Whip. MR NAMBESHE:  Yes, because this is a very important issue. The inspection report has found the stadium works not compliant with the requirements. In addition, it has not been approved for the FIFA World Cup qualifiers, 2026. THE SPEAKER:  Qualifiers? MR NAMBESHE:  Yes, the African qualifiers match 3 and 4. This goes to the Minister of Education and Sports, who had made an undertaking to ensure that by the time of inspection, the works would be ready. He has let us down and I would love to have him report what has gone amiss moreover we have an opportunity- So, if they could be expedited, there is a second chance, because we do not have another venue to host this FIFA World Cup United 2026. Thank youTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Government- on the same issue?10.29MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi):  Madam Speaker, it is proper that when the Minister for Sports and Education is speaking, he gives us a proper statement about the gaps. Was it the money, which was the problem? What was the issue? So that we get to know early enough. Otherwise, for us to miss this-the minister or the person responsible will have to vacate their position because Uganda we cannot lose this opportunity this time. You assured us that things are going to be okay, we are now here asking, “what is wrong?” THE SPEAKER:  Okay. Another one?10.30MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Madam Speaker, the issue of the state of the sports facilities and I pick on Mandela National Stadium, Namboole.Last year, when the Uganda cranes could not host their home qualifying games here, the minister responsible promised us- and there are advantages with the home team playing at home.First, the confidence that the players draw from the support that they have in the stadium motivates them to win. Most of the teams get their qualification points from their home games.Secondly, also other benefits can be associated with it. Thirdly and most importantly, we waste a lot of money going to another country, to have an agreement for that country to allow us to host our home games. We have been doing that with Morocco, even for the fans that want to travel to Morocco, you are now putting an extra cost for them to go and support their team in a foreign land. The minister promised- I think so far, there are five deadlines that the minister gave.He said: “By November 2023 it will be ready,” but it was extended, I think, to January. We were then promised that by 26 March 2024, the stadium would be ready. This lack of seriousness on the side of the Government - and taking the House and Ugandans for granted - is what the honourable minister has to address today. 12452SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS [Mr Odur]When you come here, you make promises and reassure the country; you put us on standby and excite us that we shall use our only national stadium, and then we are duped. Madam Speaker, I would also like to be on record that Mandela National Stadium, Namboole is a precondition for hosting the African Nations Championship (CHAN), not even the African Cup of Nations (AFCON). You first host CHAN and, if they are satisfied, they confirm you to host AFCON. By December next year, we should have that stadium ready. The minister should also address us in light of the bid that we have put in to host both CHAN and AFCON because Namboole is the only stadium that was earmarked to host CHAN. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  This qualification is for the current one that is supposed to happen, not so?MR ODUR:  Yes, this qualification – we have two games coming up and we were supposed to host them to qualify for the African Cup of Nations, but the stadium is not ready. However, that also informs other international engagements that should come and be hosted – THE SPEAKER:  This means that Uganda will have to go and play in another country – MR ODUR:  Yes, basically, we will lose the bid to host and Uganda will be disqualified. The minister knows that just last week, he made other promises here regarding Akii Bua Stadium, and Buhinga Stadium – and all these form part of that. Would he address us comprehensively?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, that is a very serious issue. All Ugandans have been excited about AFCON, but at the same time, there is no way we can go and play in another country. Remember, we were supposed to play Algeria and Morocco has offered for us to go and play from there for free, but Algeria has refused to go to Morocco because of their issues. What is the way forward?10.34THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua):  Madam Speaker, I would have loved for this question to be answered by the minister in charge of sports, but I would also like to inform Parliament that as we sit now, there is an ongoing meeting that had been scheduled before Parliament was scheduled to sit this morning. The meeting is being chaired by the honourable minister of state for sports, Hon. Peter Ogwang. In attendance, we have Hon. Oboth Oboth representing the UPDF Engineering Brigade, who are currently the contractor on the ground. That is why those two are not here.That said, as the Government Chief Whip, I am privy to information within Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) of the Government. I know that Mandela National Stadium was inspected recently by a team of inspectors from the Confederation of African Football (CAF). All in all, of the major areas that had earlier on been highlighted, when this stadium was not approved about two or three years ago, we, as a country, have made substantive progress. I wish to invite you, honourable colleagues, in your free time – maybe in consultation with the minister of state for sports – to pay a visit to Namboole and see the progress so far made. The areas where the inspectors highly recommended some changes to be made –(Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was in Namboole when Hon. Obua was commissioning the renovation, then as the Minister of State for Sports. He invited me and he came dressed in a military uniform. The clarification that I seek from Hon. Obua is whether now that the inspectors have said we are not ready, he is replacing them with MPs – because he is issuing an invitation on a matter where inspectors have said we are not ready yet he is saying: “MPs come and visit?” The clarification I seek is whether if the MPs, with their naked eyes, say the stadium is okay, we can do away with the decision of the inspectors. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12453THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Obua?MR OBUA:  My invitation to honourable colleagues is not to turn them into inspectors, but, at least, to see. Honourable colleagues, Mandela National Stadium is a 1970-model stadium, which was handed over to us when it was even incomplete. When you now enter Mandela National Stadium – for instance, we did not have seats, but they have been installed. When you look at the pitch, if you have been there, you have seen what is there. Therefore, Madam Speaker, what I can undertake is to – THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order. Kumbe  you are all whips?MR NAMBESHE:  Madam Speaker, I am baffled by the misleading information that my good friend, the Government Chief Whip, is furnishing this House with when the truth of the matter is that I am in receipt of a copy – which I seek your indulgence to lay for him to read what they have written. This is a pre-inspection report of Mandela National Stadium. It has been done – maybe, let me take you through it verbatim.It reads: “ We acknowledge receipt of the FUF A communication with the pre-inspection report of the Mandela National Stadium (Kampala) conducted by FUF A for the FIF A World Cup United 2026 African Qualifiers Match day 3 & 4. ” Most important is this paragraph: “As you are aware, CAF (Confederation of African Football) has also recently conducted an independent inspection visit to the Mandela National Stadium. Based on the pre-inspection report, it is noted that the works in several areas in the exterior and interior zones of the stadium are still in progress. According to the CAF stadium approval procedures, an approval is only given when the stadium is compliant with the requirements at the time of the inspection, which is not the case for the Mandela National Stadium. CAF is not in a position to grant an additional period for the completion of the works and subsequently conduct an inspection visit as all the match venues must be confirmed to FIF A today.”Madam Speaker, the rest is equally relevant, but I would not wish to waste the time of this House. This is important and I request that I lay this copy for the benefit –(Interjection)-  the source is authentic. You will see it from here. The signatory is the head of professional football, Mohammed F. Sadat. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER : Honourable minister, can we ask the minister in charge of sports to come and give us a statement tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.?MR OBUA:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker. We undertake to give that statement. That said, we should also appreciate the progress we have made on site. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Let him give us a statement on the status of Namboole Stadium and the accountability of Shs 97 billion that was released for that work. If you want more money, first tell us what the other money has done. Next item. 10.42 MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule):  Thank you Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to remind the Chair about the undertaking made to this House. While we were closing for the Easter holidays, you had undertaken that we shall have an opportunity to debate the issue of the “parliamentary exhibition” wherein Members read about the profligacy of the Commission of this House, the allegations about the handshake to the Commissioners - backbench commissioners were given money ranging from Shs 400 to Shs 500 million. Madam Speaker, you undertook to avail an opportunity to us to have this matter thoroughly debated, concluded and put to rest -(Interruption)12454SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order from Hon. Aogon.MR AOGON:  Madam Speaker, the honourable colleague is aware that right now, Parliament is too busy with the Budget; so, he need not divert because we have less time. Is it in the order for the Member not to trust the Chair, who already gave assurance that we are ready as Parliament to proceed well? Is he in order to disturb the House when we are proceeding with the Budget in a tight condition? THE SPEAKER:   Additional point of order?MR ATWIJUKIRE:  Thank you very much. I am supplementing on the point of order- (Laughter)  - so that the Speaker rules on the matter at once. Before I joined Parliament –(Mr Ssekikubo rose_)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssekikubo - [Hon Ssekikubo: “It is unheard of; it is alien.”] MR ATWIJUKIRE: Before I joined Parliament - has it been a culture that the House discusses everything that comes up in newspapers? If that is a trend - Hon. Ssekikubo is my neighbour; his constituency immediately borders mine. On a daily or weekly basis, I have heard news on our local radios talking about him being a land grabber and facilitating land grabbing - (Interjections)-  I have never taken it as an issue, yet his involvement at whatever level affects the reputation of this House since he is a Member of Parliament. I have never thought that what you pick in the media becomes an issue for debate and discussion. Is it, therefore, in order, for Hon. Ssekikubo, who has been repeatedly accused of grabbing land and evicting people to think that his matters should be kept under the carpet and then other issues should be blown out of proportion?  In fact, there are cases of murder reported at police involving his name and Parliament has never discussed it. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I left my house very early in the morning for serious business. Next item. [Hon. Ssekikubo rose_] No, Hon. Ssekikubo. Let us first dispose of some ministerial policy statements. Next item.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF REPORTS OF SECTORAL COMMITTEES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2024/2025(I) THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRSTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, this morning, the House will proceed with the consideration of the sectoral committee reports on the ministerial policy statements pursuant to Rule 149 of the Rules of Procedure.As I guided in my communication, I expect the presenters - [Hon. Ssekikubo: “Order, Madam Speaker”] Hon. Alyek-MR ALYEK:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have already proceeded to the next item and in your wisdom; you have seen that what has been brought in front of you by Hon. Ssekikubo cannot be discussed now in this Parliament. Madam Speaker, you have already ruled and we have already proceeded to the next item. Is Hon. Ssekikubo, in order to take us back when we are discussing very important issues on the Floor of Parliament? In fact, he is ordering you; when you are speaking, he is also speaking and he is stuck on the microphone. Is he in order not respect your Chair, Madam Speaker? THE SPEAKER:  Leader of the Opposition - honourable members, I said I will give time for that discussion. I have very important issues that are statutory in nature and should be handled. If you do not respect the Chair, Hon. Ssekikubo - unless we have more than one Speaker in this House. Much as I try to be patient, do not touch the wrong button. 12455THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024I have said - I have not even accommodated the issue of theft of land because it is hearsay. Hon. Obua, your Members- Honourable members, I want to refer you to rule 224 on Contempt of Parliament. Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs – (Mr Ssekikubo rose_)THE SPEAKER:  Can I hear from the LOP?  THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a point of procedure, which I think will help to guide. I raised this issue here on the Floor regarding the public outcry on the expenditure of Parliament and the Commission. One of the prayers I was making at the time - that I did make - was that Parliament comes out to explain properly and formally because it is important that we be accountable to the people. We are a people-centred Parliament. That is one of the asks that I made. I think it is following up to say; “Can that get to happen?” Maybe you can guide, Madam Speaker, when that guidance will happen – when the public can be explained to by the people-centred Parliament so that it does not appear as if we do not want to be accountable or want to push things under the carpet. An explanation to the public, for which we speak here in Parliament, about those expenditures.  Therefore, I procedurally ask that you guide when that can happen. This is because it will settle many things and also get to explain to the people out there that this is what happened and this is our formal explanation. This is so that it is also not rumours. What has been happening is some people come out to speak on behalf of Parliament, maybe with inadequate information and so it throws a lot more confusion out there.Would it not be procedurally right that Parliament formally comes out to explain all these issues so that the public is settled and they get to know what happened. Maybe if there is a supplementary question from the public, they get explained to. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Joel, I told you and I wrote to you that we will have a meeting at the end of June. And we will do that.  On the issue of land grabbing or whichever, you will come with a personal statement. That should be given out. (Hon. Ssekikubo rose_)  You speak whatever nonsense you want to speak.  MR SSEKIKUBO:  Madam Speaker, I have sense; I can assure you.  THE SPEAKER:  You speak.  MR SSEKIKUBO:  No, I have sense. There is no doubt about that. Madam Speaker, when a Member – THE SPEAKER:  And who is the person you are speaking to?  MR SSEKIKUBO:  When a Member rises to tarnish the only asset I have in life - my reputation - on the Floor of this House, and you are presiding over and you do not call the Member to substantiate – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssekikubo, first wait. Where is the person who raised the issue? I want him to be here when you are responding. Where is Hon. Kimosho? Hon. Ssekikubo, you are better off responding to that when Hon. Kimosho is inside. MR SSEKIKUBO:  Madam Speaker, the matter is on the Hansard  and it was meant to stifle my contribution about a very serious matter of the Commission and the “handshake”.  And you allowed the Member to blatantly come and destroy the only asset I have in life - my reputation.  If he was in the right, is this Parliament a platform for people to come and kill other people’s reputations and they run away and thereafter they claim they are not in the House? Madam Speaker, on top of expunging it from the Hansard , it is a right and proper case to be referred to the disciplinary committee so that he can go there. I do not want to gag him if he has this very important information. Let him 12456SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS [Mr Ssekikubo]go to the disciplinary committee and appear there because he has used the platform of this very House to slur and try to kill the image of a Member of Parliament.  Number two, it was meant to scuttle me from continuing with demanding for accountability. I will not rest until accountability is given to this House. I need the commissioners - they are here seated - to tell us where they got the money - the Shs 400 million.  It is a ploy by the likes of the MP from Kazo -  Kazo had produced very brilliant MPs. I have never seen someone being used as a hatchet man. But now we have the commissioners here with us. I do not want to be diverted from my initial point. Can the Right Honourable Speaker give us the time and date here and now for the commissioners to explain to this House where they got the Shs 400 million? Where have they put it? Who voted it?  We are on the question of accountability and they want to scuttle the debate over that.  Yes, there are important issues we have to deal with, but the moment we do not plug the loopholes, the moment we allow the public funds to be wasted and shared in broad daylight and blatantly, there is a big problem.  I will take the information – THE SPEAKER:  There is a procedural matter from the Whip.MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, Parliament is a House of record and Parliament is guided by its own Rules of Procedure. Is it procedurally correct for this House to be turned into a House of debating news on social media? Is it procedurally correct under our Rules of Procedure, that I accuse Hon. Odur, he counter-accuses me and the House is turned into discussing our accusations from Lango Subregion as my neighbour? He is my neighbour also in the constituency. Are we proceeding right?  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I made a ruling last time that we will not entertain matters on social media, or rumours. If we are going to continue doing that, then you will be debating everything in this House.  Honourable members - Hon. Jonathan, first sit, I want to beg your indulgence. I have already explained myself on what we have ahead of us. We have a statutory deadline. The deadline of all this is tomorrow. We have over 18 Ministerial Policy Statements before us. We have to leave here and go and handle this - Hon. Jonathan, please allow me have only one report of foreign affairs. Hon. Jonathan and I always agree. Hon. Jonathan, please sit down.  MR SSEKIKUBO:  Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have agreed that the Member should be here - who is going to expunge it? No. Let the Member himself expunge, not you.  Honourable members, you know what amuses me?  When they talk about other people on social media, it is not painful. (Laughter)  Now, when they talk about others – (Laughter)  Yes, Hon. Jonathan?  11.01MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The allegations that were made by the honourable colleague from Kazo, require to be substantiated. Some of them are serious, because he mentioned that murders have taken place, and there are many Ugandans who have been killed, and the suspects have not yet been apprehended. There are others who have simply gone missing, and all that has been mentioned about the honourable colleague. In the absence of a substantiation from the honourable member who made the allegation, and by precedent that has been set in this House, such statements cannot be allowed to hang without explanation. Madam Speaker, the way forward is you either give chance to the Member who made the allegation to substantiate with evidence or in the alternative, under Rule 229 that entire record is expunged. 12457THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it would require us to also expunge what Hon. Ssekikubo said or have the Member from Kazo come and – we will tell the Member from Kazo to - honourable, switch on the microphone.MR ODUR: I wanted to add that Hon. Ssekikubo equally made allegations, and that can also be expunged or he is provided with an opportunity to explain. However, I had earlier initiated and indicated that I have issues I wanted to raise. I would like to be on record. The issues I wanted to raise, I did not pick them from social media, and I have not yet communicated them. But – THE SPEAKER: I advised you to write. MR ODUR: I am waiting for an opportunity to put that on record because it also touches, for example, on the issue of human resources in this House. I want to know how staff are recruited, promoted and remunerated, so that the public is assured. This is because Parliament has no exception to the rules. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will wait for Hon. Atwijukire to come and substantiate what he said, on the allegations he put forth, and then we will take action. Are you still on the Floor? MR ODUR: Yes, I am, and the Rules of debate require that when a Member mentions a point of order, I should sit down. I am civil. Hon. Ekanya is the one who raised the point of order, so I yielded the Floor for him. THE SPEAKER: I did not hear a point of order from Hon. Ekanya. Chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs - each committee has 15 minutes. 11.05THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Opolot): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to present a report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the policy statements for V ote 006, which is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters, and V otes 501 to 538 representing the 38 missions of Uganda abroad for the Financial Year 2024/2025 – THE SPEAKER: Can I have some silence? MR FRED OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, before I delve into the details, may I lay on Table the reports – THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I have some silence? I do not like people who come here as hired guns. MR FRED OPOLOT: I beg to lay. Secondly, I lay on Table the associated minutes. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER: Yes. MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural issue regarding the presentation of policy statements. The Public Finance – THE SPEAKER: Whip, protect me from Hon. Odur. MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the Public Finance Management Act requires the minister responsible for finance, when laying the budget, to fulfil a number of conditions. The minister for finance presented draft estimates, which gives the total budget of Shs 60.4 trillion. The same minister, Hon. Musasizi, while appearing before the Budget Committee, in his written statement, said the budget is Shs 58 trillion. The policy statements, which is the procedural issue I raise, that are about to be presented, when you add them, they present a different total of the budget. The Public Finance Management Act, Section 13(c) says, “A statement of budget signed by the minister and the Secretary to the Treasury must be also presented.” This is what this statement must read like. It must be attesting to the reliability and completeness of the information provided under this section, and the conformity of the information to the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility. 12458SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSThe law says a statement must be brought here by the minister, signed by him and the secretary to the treasury, attesting to the reliability and completeness of the information that the minister is giving together with the budget. The procedural issue I raise, Madam Speaker, is that when you add the figures in the policy statements, they give a different budget. The draft estimates by the same minister gives a different budget. His statement to the Budget Committee gives a different budget. Before we begin processing policy statements, Madam Speaker, I invite you to guide Parliament in respect to this section, on whether we will be proceeding right, to begin dealing with information that violates Section 13(c) of the Public Finance Management Act.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Al-Hajj. All the attendant documents you are talking about that accompany the Budget, were laid on 27th March when you were in Mecca. I welcome you back from Mecca.2. The figures of the Ministerial Policy Statements and the draft Budget are going to be referred to the Committee on Budget that is supposed to do reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation of these figures. That is why we are looking at policy statement by policy statement and refer them for harmonisation.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to augment partly the challenge Hon. Ssemujju and the Shadow Minister of Finance are finding because he has a problem with the three documents received. 1. The Ministerial Policy Statement, which has 60 point something trillion;2. Then the budget estimates with Shs 58 trillion;3. Then the Appropriation Bill, which is the third document.A few days ago, the Minister of Finance outed a corrigendum, which is cutting votes to V ote 130, debt servicing and that is disfiguring the entirety of the Ministerial Policy Statements and that is the basis for Hon. Sssemujju’s question. Secondly and related is the fact that the Committee on Finance, which is handling very key issues relating to the revenue side of the budget and this has always been a bit of a challenge, that the Committee on Finance reports on the votes themselves and then, the revenue. The revenue reporting side has not been as intense and that disfigures the way members of Parliament view the entire budget. I do not know how much time this Committee on Finance is going to have to report on the revenue side of the Budget because we seem to be concentrating on expenditure and forgetting the revenue side. Hon. Ssemujju had a point when he found a problem in reconciling - I agree that the Committee on Budget will try to harmonise, but then, these committees are left hanging as to whether they did a good job or their job was partly done and how much time they have to make the entire reconciliation of these votes. I thought I should augment his challenge because I also found a bit of that challenge - we have three documents, the Ministerial Policy Statement, the Budget estimates, the Bill itself and then, eventually the corrigenda. MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, if you look at the Appropriation Bill, that has all the votes, V ote 130 and 131 are missing. Yet, the law on public finance speaks about the completeness of information and says; “shall, completeness”.The minister is supposed to bring here a statement to attest to the completeness of the information he is giving Parliament. He cannot keep walking here like he is going to milk cows. He brings one ‘ ka’ document, throws it there and then he goes back, brings another and throws it there. Then he walks back - the law requires him to bring a statement on the completeness of information you are giving [Mr Ssemujju]12459THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Parliament before we undertake this process of policy statement consideration.THE SPEAKER: Let the Minister of Finance first answer that; he will even forget what they have said. 11.15THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do appreciate the concerns Hon. Ssemujju and of all other colleagues in this House who are involved with us in the Budget process have. However, I wish to allay the fears of some of our colleagues. The only problem is that we want to conclude from the beginning. We should work through the process and then, at the end of the day, harmonise, as the Speaker has said and come up with the exact resource envelope, which will agree with the expenditure.It is true that in the estimates, we presented a resource envelope of Shs 60.4 trillion; what the Cabinet approved was Shs 58.3 trillion as a resource envelope and we have corrected the errors or revised some of these figures, using the corrigenda. I was talking to the Shadow Minister this morning, that all this will eventually get to the Committee on Budget; we shall do the harmonisation, reconciliation and come back to supply when all the figures are alright. I want to ask colleagues- MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, we sit this morning to process budget policy statements that also contain figures. This Parliament will be making decisions today. They present Foreign Affairs; we make a decision. Yet, in the three documents you have presented, the figures are completely different. You mean we should be wasting time approving figures that are not there? MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, what we are doing today-THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo -MR MUSASIZI: We are going to debate the policy statements and make  recommendations, which will go to the Committee on Budget. The final decision on the budget will be taken by this House at supply and appropriation; right now, we are facilitating the process. MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the explanation of the honourable minister and I know the challenge he might be facing, but honourable minister, this Parliament wants to help you. We created the National Planning Authority to support the entire process so that the planning cycle is complete. Government departments come up with ministerial policy statements, which contain expenditure plans, procurement plans and timelines. They have activity plans, which are digested by the various committees of Parliament. If the Cabinet approves a Budget of Shs 58 trillion and the policy statement has a Budget of Shs 62 trillion, we are going to pass the Finance Bill, but some of these expenditures are multi-year expenditures. Madam Speaker, the minister is indirectly disempowering Parliament by not bringing all the documents at the same time. This creates laziness among the technical people and-THE SPEAKER: Honourable  Members, let us receive the Ministerial Policy Statements, we make our input, go and harmonise. Since all the chairpersons of different committees are members of the Committee on Budget, go and harmonise, reconcile and come up with specific figures. We will not pass a figure that has not come from you people . (Applause)  We shall give our comments and see how we improve it. (Applause)  As I said, 15 minutes. MR FRED OPOLOT:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will go straight to the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the policy statements for V ote 006, which is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters, and V otes 501 – 538, which is a representation of the 38 Missions Abroad. 12460SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSWhilst considering this report, we did hold physical meetings with the Minister of State for Regional Cooperation and with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs’ heads of department. We held Zoom meetings with the heads of missions and Foreign Service staff, as well as holding physical meetings with some of the heads of missions, majorly from those missions within the regions. We scrutinised the Alternative Policy Statement on the Foreign Affairs Sector from the office of the Leader of the Opposition and as well scrutinised the draft Appropriation Bill for the Financial Year 2024/2025 for the Foreign Affairs Sector. Half-year performance and key achievements of the ministry during the Financial Year 2023/2024The committee observed that over the years, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been at the helm in promoting and protecting Uganda’s image at high-level international events and, in so doing, has registered the following achievements that demonstrate it is a productive and not a consumptive Government institution. (Refer to Annex A for the detailed achievements of the Foreign Affairs Sector) Table 1 indicates the half-year performance of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the Financial Year 2023/2024 Observations 2.1.1. Release performanceBy the end of quarter two Financial Year 2023/2024, 50 per cent of the approved Budget had been released to the ministry for expenditure. 2.1.2. Budget absorptionThe ministry absorbed 33.3 per cent of the released funds during the Financial Year 2023/2024. Under-absorption is attributed to the following reasons. i.  Funds amounting to Shs 2.797 billion meant for subscription to international organisations were not spent due to pending submissions of assessed contributions by the respective international organisations. However, the funds will be paid in the subsequent quarters. ii.  Funds amounting to Shs 0.328 billion unspent under the gratuity item were a result of having fewer officers whose gratuity payments were due during the quarter. iii.  Funds meant for procurement of office supplies, services and works had already been committed to the electronic Government procurement system.Note:a) The achievements registered by V ote 006 are attached as Annex A  b) Challenges faced by the ministry during budget execution are attached as Annex B  3.0 Compliance with the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA)The Ministry of Foreign Affairs complied with Section 13(15) of the PFMA 2015. 4.0 Budget projection for the Financial Year 2024/2025 and the medium term is reflected in Table 2 below. Observations on Table 2 above a)  For the forthcoming Financial Year 2024/2025, the ministry’s budget is projected to increase from Shs 29.959 billion to Shs 30.204 billion, which is an increase of 1 per cent. b)  Under the wage category, the ministry was allocated Shs 5.996 billion, reducing the entire wage budget by Shs 0.355 billion, equivalent to 17 per cent. [Mr Opolot]12461THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024c)  Under the non-wage category, the ministry received an additional Shs 0.6 billion (two per cent) d)  The ministry has also maintained the same budget allocation of 0.12 billion under the development budget. e)  Payment of arrears to international organisations: it should be recalled that during the consideration of the Budget Framework Paper, this Parliament agreed that funds to the tune of Shs 41,867 billion for clearing arrears to the international organisations should be transferred from the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the budget of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The committee observed that in the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2024/2025, the minister indicated that, indeed, Shs 41.867 billion was not provided for. The committee further noted with concern that while a solution is being sought to clear the outstanding arrears, in the current Financial Year 2024/2025, Shs 25.54 billion is required to subscribe to international organisations, but only Shs 6.139 billion has been provided for, leaving a shortfall of Shs 19.401 billion. This shortfall begins a new cycle of arrears of subscription remittance to international organisations. f)  On travel abroad, the ministry requires a total of Shs 4.55 billion, but only Shs 1 billion was provided. g)  The post-summit activities of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and G77+China have no allocations at all. h)  In the medium term, the ministry’s total budget is projected to increase. 5.0  Comparison of Ministerial Policy Statement figures with the draft estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025. On 15 March 2024, Parliament received Ministerial Policy Statements for Financial Year 2024/2025. On 28 March 2024, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented to this Parliament draft estimates of revenue and expenditure (recurrent and development) for the Financial Year 2024/2025, summarised in Table 3 below. Observations on Table 3 a) The ministry’s wage development budgets for both the Ministerial Policy Statements and draft estimates allocations for the Financial Year 2024/2025 are consistent. b) The committee observed that the ministry’s non-wage budget presented in Ministerial Policy Statement has reduced from Shs 24.087 billion in the Ministerial Policy Statement to Shs 22.473 billion in the draft estimates, which is a reduction of seven per cent. The reduction is, therefore, likely to affect the implementation of planned activities.RecommendationThe committee recommends that Parliament maintains the figures presented in the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2024/2025. 6.0 Critical unfunded plan outputs for the financial year 2024/2025 Table 4 below highlights the critical underfunded and unfunded priorities for V ote 006 that is, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters for Financial Year 2024/2025. Because of time, I will go to the total of V ote 006, which is the funding gap required of Shs 25.951 billion. 12462SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSGeneral observations Foreign policyA foreign policy is a means through which a country relates with another country or with other countries and international organisations. It is through a foreign policy that national governments are guided in their diplomatic interactions and relationships with other countries.A country’s foreign policy reflects its values and goals, and helps to drive its political and economic aims in the global arena. In addition, our foreign policies help countries to use diplomacy and make appropriate agreements, as well as solve international problems by keeping the problems from developing into conflict. ObservationUganda has continued to operate without a specific laid-down foreign policy. Its foreign operations are only guided by Objective XXVIII of the Constitution of Uganda, which provides that the foreign policy of Uganda shall be based on the principles of:i. Promotion of the national interest of Uganda;ii. Respect of international law and treaty obligations;iii. Peaceful coexistence and non-alignment;iv. Settlement of international disputes by peaceful means; andv. Opposition to all forms of domination, racism and other forms of oppression and exploitation.The committee further observed that Uganda’s aspirations beyond its borders have not optimally been fulfilled and realised because of a lack of a documented and consistent foreign policy – (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter.DR ISINGOMA : Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, before you come in with a procedural matter, I guided you very well. Bring the figures that you budgeted for 2024/2025; what is the shortfall, and what are your observations and recommendations? It is as brief as that, but there is a procedural matter. DR ISINGOMA: Madam Speaker, I am rising under Rule 83(f) of the Rules of Procedure, which is very clear. It says, “A Member shall not, without the consent of the Speaker, bring into the House anything other than papers, books or other documents, which are directly connected with the business of the House.”I have just seen “ Maama  Mabira” coming in with something that looks like a cup with something drinkable. I do not know whether we are proceeding well based on this rule. We do not know whether it is alcohol or not. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, can we be guided on whether we are proceeding well, when we have “ Maama  Mabira” here, busy drinking?THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable member, first of all, we do not have a Member of Parliament called “ Maama  Mabira”, so, your point of order is misguided. Continue. MR FRED OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, I will make sure I expedite. Arrears of subscription to international organisations –THE SPEAKER: Did you get what I was saying? MR FRED OPOLOT: Yes, Madam Speaker. Let me get straight to it. Allow me to go straight to the general recommendations of the first part, as well as present the Appropriation Bill very briefly.[Mr Opolot]12463THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024General recommendationsForeign policyThe Ministry of Foreign Affairs should present to Parliament a foreign policy within six months after the adoption of this report. This will enable Uganda to streamline and shape Uganda’s foreign relations and coordinate its interests and goals on the international scene. Arrears of subscription to international organisationsAs indicated in the observations above, the committee still recommends that areas amounting to Shs 41.867 billion should be transferred from the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.Annual subscriptions to international organisationsA shortfall of Shs 19.401 billion should be provided to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to enable it to pay annual subscription fees to international organisations. Travel abroadA shortfall of Shs 3.55 billion on travel abroad should be provided. Non-Aligned Movement and G77+ChinaTo avoid supplementary budgets, Shs 1 billion should be provided to the ministry for post-NAM activities and Shs 2 billion for post-G77+ China activities. The Appropriation Bill, 2024, for V ote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters Recurrent budget estimates stands at Shs 18,330,745,000. Development budget estimate stands at Shs 51,816,000,000. Madam Speaker, I will go to the second part of my presentation, which is recommendations for cross-cutting issues across the 38 missions. That is, votes 501 to 538. Missions Abroad half-year budget performance of Financial Year 2023/2024 The half-year budget performance of Missions Abroad was as indicated in Table 5 below.ObservationsRelease performanceAt the end of quarter two, total releases to Missions Abroad amounted to Shs 196.329 billion, reflecting a performance of 72.12 per cent of the revised approved budget. AbsorptionAt the end of quarter two, total expenditure amounting to Shs 117.733 billion, reflecting a performance of 79.97 per cent, was absorbed. However, most of the missions informed the committee that the unspent funds would be absorbed in the subsequent quarter. The achievements registered by votes 501 to 538 are attached in Annex A. Equally, the challenges are attached in Annex B. Compliance with Section 13 of the PFMA, 2015That is already stated in that paragraph. Because of time, I will go to the Missions Abroad projection for the Financial Year 2024/2025 and medium-term, which is outlined in Table 6 below. Observation on Table 61. In the proposed Budget for the Financial Year 2024/2025, the total budget for Missions Abroad is projected to increase from Shs 248.128 billion to Shs 266.468 billion, which reflects an increase of seven per cent; 2. Under the wage and non-wage categories, Missions Abroad received an additional Shs 6.04 billion and Shs 12.3 billion respectively; and  12464SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS3. The Missions Abroad development budget has been maintained at Shs 58.388 billion.Comparison of policy statement figures with draft estimates for Financial Year 2024/2025 for Missions AbroadTable 7 below illustrates the comparison between the Budget Framework Paper and the Draft Estimates of Revenue and Expenditure for the Financial Year 2024/2025 for Missions Abroad.Observations in Table 7The Missions Abroad wage and development budgets for both the Ministerial Policy Statements and Draft Estimates Allocations for Financial Year 2024/25 are consistent. The Missions non-wage budget has increased from Shs 169.463 billion to Shs 169.563 billion, which indicates an increase of 0.06 per cent. 6.0 Critical unfunded planned outputs for Financial Year 2024/25 Table 8 highlights the critical underfunded and unfunded priorities for the Missions abroad for Financial Year 2024/2025. The matrix shows the details of the Missions, which comes to the total of unfunded priorities to the tune of Shs 21.091 billion. 7.0 Observations of Missions AbroadColleagues, that is observed from 7.1 (i) to (iv). 7.2 outlines the significance and milestones Missions Abroad have achieved in Economic and Commercial Diplomacy. Again, colleagues, that is reflected as outlined in the document. Madam Speaker, just to cite one example of probably the key achievement, that is the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and G77+ China summits that our missions were able to attract to our good country. 7.2.1 Challenges faced while promoting Economic and Commercial Diplomacy (ECD) These are as listed from (i) to (ix) of the document and I will go straight to highlight the budgets for travel abroad- THE SPEAKER: Switch on the microphone. MR FRED OPOLOT: 7.7 Status of Uganda’s properties abroad. Madam Speaker, this is a serious matter. Could you just allow me to expound a bit? Thank you. Ownership of properties abroadThe committee observed that several Missions are seated on Uganda’s land abroad. Aware that the Uganda Land Commission is mandated to, where applicable, hold and manage any land acquired by the Government abroad except that the Commission may delegate the management of such land to Uganda’s Missions Abroad; and to procure a certificate of title for any land vested in or acquired by the Government; The committee decided to interact with the Uganda Land Commission to establish the status of Uganda’s Missions’ land abroad. The interaction proved beyond reasonable doubt that some of Uganda’s certificates of title could not be traced to the custodian of Uganda’s properties. A case in point is a certificate of title for Uganda’s Chancery in Pretoria. The committee, therefore, finds it prudent to request the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Lands and Urban Development to present to this House an updated status and proof of Uganda’s properties abroad within six months from the date of the adoption of these reports. Physical state of properties abroad Out of the 38 Missions, which Uganda has abroad, 16 Missions do not have any properties. Other missions either have a Chancery or official residence or a commercial [Mr Opolot]12465THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024building generating Non-Tax Revenue for Uganda. A list is attached in Appendix D. Properties in deplorable stateThese are listed as highlighted in the report; equally, the vacant land abroad. 7.9 Classification of Missions AbroadThe committee learned that - Madam Speaker, this is extremely important- that the last classification of Missions was done in 2011. There is a need to reclassify Missions to place them appropriately, bearing in mind that circumstances have evolved over time. This affects the wage allocation on these different missions, the foreign service allowances as well as the education allowances of our staff in these Missions. 7.13 Funding gaps and unfunded prioritiesWages     Locally employed staff of diplomatic missions or consulates are usually citizens or permanent residents of the host countries. It is an international policy that staff agreements are entered into by local staff and the Missions are governed by applicable host countries’ laws and standards. Some host countries’ labour laws demand the employers to increase salaries of local staff  annually in accordance with the cost of living index. Many of Uganda’s Missions Abroad have fallen short; and or not implemented the same, making Uganda a candidate for litigation. To abet the above anomaly, the committee recommends that additional funding should be provided to cater for prospective salary increases. Rental and property tax arrears     Uganda has several commercial buildings in the Missions’ host countries. The committee, however, learned that the Missions do not have a budget line for rental and property taxes and now that is the irony.Whereas the Missions Abroad bring in the money to the Consolidated Fund, we cannot avail money for tax arrears. This has caused accumulated tax arrears indicated in just a few of these examples. For instance, in Kinshasa, the property generates an annual Non-Tax Revenue of $165,000, which is collected and remitted to the Consolidated Fund. The Mission, however, does not have a budget to pay rental and property taxes. The total tax arrears from 2019 in Kinshasa including tax assessment of 2024 have accumulated to $443,582. Letters on the subject matter have been written and rewritten to the relevant stakeholders in Uganda, but there is no response yet. Uganda stands to lose this property if payment is not made on time. Ottawa; the Mission in Ottawa has arrears of property tax amounting to Shs 231,424,984 on the official residence and Shs 595,522,060 on the Chancery building. iii. Poor infrastructure of the rental propertiesThis is as indicated in the report and so is the transfer and settling of Foreign Service Officers to Missions, official representational vehicles; I should highlight that this is very embarrassing because some heads of mission use public means; taxis and Ubers, to perform Mission duties. For instance, the Ambassador in Algeria has used taxis for eight years of his deployment in that Mission. Many other Missions, which still have a semblance of official representational and utility vehicles have vehicles that are outdated, completely worn out and beyond the standard emission levels as required by the host countries. In some countries like India, the Minister of External Affairs of India has occasionally cautioned the Ugandan Mission to dispose of 12466SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSthe vehicles as soon as possible in compliance with the set emission regulations. This calls for urgent provision of the required funds as indicated herein:(i) Uganda Embassy in Algeria requires Shs 700,000,000.(ii) Uganda High Commission in New Delhi requires Shs 800,000,000. (iii) Uganda High Commission in Nairobi requires Shs 180,000,000. (iv) Uganda Embassy in Tehran requires Shs 465,000,000 to purchase a new representational car.7.14 Revenue from Missions Abroad is detailed in the report.7.16 Lack of a budget line for Missions abroad for externalisation of labour - again it is an area that needs attention. There is a need for Ugandans to look for greener pastures, as well as address the problem of lack of enough employment in Uganda. This has, therefore, forced many Ugandans to seek employment abroad. As a result, Ugandans are often forced to take unimaginable risks, accepting precarious job offers and making hazardous migration decisions. (i)  Uganda’s Missions in destination countries are responsible for vetting, accrediting and licensing recruitment agencies in those respective countries. The Mission in Riyadh, for instance, was reported to have accredited 771 recruitment companies out of 1,900 companies in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. (ii) The Missions are also responsible for clearing and attesting job orders from destination countries. Uganda’s Embassy in Riyadh was reported to have cleared and attested to 1,109 job orders out of 2,950 applications in 2022. It is, therefore, important to note that it is a process to vet, accredit and license recruiting agencies, but Uganda Missions are performing these activities in destination countries without leaving a processing fee. In this regard, the MoGLSD of Uganda should put in place a policy that will enable the Missions to levy a processing fee. Challenges arising from the externalisation of labour;(i) Increasing number of detainees(ii) Lack of medical care(iii) Execution time for our citizens who are abroad who are charged in courts of law. (iv) Lack of adequate facilities such as a simple call centre that these workers can access help very fast. Capacity of foreign service officers to deliver is already mentioned - 8.0 General recommendations; (i)  Compliance with Section 13(15) of the PFMA, 2015. Upgrade the Programme-based Budgeting System (PBS)The PBS system should be upgraded to incorporate requirements of Section 13(15) of the PFMA, 2015 and to allow for earlier reporting by Missions abroad. (ii) Economic and commercial diplomacyFunds should be available to all Missions to enable them –THE SPEAKER:  Is it easier or to allow for earlier reporting? MR FRED OPOLOT:  For earlier reporting, that is correct. Thank you for that correction. (ii) Economic and commercial diplomacy Funds should be available to all Missions to enable them to enhance Economic and Commercial Diplomacy. [Mr Opolot]12467THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024(iii)  Increase MTEF Ceilings(a) The Government of Uganda should increase the MTEF ceiling for all missions abroad. This will enable them to capture the reality of the cost of living index, especially medical expenses, rent costs, utilities, and salaries. (iv) Allocation of funds for NAM and G77+China Post-Summit activities.(v) Deployment of labour attaches to all Missions abroad As part of the monetary mechanism, the MoGLSD should, as a matter of urgency, recruit labour attaches at all Missions abroad. The labour attachés will be responsible for ensuring that all complaints of migrant workers and other Ugandans in the diaspora are handled to their logical conclusion. (vi) Uganda AirlinesCountries, which have their own airlines offer cheaper air tickets, hence reducing the chances of passengers opting for Uganda Airlines. The Ethiopian Airlines, for instance, provides cheaper flight ticket fares from Mogadishu to Entebbe. Uganda Airlines, therefore, needs to adopt competitiveness in order to survive in the airline market. Finally, there is the Appropriation Bill, 2024 for V otes 501 to 538. Those are our Missions Abroad, as I have already stated. Given time, it is already listed in the appendix. I will only avail the total, which is the recurrent budget estimate at Shs 208,681,738,000 and the Development Budget estimates stands at Shs 61,889,068,000. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson. As I said before, pursuant to rule 149(2) we will send this Ministerial Policy Statement to the Committee on Budget after we have approved from here, for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation. They raise pertinent issues, which must be considered and handled. Let us first hear from the shadow minister. 11.57MR MUWADA NKUNYINGI (NUP, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the elaborate report. As an able shadow minister, I wish to add that part of the challenges of the foreign affairs sector has been on policy. If you recall, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was supposed to table a codified foreign policy by June last year. As Opposition, we have not been updated, and we perceive it as contempt of Parliament. We need to get a better understanding from –THE SPEAKER:  Not as Opposition, but as the House because the contempt is to Parliament, not to Opposition. MR NKUNYINGI: Thank you, for the guidance. It is only that I was submitting as a Shadow Minister of Foreign Affairs and I wish to represent, first of all, the alternative government. Secondly, under NDP III, we are talking about, for example, enhancing funding for ECD. The NDP III provided for a diaspora investment strategy that had to be finalised in the first year. To date, we do not have such a strategy for the diaspora. As Opposition, whereas we fund Missions for diaspora mobilisation and engagement, we are worried. The diaspora is being mobilised for what and to do what without a policy. There is no proper guidance on what the diaspora is mobilised for. However, the guidance would be under NDP III, which required a diaspora investment strategy that would guide the development of a diaspora engagement policy. As of now, we do not know why they are mobilising people in the diaspora much as there is funding allocated to some of these missions. Thirdly, is on protocol and consular services. Whereas we agree that there is need to fund and enhance the provision of consular services across our Missions and embassies, we also see 12468SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSa weakness by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Our passport ranking and index is lower than Kenya and Tanzania. We even have countries, which are visa-exempt for Uganda, but we do not have that reciprocal arrangement where Ugandan passport holders can equally enter those countries visa-free, much as we are proposing funding. This is equally related to public diplomacy. On the realignment of our embassies and missions, I want to give an example of our Mission in Russia. It is the same mission accredited to cover Ukraine, but these are countries at war. You cannot be a diplomat in Russia representing Uganda and purport to appear in Ukraine. There must be a realignment as we pursue enhanced funding. The embassies are talking about travel abroad, which is right because many times, when we raise issues of labour externalisation, they will say we want money to reach these areas. However, some of this might be affected by policy and the rationale of accreditation if we do not realign our Missions to be alive to international realities. The last is with bilateral labour agreements; labour externalisation has been echoed in this Parliament day by day, but the answer from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has been, “We don’t have money for travel.” It is also true that some of our ambassadors have not presented their credentials to the other countries of the world, alleging lack of travel. The Minister of Foreign Affairs is talking about bilateral agreements and we see some of these ministers parading what they call “agreements” out there. However, in those countries, there is an allegation that those are not enforceable, which may have a bearing on the budget. It is not brought to us in Parliament to understand the realities of how to enforce these bilateral agreements. We would like to learn from the Minister of Foreign Affairs - much as we have a Minister of State, I have not seen the full minister, Gen. Jeje Odongo, since I became a Shadow Minister, but I hear that he took oath somewhere. We would like to know how many bilateral agreements have been enforced. For example, we hear of a bilateral agreement with United Arab Emirates (UAE), but we understand it is not enforced. How many have been signed?  And how many have been enforced? As I conclude, when it comes to international subscription, it is shaming that the Republic of Uganda by last year, failed to pay subscription to the African Union. We understood as a committee that our Ambassador –THE SPEAKER:  Actually, we did not fail to pay – we only delayed. There is no way we can fail to pay. MR NKUNYINGI:  I take your guidance, Madam Speaker, but one time, we interfaced with our Ambassador to the African Union and she alleged that she was denied entry to the meetings of the African Union. When building African nationalism and patriotism on the African continent, but we do not comply with our commitment on international obligations, especially on strategic institutions like the African Union, it is a shame. We need to understand from the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the strategy and from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. When presenting the budget and most of these estimates, we discuss in terms of sectors. Many times, when we are realigning to the programme approach, a number of these proposed priorities are disregarded. I do not know how best we are going to safeguard this process to ensure that what has been recommended is actualised. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery this morning, we have students from Kyambogo University, Kampala, they are represented [Mr Nkunyingi]12469THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024by Hon. Ronald Balimwezo, Member of Parliament, Nakawa East and Hon. Shamim Malende. Join me in welcoming them - (Applause) –  Please, have a seat. Thank you, very much for coming.MS ANYWAR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker – (Interjections)-  THE SPEAKER:  She is not the Minister of Foreign Affairs. She wants to raise her issues. Let her speak as a Member of Parliament.MS ANYWAR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the kind guidance. I appreciate the report, but would like to bring to your notice that I was in Copenhagen two and a half weeks ago, for a meeting on climate issues. While there, we were confronted with a situation, which I thought should be brought to your attention. Members travelled for various meetings and I had also gone as a minister on environmental issues. You are aware that our President is the Chairperson of G77+China and in those meetings, we were seen as members coming from the country chairing the group and any comment would be taken as the country’s position. I was lucky to be with Ambassador Adonia and being the chairperson of that committee, he quickly consulted others and then, I read a statement on behalf of the Government of Uganda, the Chairperson of the G77+China group, which made it easy. I brought this up so that the Minister of Foreign Affairs comes and briefs Parliament on these procedures because you can be trapped to make a comment, yet you are making it maybe as a committee-next week, I will also go and meet the President for the United Nations Climate Change Conference/Conference of the Parties (COP 29) in Berlin- I am also guided that it is not about environmental issues or COP 29. They want to know the position of the G77+China Group -I thought I would bring this to your attention.THE SPEAKER:  Do you sit in the same Cabinet with the Minister of Foreign Affairs? MS ANYWAR:  I do, but I am speaking for the benefit of this House. THE SPEAKER:  I think it is a collective responsibility that something must come out from Cabinet and it is the position of the country. I do not want you ministers to start lamenting on the Floor. Sort your issues at Cabinet, agree on a Government position and give.12.09MR JONATHAN ODUR  (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the report and I adopt its text entirely, with the following comments. I will begin from where the honourable minister stopped, raised ably by the shadow minister for Foreign Affairs - the lack of foreign policy. It does not only put the Government officials in a corner, but also applies to us Members of Parliament, that when we move out of the country, we represent Uganda. There are certain matters in the international community that we must speak to in unison as a country. Therefore, I cannot overly emphasise the need for a foreign policy. I know the Prime Minister one time told us that there is a foreign policy in the head of the Chief Diplomat of the country, the President. This means that we must access the President every time to know his position on a certain matter. It is quite difficult for that to be done, practically. So, let the ministers who are here, as you have guided, follow up and let the President put that vision in writing so that the country can be at peace. I will give one minute, strictly, for my brother to give information. THE SPEAKER:  Eeh, you have become the Speaker!MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO:   Thank you, Madam Speaker. Further on the issue of foreign policy, you all know what is going on 12470SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSin the world and we cannot shy away from the suffering that is in the Gaza Strip. We, as Ugandans and citizens of this world, are aware that over 39,000 people have been killed – 13,000 children have lost their lives – and over one million people are threatened with famine.We would like to know the position of our country on the suffering of the people in Palestine and the Gaza Strip. All countries are calling for a ceasefire – a cessation of hostilities -THE SPEAKER:  So, what is the information you are giving? MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO:  The information I would like to give to my honourable colleague is that the chief diplomat of this country must be elaborate on matters of foreign affairs and give the position of our country as regards the global issues that are happening in this world so that we can also feel fully represented in the global atmosphere. Thank you. MR ODUR:  Thank you for that valuable information. The second point I would like to raise, Madam Speaker, which is very embarrassing, is our failure to remit taxes in foreign countries. In some countries, failure to pay taxes is a very serious crime -THE SPEAKER:  Taxes and subscriptions.MR ODUR:  For subscription, it could be subject – but with taxes, after the assessment, there are penalties that accompany them. It means we are accumulating what we call “nugatory expenditures” by failing to pay our taxes on time. The two foreign missions cited here, Ottawa in Canada and Kinshasa, require Shs 2.587 billion. I feel that this House must support the ministry to pay for that. Otherwise, our image – for a country that fails to pay its taxes, you can imagine what goes on in the minds of those who are abroad. The fourth one is about the face of our foreign Missions. It is quite embarrassing that a guard of honour is mounted by a host country and our Ambassador comes in a tuk-tuk , because they do not have means of transport. For some of those countries, the taxis they have are too old. I have been to some of the countries that I do not want to mention here.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Jonathan, he goes to receive his Members of Parliament and ministers in a tuk-tuk?  (Laughter)MR ODUR:  That is what the report is saying. They do not have vehicles. Some of the vehicles are condemned, meaning they are not fit and worthy to be on the road. Any time, they can cause accidents and embarrass the country. So, I support that money be provided for our chief diplomats to be -(Interjection)-  I will give you clarification when I finish.THE SPEAKER:  There is information from Hon. Fortunate.MS NANTONGO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank Hon. Odur. In addition to the issue of the vehicles for our foreign Missions, Saudi Arabia, in particular, is a country with 13 states. It handles all issues to do with labour externalisation, but they have one vehicle that is in a very poor condition.Therefore, I would like to support Hon. Odur’s point that we need to fund these Missions because some of them are handling labour externalisation issues -THE SPEAKER:  You want to support the committee’s position.MS NANTONGO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the committee’s position to increase funding for these Missions, especially the ones that handle labour externalisation issues because they handle both labour externalisation and other issues. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. [Mr Nsereko]12471THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024MR ODUR:  The Minister for Finance would do us a very good job to clarify on the variation in the figures in the Ministerial Policy Statement. THE SPEAKER:  Where is the Minister for Finance? Hon. Obua is there.MR ODUR:  Hon. Obua is my neighbour and he has a history of other things other than finance and mathematics. (Laughter)  The point I am raising here is that Shs 1.613 billion that had been proposed in the ministerial policy statement does not tally with the figures in the Appropriation Bill. I would like the minister to clarify to us: what will happen to our approval? We want to take a decision from an informed position. So, it would be very important that the Ministry for Finance - and there are several ministers there – comes back here before the debate ends and clarifies on that particular point: the variation of Shs 1.613 billion. I thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Jonathan, as I said before, pursuant to rule 149(2), all these ministerial statements do not tally with the Budget estimates and, of course, we also have the corrigenda and Appropriation Bill. So, we are going to send them for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation. By the time they bring them back here, our expectation is that the Budget Committee will have done a good job to harmonise that. I was happy with a disclaimer that the minister made the other day. Honourable minister for finance made a very serious disclaimer, that in this Budget that we have, there is a V ote that was missing. I loved your sincerity. Honourable members, you have heard the issues that are in the report and these issues are going to be harmonised.12.17MR BRAHAN EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the foreign Mission in Pretoria. I concur with the report. They have done a very good and elaborate report. However, the foreign mission in Pretoria is handling many neighbouring countries. However, they have not been well facilitated to reach those neighbouring countries that they are handling. We once went there and they were telling us that when their meetings were taking place, especially in Botswana and Namibia, they could not be in a position to attend those meetings because they were not facilitated. They are only facilitated to handle issues that are to do with South Africa, yet there are other areas that they are supposed to handle.In this regard, I concur with the report that those Missions that are handling areas that they are attached to are well facilitated so that our citizens staying in those countries are also helped. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Dr Abed? 12.18DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Over the years, the Government of the Republic of Uganda has invested millions of dollars in infrastructure in the Democratic Republic of Congo. I have observed that our trade has gone up ever since that time. However, I would like to know from the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the minister for finance how this investment is impacting - because the trade can go up when there are issues that have impacted from Kinshasa, not necessarily from eastern Congo.We invested millions of dollars in infrastructure in the eastern Congo. We want a brief from the ministry on how this is impacting our trade so that it will guide us in the future, to understand where to put our money and that is very critical.In the report, I heard that the chairperson is proposing that Uganda Airlines reduces its air ticket fares because they are comparing with Ethiopia.12472SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMadam Speaker, there are many factors that guide these air ticket fares. That statement in the report does not properly substantiate this. Some of the factors - THE SPEAKER:  Maybe the chairperson did not have a business mind because Uganda Airlines is a young airline company and we need to grow it.DR BWANIKA:  Exactly! Madam Speaker, there are many factors and I thought that we should be fair enough not to use that statement. Otherwise, Ethiopia has a hub and the type of aircrafts they use - there are so many issues that arise when you talk about airfares.THE SPEAKER:  That can only be advised by the Ministry of Works and Transport, which is responsible for that not, you. DR BWANIKA: Thank you.12.21MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (NUP, Nyendo-Mukungwe Division, Masaka City: Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Some of you will speak to the next ministerial policy statements.MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker . I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report presented. I have two brief issues to bring to the attention of the chairperson and the minister.One relates to the classification of the missions. Whereas you make mention of the challenge of classification, having hosted several international conferences and summits, we would have expected foreign affairs, by now, to have re-aligned its interests in terms of mission allocation.Earlier on, Hon. Ezama spoke about Pretoria. I was part of the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) in the 10th Parliament and I led a delegation to our Mission in Pretoria, which was in a mess. One of the key people at the station had abandoned duty and delegated his wife who was not a mission staff and retired himself. It is in the report; and there were problems.However, when you look at the duty there, that they are looking after several neighbouring nations, that nation by now should have been re-classified. So, the delay in reclassifying these missions according to the interests of our country is a problem.Secondly, we need clarity on endangered assets. Forget about those that are in a very sorry state. I recollect that our assets in Addis Ababa were hanging in balance and the people who were trading them on the market were staff of foreign affairs. I do not know if they are still safe or they have been sold off. We need clarity on the safety of these assets. There was property in Addis Ababa, which was due for development, but we did not have money yet the Government had given timelines to either develop it or sell it. So, we need clarity on these assets so that as Parliament, we can know whether we are taking a positive trajectory as far as these assets are concerned.Lastly, the fluidity of our foreign policy should not be a problem because we are a mature data nation and mature data ordinarily have fluid foreign policy. Fluid sometimes to fit the moment of the time, but what should not change are our international commitments such as human rights and other key values that we have as a nation. Otherwise, nobody will have time to download the views of the chief executive of the nation every time they travel to know his views on a particular matter on the global circuit. If they were downloadable, we would know what he thinks every time.Therefore, foreign affairs has a duty to guide the nation on where it stands on key international issues when they arise. Otherwise, we understand the fluidity or the flexibility of our foreign policy. Thank you[Dr Bwanika]12473THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:   Thank you. Honourable minister, something came up on the Floor of the House and it is about the assets we have outside this country so, we need a status report.There is one in Nakuru, which we visited. There is also one in Naivasha, which we also visited while we served on the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises).Honourable minister, can we hear from you?12.25THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr John Mulimba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for a very elaborate report presented. As the Minister of Foreign Affairs, we concur with all the issues that have been raised in the report. I also thank, honourable colleagues, for emphasising in concurrence with what the report contains. I would like to highlight a few areas.Number one, on the issue of foreign policy, I think Uganda is one of the countries, which has an entrenched foreign policy position in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, contained in the National Objectives and Direct Principles of State Policy, Objective XXVIII. Therefore, we have made remarkable progress in trying to draft one. However, as you may be aware, the ministry does a function delegated by His Excellency the President who is the chief diplomat in any case and we forwarded the foreign policy proposal to him for clearance and onward transmission to Parliament. In a recent meeting, Madam Speaker, because of the global fluidity of affairs we have, we have been advised that Uganda may not come out very fast to coin out a steadfast written foreign policy, but continues to deliver her foreign policy in the ministerial policy statements as contained thereunder. We shall continue to wait for the advice of the chief diplomat in that regard.Madam Speaker, permit me to comment on the issues of arrears to international obligations. Indeed, I want to confess to this House that Uganda quite often has looked ugly in respect to meeting obligations especially assessed contributions to international organisations to which we subscribe. First of all, in respect to our foreign policy as contained in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, we are supposed to respect international obligations such as treaties and agreements to which we are part and part of the respect is actually meeting the assessed contributions. So, quite often, we have not looked very good. THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of clarification.MR MULIMBA:  I will give you the clarification later. We have not looked good -THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of clarification.MR SSEMUJJU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister. The clarification I am seeking arises from your statement that the President is the chief diplomat. We have seen the President sending his son to Rwanda when you ministers are there; his son threatening to invade and overrun the Government of Kenya and the President called the President of Kenya to apologise. His son said, he now supports Tigrayans who are fighting the Government of Ethiopia and your embassy staff were summoned by Ethiopia and later minister, Hon. Jeje Odongo went there. Therefore, the clarification I seek is whether the family of the President also shares in this responsibility and who would you contact, for example, when the son says that he is going to raid Kenya. Do you contact the son or the 12474SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSfather? You people – because when the son caused problems in Ethiopia, they summoned the Embassy staff. For clarification, who do you call when there are problems with sons or daughters?THE SPEAKER:  I would have been surprised if you finished your submission without mentioning the name of President Museveni. Can we conclude on the issue of subscription because that takes the first call?MR MULIMBA : Madam Speaker, permit me to proceed from where I was -(Laughter)-  I was submitting that, indeed, we need to up our game concerning payments to the international organisations to which we subscribe. I have seen in the report a proposal that the V olume of Shs 41.8 billion be transferred from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I think that does not cure the problem. The problem is the lack of commitment to pay arrears. Whether under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they are still arrears to Uganda.Madam Speaker, I know we have a commitment not to come up with supplementary budgets, our annual requirement for assessed contributions as subscriptions amounts to Shs 25.54 billion. What is provided for is Shs 6.139 billion, leaving a shortfall of Shs 19.401 billion. That automatically calls for a supplementary because these are international organisations to which we have subscribed by treaties and it is mandatory. It is therefore, my appeal that Parliament supports the position that we get the shortfall funded.Let me also go to issues of our Heads of Missions failing to travel and present credentials to some of the countries to which they are accredited. Yes, indeed, this has been a usual occurrence. Why, because of the suspension of the budget for travel abroad. Madam Speaker, permit me to make this clear. I think when some people read “travel abroad” as contained in our proposal, they attach it to ministry officials, that is the ministers. Remember our ministerial policy statement contains V ote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs and V ote 501 to V ote to 538 for Missions Abroad. Therefore, when we talk about travel abroad, it embodies Missions Abroad among others to permit Heads of Missions accredited to multilateral stations to present credentials to those other countries where they are accredited, apart from the sitting station. Also to perform consular and diplomatic functions to which they are called to play. It is, therefore, important that this Parliament supports the restoration of the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for travel abroad.Madam Speaker, it also goes to the matter raised earlier on by an honourable colleague where it has been observed that we do not classify and reclassify these Missions Abroad. This equally calls for travel abroad to do annual and sub annual inspections. Without this travel abroad, we may not know what is obtaining in the Missions. As you are aware the world and geopolitics are very dynamic, and we need inspectors to travel abroad to assess and therefore inform the standing of the Missions at that point in time.Indeed, we do have several deficiencies in our structures. For example, our structure in Trafalgar Square is not pleasant, and our structure in Ottawa – Madam Speaker, it is true some of our structures have been condemned by the host governments. To that extent, we look ugly and therefore, need money to do rehabilitation and repairs or do fresh construction where possible. We also have some pieces of land allocated by some host governments and when that is done, they give you a period within which you have to develop – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, can you bring us a documented list of the property?MR MULIMBA:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker. On the issuance of passports, it is true [Mr Ssemujju]12475THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024that previously our three Missions in London, Washington and Pretoria had been permitted to issue passports. However, due to funding shortages that role has been recalled. We would also like to pray that funds be availed to support the budget for the issuance of passports because this is a right given to the citizens of Uganda both within and outside – (Interruption)MS NABUKEERA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. You talked about the structures and the Missions in Ottawa, Canada, but I bring information to you that those structures have attracted taxes to the Government of Canada. Are you aware of that? If yes, include it in the report for your submission. I thank you.MR MULIMBA:  Madam Speaker, the issue as highlighted by the honourable member is already contained in the report. It is an observation that we - THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, take your time to read this report. It is a very exhaustive report. Clerk, upload the report. The minister will not be able to answer all the questions that have been raised here. Yes, honourable minister.MR MULIMBA:  Madam Speaker, concerning Commercial and Economic Diplomacy, we take the observation made by the committee. However, we beg to differ with its recommendation to the effect that all Missions be availed with funds to enhance Commercial and Economic Diplomacy. While interfacing with the committee, I mentioned this to the committee. The ministry does assessment and we invest money in Commercial and Economic Diplomacy where we expect returns. We may not recommend providing a budget to a destination such as South Sudan, or Burundi, for tourism as against Geneva, Brussels and Washington. We do it out of scientific research about where we get returns. In terms of trade, yes, we may allocate to South Sudan and not allocate to other countries, which I do not want to mention here. It should not be that we allocate to all Missions.Madam Speaker, there are a few observations that were made by the shadow minister. Yes, one was about foreign policy, which I have already answered. About strategy, if you look through the National Development Plan followed by our ministerial policy statement, which we submitted, you realise that we do provide policies and strategies on how to mobilise the diaspora. Three things are provided for under the diaspora. One is foreign direct investment. Two is the investment of receipts from earnings from the diaspora, but also for purposes of solidarity and cohesion of Ugandans abroad. Regarding the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) and bilateral agreements not being enforceable, Madam Speaker, this appeared to be extremely broad and sweeping. I wish he could give me a precise report about which agreement is not enforceable, and from which country. Otherwise, I am only responding to what you said. As a country, as far as we are concerned –  THE SPEAKER:  Can we have the MoUs that are not recognised, brought on the Floor so that the minister can be able to see them? MR NKUNYINGI:  Madam Speaker, I would like to give the minister information regarding two issues. One, on diaspora engagement, he is talking about a strategy, but as it is now, our foreign missions have no guidance on that -THE SPEAKER:  Which MOUs have been signed and are not enforceable? MR NKUNYINGI:  Madam Speaker, MoU for United Arab Emirates, that is properly known as Dubai by the public is not enforced. Some time back, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development was waving to the public another new MoU, I think with Qatar. However, we do not even know the content. I hear even Jordan. We need clarity on these MoUs and their enforcement. If they require a budget, we plan for it. 12476SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE SPEAKER:  I hope you are not mixing the MoUs for the employment of those people going abroad vis-à-vis  – can we have a clarification? MR MULIMBA:  Madam Speaker, the relationship of nations is corresponded to through the normal diplomatic channels. When we enter an MOU or an agreement between nations, if there are areas of discontent or contention, they are responded to formally. To this extent, Uganda has not received any complaint whatsoever from the Government of the United Arab Emirates to the effect of failure to enforce any of the agreements. Unless it is laid on the Table or it comes through the normal diplomatic channels, then we shall respond.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, what about the issue of Uganda’s Ambassador to Russia is the same one for Ukraine?MR MULIMBA:  Madam Speaker, let me come to that after responding to the issue raised by the Hon. Nsereko. Hon. Nsereko inquired to know whether Uganda has made her position clear on issues of Palestine and other emerging issues. This year, in January, Uganda hosted two very important conferences. One was the conference on Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) countries, to which Uganda assumed the Chairpersonship and will chair it for three years. However, during the conference, several deliberations were made, and a document popularly known as the “Kampala Outcome Document” was produced. In that document, a very precise and clear position on the question of Palestine was professed. That is Uganda’s position. I invite Members to read the “Kampala Outcome Document.” THE SPEAKER:  Which conferences were there? Non-Aligned Movement Summit and –   MR MULIMBA:  It was NAM and G77+China. Madam Speaker, the theme for the NAM Conference – THE SPEAKER: Were those three? MR MULIMBA:  They were two. THE SPEAKER: So, you do not consider the one that was hosted by Parliament as a Ugandan activity? MR MULIMBA:  Madam Speaker, I was responding in respect of those under foreign affairs, but we do consider the one, which was hosted by Parliament very dearly; I was only talking about the other two in context.THE SPEAKER:  That was still under Ministry of Foreign Affairs because -MR MULIMBA:  We applaud Parliament for hosting the Speaker’s Conference in Munyonyo as well, and we take pride in it. The theme for the NAM Conference was “deepening cooperation of partner states for shared global affluence.” I would like to respond to Hon. Nsereko who asked this question. That alone means that we need to deepen our engagement with the South countries.Therefore, we have to involve ourselves in terms of investing in missions in those countries to further commercial and economic diplomacy. That is when we shall deepen global affluence or strengthen the sharing of global wealth. The issue of having Uganda’s representative in Russia being the same representative in Ukraine, Madam Speaker, does not have any harm. This is because one, Uganda is not concerned about the quarrels between the two nations in question. To even emphasise further, as members of NAM, we do not poke our noses in the affairs of any of those two countries. Also, under the Vienna Convention of 1969, on Diplomatic Relations, there is no law whatsoever violated when one country has a representative in one nation also representing it in another nation, where the two nations do not have diplomatic ties. It is, therefore, in order. THE SPEAKER:  Can you summarise? 12477THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024MR MULIMBA:  Finally, on the issue of representatives’ vehicles, Madam Speaker, we all travel abroad and love to be given courtesies. However, many times, we have gone abroad and been received in a manner that is worth what we have provided. We have also seen in this country where we have delegations coming in and being received by their missions accredited to Uganda. I think the difference is quite loud sounding.I, therefore, implore this House to enhance the budget of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, to cater for those critical areas, particularly those that touch the image of our country, through missions abroad, including capital or development expenditure to care for our dilapidated structures. The last one is about statutory obligations to host countries. We are indeed obliged to pay local taxes to host countries where we have property. In Ottawa and Kinshasa, we are heavily indebted and these host countries have already given us notice to the effect that our buildings may be auctioned. It is, therefore, important that we - I am glad, Madam Speaker, that yesterday you guided us to look at the -THE SPEAKER:  Yesterday was Eid. MR MULIMBA:  No, on Tuesday, you guided us to consider amending the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. We request that during that amendment, we should have sectors, which contribute to the national treasury, but have statutory obligations to be permitted to remit after the deduction of such obligations. That is what we call profit after tax and interest. Thank you very much.THE SPEAKER:  The Non-Taxable Revenue. Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025, be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, all the issues that have been raised about the ministerial statement must be handled. Let it not just be for the sake. This report is referred to the Committee on Budget, pursuant to Rule 149(2) of the Rules of Procedure.  Agriculture, I am giving you 15 minutes.(II) THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES12.50THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025. In the same vein, I beg to lay the minutes of the meetings while the committee was considering the ministerial policy statement. I now move to present the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025.With your guidance, Madam Speaker, I will just try to make a summary within the time you have allocated.  Agriculture remains the mainstay of Uganda’s economy.  It is the backbone and the heart of the economy, but much as it is so, while looking at the estimates that have been given, we noted that there is limited allocation to the programme on agro-industrialisation and this impacts negatively on the activities of the programme. Based on the importance and recent developments, the agricultural sector requires affirmative action to support the socio-economic transformation agenda and support the Parish Development Model and improve the livelihoods and income of our people.12478SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSOn gender and equity compliance, on page 6, all the votes under the programme scored above the threshold of 50 per cent as indicated in the report.  The overall programme budget is projected to decline by 21.6 per cent, from Shs 1,813.9 billion, as approved in the Financial Year 2023/2024, to Shs 1,288.2 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025, as indicated in Table 2 on page seven.Table 2 shows the budget allocation to the programme for the Financial Year 2024/2025. Specifically, for the agro-industrialisation programme, the budget will decline as I have already said.  Compared to what was passed in the National Budget Framework Paper, the budget is projected to reduce by 1.4 per cent, that is Shs 22.3 billion. This is mainly on account of an 11.9 per cent reduction in the external financing component, from Shs 837.3 billion, approved in the Budget Framework Paper, to Shs 737.3 billion as projected in the budget estimate.  Compared to the overall national budget, the agro-industrialisation programme is projected to share only 2.7 per cent of the resources in the Financial Year 2024/2025, down from what it was at 3.6 per cent in the approved budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024. Additionally, the allocation to the programme is 26 per cent less than the NDP III envisaged allocation of Shs 2,193 billion. The continued underfunding of the programme undermines the Government’s commitment of 10 per cent, under the Malabo Declaration to which Uganda is a signatory. This, therefore, dims the medium-term prospects of the programme.  Observations and recommendations On programme budget performance for the Financial Year 2023/2024, the programme had an approved budget of Shs 1.814 trillion.  By December 2023, Shs 746 billion had been released, of which 526 billion was spent. The percentage of Budget release stood at 41.1 per cent, while the percentage of releases spent stood at 70.6 per cent. The overall programme’s external budget performance amounted to 29.82 per cent and 56.78 per cent in release and expenditure, respectively.  Specifically, the expenditure on external financing for V ote 010 – Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, was 26.2 per cent and 64.7 per cent in release. This was mainly due to the delay in the approval of the restructured plan on enhancing national food security through increasing rice production in Uganda Project (1316) and the Uganda Climate Smart Agricultural Transformation Project (1786), which was programmed in the Financial Year 2023/2024, with an approved budget of Shs 411.7 billion. The committee observed that whereas recurrent expenditures were generally well absorbed, domestic development and external financing lagged significantly, which indicates challenges in effectively utilising resources, potentially hindering the realisation of programme objectives.  The committee recommends a thorough review of project management practices and financial oversight to ensure optimal utilisation of resources and timely project delivery.  The committee also recommends that the implementation process of the delayed projects be expedited to ensure timely utilisation of allocated funds and prevent further underspending.  On underfunding of the programme, the committee observed that the agro-industrialisation Programme is allocated only 2.7 per cent of the total national budget in the Financial Year 2024/2025, down from 3.6 per cent in the approved budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024. Moreover, over 45.5 per cent of this programme budget is through external financing in the [Ms Okori-Moe]12479THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024form of loan projects. This form of financing is not reliable and it in many cases, performs very low, way the planned budget, in releases and expenditures due to very stringent conditions attached. Recommendations of the committee(i) The Government should raise the budget of the agro-industrialisation programme from the current 2.7 per cent to a minimum of 10 per cent, as per the 2013 Malabo Declaration to which Uganda is a signatory; and (ii) The committee also recommends that the funding for the programme should be strategically shifted from unreliable external financing, as has been the case over time, to Government of Uganda financing for the stability of the programme. Pest, vector and disease controlOn pest, vector, and disease control, Madam Speaker, the committee observed that there are persistent outbreaks of pests, vectors and diseases, especially the Foot and Mouth Disease. Members have always raised this issue as a matter of concern, but with minimal budgets to address the problem. In the current year, many of the districts within and outside the Cattle Corridor have had an escalating outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease and PPR – that is, a disease for small ruminants like goats and so forth, which has affected the animal market both domestically and internationally. More so, the crop sector’s production and productivity is not spared, with the persistent incidences of pests and diseases in the major crops such as coffee and cotton. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries requires Shs 769.12 billion for the purchase of Foot and Mouth Disease vaccines and vaccine cold chain equipment for biannual vaccination of the 44 million animals at risk. However, only Shs 11 billion has been provided in the budget. We stand a risk of losing all the livestock population in the country. Furthermore, Shs 15.1 billion is required for the purchase of pesticides, spray pumps and other assorted equipment to be used in the control of crop pests and diseases, but only Shs 1.5 billion has been budgeted. The ministry also requires Shs 10 billion for the purchase of assorted laboratory reagents, consumables and supplies for the control of animal diseases, but only Shs 7.2 billion has been provided. The committee recommends as follows:(i) That the funding gap of Shs 758.12 billion required to address the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease be provided to restore the integrity of the animal subsector in the country; (ii) That Shs 13.6 billion be provided for pesticides and associated assorted equipment for the control of crop pests and diseases; and(iii) That Shs 2.48 billion be provided for the purchase of assorted laboratory reagents, consumables and supplies for the control of animal diseases. Agricultural mechanisationOn agricultural mechanisation, Madam Speaker – specifically, the purchase of tractors and implements – the committee is cognisant of the strategic direction that the country has purposed to take towards mechanisation of agriculture, to improve production and productivity, and unlock the potential of the sector in its bid to catch up with its peers. Though Uganda is endowed with over 44 per cent of arable land, less than 34.4 per cent of this is under agricultural use, according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) Report of 2020, leaving 63.6 per cent of it unutilised. The committee knows that this can be improved through mechanisation, but inadequate funds have been invested by the Government over the past years, towards this cause. Thus, little has 12480SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSbeen achieved. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) has procured tractors of different types over the past few years, but due to limited numbers available over the years, the effect has remained minimal. The committee observed that in Financial Year 2024/25, MAAIF requires Shs 282 billion for the procurement of 2,000 four-wheel tractors with the matching implements - those are planters, hullers, harrows, trailers, ploughs, rippers and rotavators - as a step towards providing a tractor per subcounty. However, only Shs 23 billion is available in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework. Furthermore, MAAIF requires an additional Shs 100 billion to procure and distribute 4,000 power tillers – those are the walk-behind tractors, which were recently given to some regions. This targets every subcounty in the country. Madam Speaker, no allocation has been made to this though farmers continue to cry for these tractors. The committee recommends as follows:(i) That the Government should deliberately invest in the mechanisation agenda to unlock the full potential of the agricultural sector. (ii) That Shs 259 billion be provided for the procurement and deployment of 2,000 tractors and implement units to be distributed countrywide. (iii) That Shs 100 billion be allocated towards the purchase of 4,000 power tillers of 14 horsepower, with assorted implements. Agricultural mechanisation centres The committee observes that over time, agricultural mechanisation has been staggering with the performance in line with the development projects. There is a need, therefore, to establish and construct more centres. However, prior to that, it is pertinent to maintain, equip and manage the existing centres to full operational standards and capacity, to be able to invest and support farmers with appropriate technology, for mechanisation across the value chain. Madam Speaker, the current seven regional mechanisation centres, which are central to this investment, have inadequate infrastructure, equipment and staff, while some centres are battling with encroachers. The committee visited all seven regional mechanisation centres. The committee observed that MAAIF requires Shs 132 billion for the construction of regional mechanisation centres, access, deployment, maintenance and repair of equipment, as well as recruitment and training of staff to operate machines and run these centres. Only Shs 70 billion is available in the Medium Term Expenditure Framework. The committee recommends as follows:(i) That priority be given to the already existing mechanisation centres by recruiting enough staff, providing sufficient equipment and, when they are fully operational, the other remaining centres, which are 11, can be embarked on. (ii) That the ministry formulates and presents before Parliament, a national mechanisation strategy and equipment management and utilisation policy in the next financial year. (iii) That the funding gap of Shs 62 billion should be provided for the construction, equipping, staffing and maintenance of the regional mechanisation centres. Roll out of the e-extension system Madam Speaker, the Government projects economic growth over the medium term to an average of seven per cent, anchored on anticipated boosts in agriculture manufacturing, production, and productivity. One of the strategies under agriculture is [Ms Okori-Moe]12481THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024strengthening public extension systems, but this is not matched by budget provision. The ministry developed and intends to rollout the e-extension systems for real-time information sharing and monitoring of extension services delivery in districts across the country, which requires Shs 8 billion, but only Shs 1.5 billion is in the projected budget. The committee notes that there is more than ever before the need for effective extension services, especially now as we are implementing the Parish Development Model to guide farmers on the best practices to efficiently benefit from the program.The committee recommends as follows:(i) The shortfall of Shs 6.5 billion required for the rollout of the e-extension systems across the country be provided; (ii) where extension workers are being deployed, a study needs to be done to assess their impact on agricultural activities in those areas so that corrective actions can be taken where necessary. Water for agricultural productionMadam Speaker, the country is increasingly facing a major challenge of prolonged droughts - THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwang, as you get out, take note that you have a report to present tomorrow. Something came up while you were away. The first thing at 10.00 a.m. will be your report. MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Speaker, MAAIF requires Shs 114 billion for the construction/rehabilitation of water-facing facilities, but only Shs 5.5 billion has been budgeted for, leaving a funding gap of Shs 108.5 billion. The committee recommends that a funding gap of Shs 108.5 billion be allocated towards this activity. The fisheries subsector The committee notes that fish is one of the high-value commodities that contribute to the economic growth in Uganda, contributing 3 per cent to the national GDP, 12 per cent to the agricultural sector GDP, and employing between 1.5 and 2 million Ugandans along the entire value chain.The committee observed that the subsector remains underfunded, despite its strategic importance. MAAIF requires Shs 17 billion to support fishing communities with critical inputs (fish feed, fingerlings) and appropriate fishing gear (fishing nets and boat engines) and assorted value addition equipment, but only Shs 1.5 is available for this activity. Furthermore, Shs 13 billion is required for the establishment of fish ponds and aquaculture parks with a focus on youth and women in aquaculture cooperatives and groups, but only Shs 5 billion has been provided. Additionally, Shs 7 billion is required for the inspection, surveillance and enforcement of fisheries standards facilitated and inspectors provided with the tools and equipment for inspection with only Shs 4 billion budgeted for. The committee recommends as follows:(i) Shs 15.5 billion required to support fishing communities with the critical inputs, appropriate fishing gear and assorted value addition equipment be provided.(ii) Shs 8 billion required for the establishment of fishponds and aquaculture parks be provided. (iii) Shs 3 billion required for inspection, surveillance and enforcement of fisheries standards and the provision of tools and equipment to inspectors be provided.12482SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSPerformance of externally funded projectsNational Oil Farm Projects(NOPP)The background is there and the recommendation by the committee are as follows:(i) That the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail the required funds for land acquisition to support project activities. (ii) That MAAIF should enhance project monitoring mechanisms and streamline administrative processes to expedite the absorption of funds and minimise delays in implementation. b. Enhancing national food security through increased rice production projectThe details are captured in the report. The recommendation by the committee is that –(i) The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails the necessary funds to facilitate the compensation of PAPs and dam construction completion;(ii) for any future projects, contracting of civil works should only be made after all the project-affected persons have been fully compensated to enable the smooth execution of civil works. c. National Oil Seeds Project. The narrative is there. Madam Speaker, I am happy that honourable colleagues like reading; they will read it.The committee recommends that –  (i) MAAIF expedites project activities to meet the stipulated timelines and ensure efficient utilisation of allocated funds. (ii) MAAIF should conduct a thorough review of project design and cost estimates to incorporate adjustments for increased material costs. Post-harvest handling and storageThe committee notes that improving post-handling and storage of agricultural products is one of the major objectives of agro-industrialisation, but less investment has been done in this area.The committee recommends that –  (i) The Government prioritises establishing regional and subregional storage facilities/silos, to support farmers in improving the quantity and quality of their products. We have just debated the challenges of mycotoxin and I think it is timely that we take up this recommendation. (ii)  The government should adopt the NDP III Mid-term recommendation of allocating close to Shs 170 billion towards storage, agro-processing and value addition for improved handling and storage of agricultural products. (iii) The government should explore the possibility of establishing storage facilities at the subcounty level, in a phased manner, to support PDM. Agricultural sector financingThe committee observed that in October 2022, we resolved to establish an agricultural bank, but little is known about the progress by the Government towards this resolution. The committee recommends that –(i) The Government should report on the progress towards the formation of this bank and commit to timelines for the finalisation of this establishment. (ii) The finance ministry fast tracks the finalisation of the agricultural financing policy.  [Ms Okori-Moe]12483THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024V ote 121: Dairy Development Authority(a) Inspection, certification and quality assurance for market competitivenessMadam Speaker, the committee was informed that upon Uganda securing the Algerian market, estimated at $ 500 million annually for dairy products, follow-up inspectors visited various dairy installations, but many gaps were discovered. The Dairy Development Authority requires Shs 3.6 billion to conduct inspections, enforcement, and milking testing for safety and market access in a bid to fix those gaps. However, only Shs 1.914 billion has been provided. Relatedly, DDA also requires Shs 1 billion to support commercial dairy farmers for production and demonstration in each milk shed.The committee recommends that:(i) In a bid to fully secure the Algerian market, DDA should endeavour to close all the gaps.(ii) Shs 1.6 billion is required for regular enforcement and milk testing for safety and market access be provided.(iii) DDA takes deliberate steps to ensure that sufficient milk volumes are available so that even with the Algerian markets, enough is still available for domestic consumption. (iv) Shs 1 billion be provided to support commercial dairy farmers for production and demonstration in each milk shed.(b) Mbale Milk Factory Phase IIThis factory was already developed under Phase 1, but the work has stalled due to lack of funding. It is supposed to go on to phase two in the Financial Year 2024/2025. Phase 2 requires an additional Shs 3.44 billion. Furthermore, DDA has more milk collection centres that are dilapidated and in a sorry state inherited from dairy corporations, and they require an additional Shs 2.4 billion. The committee recommends that:  (i) For the continuity of the Mbale milk factory for eastern Uganda, Shs 3.44 billion be availed in the current budget projection. (ii) Shs 12.4 billion required for rehabilitation of milk collection centres countrywide be provided.(iii) Milk-producing areas where there are no facilities to manage milk collection be planned for by DDA, in a bid to boost milk production. (c) Entebbe Diaries Training School Requires Shs 5 billion to rehabilitate and expand it to a regional dairy and Trading Incubation College of East Africa. The committee recommends that the Shs 5 billion be allocated to the authority for this activity.(d) Support to roll out of the school milk program. DDA in collaboration with the Ministry of Education and Sports and SNV had already started this programme, and it worked very well in south western Uganda milk shed. This is intended to improve child nutrition, stabilise domestic milk prices, and widen the market. DDA requires Shs 4 billion to roll out this program countrywide, prioritising areas like Karamoja and other parts of the country where there is acute malnutrition. The committee recommends that Shs 4 billion be provided for this activity. THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson, try to summarise. MS OKORI-MOE:  Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 12484SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSV ote 125(a)  Inadequate funds for capital development for NAGRC&DB. The committee notes that NAGRC is sometimes even diverted from its original mandate to handle the issues at one time they were told to go for food security, recently they were diverted to handle the issues of Balaalo . The committee recommends that:(i) The government provides steady capital development of Shs 100 billion for the next five years to enable the agency to carry out its initial capital investment for a take-off. (ii) The committee also recommends that the Government ensures agencies stick to their core mandates to avoid executing tasks outside their mandate. (b)  Breeding activities countrywideThe committee recommends that:(i) The project for revamping Iriri Ranch in Napak District in a phased manner in three years, and is replicated in all unprivileged regions in the country. (ii) Shs 30 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 be provided to kick-start revamping Iriri Ranch in Napak District.(iii) Shs 15.8 billion be provided for transforming Ruhengyere and Sanga Ranches into dairy farms. One of the ranches should be reserved for the local breeds. (iv) Shs 25 billion for Got Apwoyo Ranch.(v) Shs 2 billion for the construction and completion of hatcheries in Bukedi, Tororo, Karamoja, and Abim Districts(vi) Shs 54 billion be provided to establish animal feed processing plants in Aswa, Maruzi and Nshara Ranches.(c)  Community breeding services to support PDM. This is required. THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson, I want you to give all those unfunded priorities to the Budget Committee under Rule 149(2). You will not mention all of them. That is why you are a member of the Budget Committee. You are going to do the harmonisation in the committee. MS OKORI MOE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. V ote 152: National Animal Advisory Services, and I request you, Madam Speaker, to allow me to talk about this, because Members have always raised issues of food insecurity in the country. THE SPEAKER:  NAADS? The one that is being repealed tomorrow? MS OKORI MOE:  Yes, the one that has been giving seeds –(Laughter)-  The committee recommends that: (i) Shs 12 billion for strategic commodities that are lined up there in that order and Shs 6 billion be provided for apples, Shs 3 billion for grapes.(ii) Other under/unfunded priorities under NAADS. The Committee recommends a total of Shs 72.7 billion be provided to NAADS for the implementation of the activities below; I want to specifically talk about the Shs 46 billion for maize and bean seeds. We have always been recommending this money, but at the tail end of the budget, it disappears. The way we have planned for this money, we have made calculations, and we support the PDM, but according to the arrangement of the PDM, there is no poor person among the 39 per cent who will go and buy seeds and plant. All are buying mukene  to sell to increase their monies, leaving the whole population starving. [Ms Okori-Moe]12485THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Out of the Shs 46 billion the calculation is that Shs 38 billion provides 10,000 kilograms of bean seeds and 20,000 kilograms of maize seeds to every district to plant- that is for the two seasons. Then the Shs 8 billion is to address the headache you have always been having so that the leaders can have a remedial arrangement where they also take seeds to cover the gaps that the other Shs 38 billion cannot handle. The Shs 8 billion is meant for the two seasons and that should start the next season. I want to remind you of the commitment of the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development. While the deputy chairperson –THE SPEAKER: We still have that commitment and the rains have started. MS OKORI-MOE: Yes, they are here. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, for this planting season, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the one to respond to those concerns. For coffee, there are outstanding arrears of Shs 4.9 billion which are required. THE SPEAKER: The coffee farmers are demonstrating at the gate.MS OKORI-MOE: They are at the gate. The Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) cannot work because the coffee nursery operators camp at UCDA all the time. Some of them can no longer take their children to school, others have even lost property. So, we need to take this matter seriously, honourable colleagues. Finally, there is a V ote on cotton. The cotton that our men and women in uniform use is ours. When you see them seated smartly in this House that is our cotton. (Applause)  We do not import it, but it is underfunded. THE SPEAKER: Madam Alanyo, you look smart. (Laughter)MS OKORI-MOE: That is our cotton used by Uganda Prisons Service, Uganda Police Force, UPDF and Uganda Wildlife Authority. If you visit the factory in Bugolobi, you will believe what I am saying, but they are underfunded. We shall debate this in the Budget Committee. Honourable colleagues, I request for your support. This is a sector, which feeds the community, and I am sure that immediately Madam Speaker gives us a break, we are going to partake of the products of this sector, which is underfunded.THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MS OKORI-MOE: In conclusion, Madam Speaker, thank you very much and I thank the committee for processing this report. However, the sector, which feeds and is the backbone of the economy, is grossly underfunded. When you see the Ministers of Agriculture grow thin, it is because of the challenges that they are facing. (Laughter)I present, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a very exhaustive report and it raises all the issues, including Foot and Mouth Disease. Uganda is an agricultural country; it is the backbone of the economy.All issues that have been raised are pertinent, and my request is that when you go to the Budget Committee, the issues of agriculture must be taken as a priority. (Applause)  There is no need to debate on this; this is a priority area. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Ministerial Policy Statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Reported adopted.THE SPEAKER: I am telling you that this is a priority in this country and it must be considered.12486SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSHonourable members - Who is shouting “procedure”? Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have teachers and students from Musana V ocational School, Kigulu County South Constituency. They are represented by Hon. Milton Muwuma and Hon. Sauda Kauma. You are most welcome. Join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  They are here to observe the proceedings.Also, join me in welcoming the Deputy Speaker – (Applause)-  who has come to observe and relieve me . (Laughter)(Whereupon the Speaker exited the Chamber and the Deputy Speaker assumed the Chair_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item. (Laughter)  (III) THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee  Chairperson – if she is not ready, next item. (IV) THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Committee  Chairperson – 1.36THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COM -MITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Catherine Lamwaka): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the consideration of the ministerial policy statement. I beg to lay a copy of the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget estimates for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for the Financial Year 2024/2025. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Deputy Chairperson, we have the report on the system, so you do not need to read it verbatim or word for word. We shall capture it on the Hansard .(The report is hereto attached.)MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA: I now proceed to present the report of the sectoral Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget estimates for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for Financial Year 2024/2025, according to the Rules of Procedure of this House. Page 3 is on introduction and methodology. I will move to page 5 on the tourism development programme, which consists of two V otes; the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife, Antiquities; V ote 022 and subventions under them, including:1. Uganda Wildlife Authority;2. Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute;3. Uganda Wildlife Education Centre;4. Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute. Mr Speaker, under tourism, I request Members that we move ahead because of time. Page 6 is an overview of the semi-annual budget performance. Key performance indicators are on page 8. I request Members that we move to page 15 on budget allocation for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and its subventions for the Financial Year 2024/2025.On page 15, the overall budget allocation is presented on table 5; I hope Members will be able to read. Its subventions are proposed to be reduced by Shs 43.825 billion from Shs 221.568 billion that was approved in FY 2023/24 to Shs 174.743 billion proposed for FY 2024/25. On page 16, table 6 talks about the Non-Tax Revenue trend and projections of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities’ agencies. [The Speaker]12487THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024From the above, the Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) from the Tourism Development Program is on an upward trajectory indicating a steady recovery from the pandemic period for FY 2024/25 as indicated in the report that the Members will look through.3.5.3 Key planned activities for Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and its agencies for FY 2024/25Page 20, Uganda Wildlife Conservation Education Centre has been allocated Shs 16,498,000,000. Page 21, Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute has been allocated Shs 7,731,000,000. Page 22, Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute has been allocated Shs 5,485,000,000. On page 24; V ote 117, Uganda Tourism Board (UTB), Members can look through that table. I am not going to read the UTB semi-annual budget performance for FY 2023/24. I request that we move to page 29 on V ote 117, UTB proposed budget allocation. The budget of Uganda Tourism Board is proposed to increase by Uganda shillings 0.30 billion on account of the proposed increment in wage to cater for planned recruitment of five staff in UTB. There are planned activities for UTB for FY 2024/25 which have been allocated Shs 27.627 billion. Observations and recommendations, which start from page 32. The committee observed that Section 83 of the Wildlife Act, 2019 requires Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) to establish the Wildlife Compensation Scheme which consists of a 2 per cent levy on Non-Tax Revenue collections made by UWA to settle human-wildlife conflict compensation claims. The committee has since established that the 2 per cent levy cannot adequately cater for compensations for the increasing number of human-wildlife conflicts, including destruction of property and lives. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should, by a statutory instrument, amend the UWA (Compensation Scheme) Regulation, 2022 No.65, to increase the percentage levy from 2 per cent to at least 5 per cent on Non-Tax Revenue collected by UWA for purposes of strengthening the Wildlife Compensation Scheme because the circumstances of human-wildlife conflicts have increased and harmony of the same is paramount. 4.2 Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA)The committee established that National Development Plan (NDP III) targets to keep human-wildlife conflict within 1,160 incidences cumulatively. However, the conflicts have increased by 796 incidences, from 6,999 reported in the Financial Year 2022/2023 to 7,795 incidences reported by the end of the first half of the Financial Year 2023/2024. Increased human conflict has had a negative impact on conservation education and awareness since it breeds unfriendly relationships between wildlife and human beings. The committee was informed by UWA of USD 1.34 million off-budget support that UWA is to receive from the World Bank to procure an electric fence that is to be erected on an 80-kilometre-long boundary distance as a mechanism of reducing human-wildlife conflict around Murchison Falls National Park. The committee was further informed by UWA of an additional budget allocation of Shs 5.04 billion from the Government of Uganda to procure an electric fence to fence off some parts of the Murchison Falls National Park that could potentially breed human-wildlife conflict. The committee observed that whereas electric fencing required colossal sums of money and other resources, this should not lead to budget duplication. 12488SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSThe committee observed that there were variations in budget lines from allocations made by the Government of Uganda and the off-budget support from the World Bank, both addressing human-wildlife conflict in the same area; Murchison Falls National Park. The committee further observed that the off-budget of USD 1.34 million from the World Bank was not included in the Ministerial Policy Statement by the ministry for the Financial Year 2024/2025 as external finance for parliamentary appropriation. This poses a risk of potential duplication of budgets. The committee observed on raising the budget ceiling for UWA that over time, UWA has demonstrated capacity to collect its projected Non-Tax Revenue (NTR). In the Financial Year 2022/23, UWA collected Shs 128.975 billion and made a surplus of Shs 34 billion currently saved on its wildlife fund.In the Financial Year 2024/25, UWA has been allocated Shs 81.433 billion as proposed in this Ministerial Policy Statement, yet it has projected to collect Shs 182.36 billion in addition to the NTR surplus saved from the Financial Year 2022/2023. With Shs 81.43 billion, UWA will only cover wage-related expenses for its 3,200 staff. UWA spends Shs 62.2 billion on wage, gratuity, the National Social Security Fund and medical. The outstanding balance will cover part of the fixed operation costs. The committee notes that whereas UWA spends at source in line with the Uganda Wildlife Act, 2019, its expenditure must be within the appropriated ceiling. We therefore recommend that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should incorporate all expected external finance in its annual budget proposal for consideration and final appropriation by Parliament. The committee further recommends that the Government should raise the budget ceiling for Uganda Wildlife Authority to Shs 167.36 billion to allow for utilisation of funds internally generated by UWA and access to funds already saved as surplus from the Wildlife Fund.On page 35, redistribution of UWA Non-Tax Revenue surplusThe committee observed that UWA Non-Tax Revenue realised Shs 34 billion surplus which was saved on the Wildlife Fund. The committee is cognisant of the fact that Tourism Development Agencies have a symbiotic relationship with UWA and there is need to support other entities within the program that have critical unfunded priorities. We, therefore, recommend that Shs 15 billion be internally reallocated from the Uganda Wildlife Authority to cater for unfunded priorities at the Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC), Uganda Wildlife Research Training Institute (UWRTI) and Uganda Tourism Board (UTB) as per the reallocation tables 9 and 10. 4.3 Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC)The committee noted that UWEC presented a proposal to increase the population of lions in national game parks through breeding. Consequently, a budgetary proposal of Shs 7 billion for in-situ lion breeding with a targeted output of only 16 lions to be bred in a year was presented. The committee, however, observed that whereas the proposal is quite innovative, the proposed return on investment was low. The committee further noted that both UWA and UWEC submitted budgets for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) that cost Shs 280 million and Shs 500 million respectively for lion breeding. The committee however observed that it was UWEC alone that had the mandate of breeding lions within the vicinities managed by UWA. [Ms Lamwaka]12489THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024The committee recommends as follows:(i) That UWEC should review its feasibility study and conduct benchmarks on the return on investment on in-situ lion breeding and present it for recommendation during the Budget cycle for the Financial Year 2025/2026. (ii) Additionally, that UWEC and UWA should harmonise their mandates regarding lion breeding in national game parks and protected areas. 4.4 Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UHTTI) The committee observed that UHHTI made a total collection of Shs 2.8 billion as Non-Tax Revenue and retained the same on its revenue account. The committee further observed that UHTTI has been spending funds at source, contrary to Section 29 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. During the meeting of the committee held on Thursday, 21 March 2024, the Principal of UHTTI informed the committee that the institute received authorisation from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) to spend funds at source. He tabled a letter dated 13 January 2023, authored by the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, requesting the PS/ST for a supplementary budget of Shs 3.8 billion for emergency relocation of UHTTI to rented premises and establishment of student accommodation facilities.The committee, however, did not receive evidence of an instrument from the PS/ST authorising the Principal of UHTTI to spend at source. The committee observed that UHTTI illegally held funds on its revenue account beyond one financial year without remitting the same to the Consolidated Fund. The committee was privy to the information that management abused its authority by allowing insider borrowing of money that culminated in a total loan portfolio of Shs 472 million for the period July 2022 to March 2024. The committee further observed that this institution was engaged in insider borrowing without authorisation from any lawful authority. It is trait law that the mandate of borrowing and lending money is a preserve of the Government. Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides that the power to borrow and lend money is for the Government. Further, Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides for authority to raise loans. It specifically provides that – it is as elaborated in the statement of the committee.The committee recommends as follows: (i) The committee recommends that UHTTI should desist from the absurd, irregular and illegal act of insider borrowing, as it contravenes Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 36 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. (ii) The committee further recommends that the Directorate of Public Prosecution should investigate the actions of the Board of Directors and the Principal of UHTTI for actions of insider borrowing from the revenue account of the institute. 4.5 Uganda Wildlife Research Training Institute (UWRTI) The committee observed that the performance of this institute, since its inception, in terms of publication of wildlife research findings, fell below average and neither does it depict the name of the institute nor justify the annual budgetary allocation made. The committee was informed by the minister that the poor performance of this institution could be attributed to low staffing levels in the research division of Uganda Wildlife Research Training Institute due to limited budget allocation to the institute. The committee was further informed that the institute has 12490SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSgone through a restructuring exercise by the Ministry of Public Service, which will position it as a centre of excellence in wildlife research. However, this will require an additional Shs 8 billion to run the research institute. The committee recommends as follows:(i) The committee recommends that the Government should provide additional Shs 8 billion to implement the newly approved structure of this institution. 4.6 Uganda Tourism Board (UTB)The committee observed that NDP III targeted, cumulatively, to attract 281,760 international tourist arrivals from the US, Europe and China, but only 67,252 arrivals were registered by the end of the Financial Year 2023/2024. The committee was informed that the US, Europe and China were key target sources for leisure tourists who stay longer than business tourists. However, statistics show that international arrivals from the aforementioned areas have continued to drop. The committee was informed that UTB requires Shs 4 billion to engage international and national media for the production of positive tourism stories to improve destination perception in light of recent controversies that shed the destination in a bad light. However, this has remained unfunded. The committee recommends as follows:(i) The committee recommends that the Government should provide Shs 4 billion to UTB to engage international and national media houses in the production of positive media stories for improved destination image. 5.0 Proposed reallocation under the Tourism Development Programme for the Financial Year 2024/2025The committee identified Shs 22.405 billion from within the tourism development programme and reallocated it to key priority areas within the programme. The table below; table 9, shows the source of funds identified for reallocation. Proposed committee re-allocationsThe committee observed that the tourism development programme entities are grossly underfunded. The committee was presented with several unfunded priorities. However, the following are considered very critical and should be provided for within the Financial Year 2024/2025. The next table 10 presents the destination of identified resources where the committee reallocated this fund to the total tune of Shs 22,405,000,000. I hope Members will be able to read it on page 41. 6.0 Trade and Industry SectorUnder trade, we have V ote 015: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, V ote 136: Uganda Export Promotion Board and V ote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards. Page 45 presents the proposed budget allocation for the Financial Year 2024/2025. I hope Members will be able to read Table 12. I will just give a summary. For Financial Year 2024/2025, the ministry has been allocated Shs 2.9 billion for financing its wage and Shs 101.21 billion for non-wage recurrent expenditure. The budget for development (domestic) stands at Shs 11.16 billion. The total budget has dropped by Shs 54.725 billion from Shs 169.99 billion to Shs 115.27 billion. Mr Speaker, the reduction is largely attributed to one-off supplementary budgets to UWRSA to the tune of Shs 2 billion, Ministry of Trade (Shs 3 billion) and UDC (Shs 50.4 billion). That was a one-off expenditure that led to a big margin of reduction in the total budget of the ministry. 6.3 Key planned activities for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for Financial [Ms Lamwaka]12491THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Year 2024/2025 - These are on page 46. I request that we move to page 54.Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB)Uganda Export Promotion Board is another V ote on its own; V ote 136. On page 54, it presents the semi-annual budget performance and the proposed budget for the Financial Year 2024/2025. The overall budget for the Uganda Export Promotion Board is proposed to reduce by Shs 0.703 billion. The reduction has been effected on the wage component to clear unutilised wage during the Financial Year 2023/2024. However, a slight increment of Shs 0.3 billion is proposed for the non-wage component. The planned activities are there under 6.6 on page 54 and it runs up to page 56.V ote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS)Honourable colleagues, on page 56, you see table 16 on UNBS semi-annual Budget performance, which I am not going to read because of time. On page 57 is UNBS half-year physical performance, scrutinised by the committee. On page 58, there is the proposed Budget allocation for the Financial Year 2024/2025 and the variance between approved and the proposed.The proposed budget for UNBS is Shs 58.142 billion, which is a reduction of Shs 1.9 billion from the approved budget of the Financial Year 2023/2024. The wage component is expected to remain constant while the non-wage and development budget are proposed to reduce by Shs 0.3 billion and Shs 1.6 billion, respectively. The planned activities for UNBS starts from page 58. Members can read through.On page 59, there is the proposed reallocation for trade and industry for the Financial Year 2024/2025. In table 19, the committee identified Shs 35.725 billion from within the trade and industry and reallocated it within the sector key priority areas. The table presents all the details of the source of funds identified for reallocation. That runs up to page 60 with a total of Shs 35,727,500,000 identified and reallocated on page 61 in Table 20. Members can have time and look through. The committee scrutinised the funded and unfunded priorities for entities under this jurisdiction and was able to identify sources for reallocation and reallocated it accordingly in Table 20, based on some projects were already running, to get completed and few new projects. I now move to observations on Trade and Industry, which is on page 62. The committee is concerned that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives was supposed to have operationalised laws such as the Accreditation Service Act, 2021 and the Sugar Act, 2020. However, none of the two have been operationalised. These laws require operational structures. However, no structures have been proposed in the current rationalisation of Government agencies, an implication that they might remain on the shelves, yet they are important to the economy.We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should have in place structures to operationalise laws in the trade sector that were passed by this Parliament. On the subvention to the Uganda Cooperative Alliance, the committee observed that in the Financial Year 2023/2024, MTIC was allocated Shs 3 billion to Uganda Cooperative Alliance Limited (UCAL) without a legal framework or cooperation agreement and Memorandum of Understanding to formalise their relationship. The committee further observed that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives did not have in its possession an instrument legalising its relationship with UCAL since UCAL is a limited company. 12492SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSWe recommend that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Attorney-General should draft the legal framework to regulate this cooperation. In the circumstance, the committee declines to approve Shs 3 billion allocated for the Financial Year 2024/2025 to UCAL through the MTIC until a working relationship is properly formalised. Mr Speaker, still on page 63, we have V ote 136, Uganda Export Promotion Board.The committee observed that the Uganda Export Promotion Board is mandated to develop and promote Uganda export on the international market. However, little attention has been given to this institution. It lacks a Board in addition to limited funding budget resources that are not always fully released in time. For instance, in the Financial Year 2023/2024, Uganda Export Promotion Board (UEPB) received only Shs 4.46 billion, which was 53 per cent of Shs 8.42 billion, its total annual budget. It was the least funded entity of Government. UEPB is mandated by the Act of Parliament to facilitate the development and growth of export trade in Uganda. The NDP III highlights export promotion and import substitution as one of the country’s key development strategies. However, the importance of UEPB in promoting exports has not attracted the requisite budget allocation. Additionally, poor release of funds has undermined its performance. Uganda Export Promotion Board has unfunded priorities worth Shs 20.66 billion. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should expedite the appointment of the Board of Directors of Uganda Export Promotion Board and allocate an additional budget of Shs 20.66 billion to the Uganda Export Promotion Board to develop exports and discover new markets for Uganda in view of the worsening balance of trade position and the suspension of Uganda from AGOA.V ote 154: Uganda National Bureau of StandardsThe committee reviewed the performance statistics for UNBS on table 17 and observed that UNBS averagely rated at 72 per cent by half of the Financial Year 2023/2024. Most of the indicators and activities geared towards quality assurance and consumer protection performed below average. These include product and certification permits, equipment verified, equipment calibrated while market surveillance inspection, which is at the core of consumer protection, registered the worst performance of 36 per cent as in table 17.We, therefore, recommend that Government should open UNBS regional centres and laboratories to bring services closer to the population and reduce costs of doing business, which would subsequently enhance the entity’s performance. The committee further recommends that Government should allocate adequate funds for salary enhancement for scientists as per the Presidential directive. This would enhance performance in this institution.Uganda Development Corporation (UDC)The committee observed that it operates as a subvention under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Under the subvention, funds are released to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives, which are in turn transferred to UDC for its operations and investment. The committee noted that UDC accounts for over 60 per cent of the budget appropriated to the MTIC. Under the current arrangement, UDC is not able to monitor how much is released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for its operations and control the funds. The committee is cognisant of the fact that in some instances, UDC has to operate under the market situation. This may be affected by the lengthy financial release procedures and especially while operating as a subvention.The committee further observed that as Government of Uganda’s investment arm, UDC was supposed to ensure that Government’s shareholding portfolios in business [Ms Lamwaka]12493THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024ventures generated return on investments. However, the committee noted that despite recurring investments in businesses such as Commonwealth Resort Munyonyo, Soroti Fruit Factory, Mutuma Tea Factory, Mpanga Tea Factory, Atiak Sugar Factory, among others, UDC has continued to post losses. The committee further notes that there was no guarantee that allocations to UDC would transform or generate return on investments. This is evident because at the request of the committee for UDC to share any success stories/profit-making ventures since their inception, none was provided.We, therefore, recommend, as a committee, that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate a V ote to UDC as a semi-autonomous Government entity. This will enhance accountability, transparency and effectiveness in management of public resources in all operations of UDC as an investment arm of the Government of Uganda. Page 66, Management, Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC) The following are key outputs and activities that MTAC intends to carry out during the Financial Year 2024/2025. Members can read-Observations of the committeeThe committee observed that in addition to spending money at source, which is contrary to Section 29 of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, MTAC made substantial transactions on the revenue account that were suspicious, irregular and illegal. Further, the committee was alive to the second Budget Call Circular of 2022 authored by the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) to all accounting officers, reminding them of their obligations under the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), 2015 to desist from spending at source. MTAC decided to ignore such guidance. Section 45 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires that an accounting officer shall control the regularity and proper use of money appropriated to the V ote, be responsible for authorising any commitment made by a V ote, and control the resources received, held or disposed of by or on account of a V ote.Mr Speaker, I proceed to page 67; General Observations and Recommendations 1. Expenditure at source outside Parliamentary approval   The committee observed that several entities under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities spend their Non-Tax Revenue at source in contravention of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. These entities include MTAC, UNBS and UHTTI. The committee noted with concern that easy accessibility to these funds has led to financial irregularities in these institutions. For instance, UNBS has collected Shs 64.7 billion in Non-Tax Revenue, out of which only Shs 52.53 billion was transferred to the Consolidated Fund, and the balance of Shs 12.14 billion was spent at source.2.  Procurement of private consultancy services for civil works The committee observed that the deliberate disregard of the mandate of the Ministry of Works and Transport by MDAs and prefer private consultants was a debilitating marvel and raised concerns as to reasons MDAs choose consultants as opposed to the Ministry of Works and Transport for civil works. It is costly, irregular, dubious, suspicious and encumbers service delivery. Mr Speaker, under the Uganda Public Service Standing Order, the procurement, utilisation and disposal of goods and services in the Public Sector Standing Orders is on the works ministry. It instructs the responsible officer to consult the ministry responsible for works 12494SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSbefore engaging in any works or related activities. Further, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued a Procurement Policy Book, 2022, to which the Ministry of Works and Transport was listed as a component authority in executing civil works. Recommendations of the CommitteeThe committee recommends that PS/ST should immediately exercise disciplinary action on all accounting officers who fail to comply with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 on management and remittance of non-tax revenue to the Consolidated Fund.Mr Speaker, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry recommends that Parliament adopts this report and approves budgetary allocation for the Financial Year 2024/2025 as indicated in this table: V ote 015:  Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives - Shs 114,474,000,000 V ote 136:  Uganda Export Promotion Board - Shs 12,321,175,000  V ote 154:  UNBS - Shs 64,691,000,000  V ote 022: Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, Shs -  173,243,000,000V ote 117: Uganda Tourism Board - Shs 28,128,000,000 V ote 534: Uganda Consulate in Kenya, Mombasa - Shs 1,500,000,000 Mr Speaker, I beg to report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable chairperson. Colleagues I open the debate now. We will start with - Members of the committee, please do not dare. LOP, I will get to you a bit later. Hon. Kabanda is already on the microphone. He has smuggled himself to the microphone. Let us first sort out this problem of Hon. Kabanda, we go to Hon. Ameede, Hon. Solomon, the three colleagues, and then I come here.Colleagues, stand up. I see the ones who are - Hon. Kabanda, Hon. Ameede, Hon. Solomon, Hon. Ekanya, Member for Kyegegwa, Member for Terego, Hon. Otimgiw. Let us make a deal. Colleagues who have stood up are the ones who will speak because I have people who will come in later and want to confuse - Let us summarise so that -2.14MR DA VID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the members of the committee for the good report. However, I am still disappointed with the committee because they have given very little money to this sector. When you go to developed countries, they prioritise tourism. You go to Rwanda, where they have only 25 or 26 gorillas, and compare Uganda with Rwanda. Uganda - If the minister can give me information, I do not know the families we have of the gorillas, but they are more than 29 or 30, but you compare the money we put in our tourism sector and the money that Rwanda puts in their tourism sector. When you fly a Turkish Airline that lands at Kigali International Airport every day at 4.00 a.m., every tourist goes to Rwanda. When this aircraft goes back to Istanbul from Kigali, it has tourists who had landed to spend money in Rwanda. I would like to implore the Government to put more money into tourism because if we do not widen our tax base, we shall continue squeezing our traders; people who cannot generate enough revenue for our country. Let us put more money into this sector because tourism alone can sustain our economy. Lastly, Mr Speaker, I am happy the minister - he has disappeared. The minister for finance is there. On Monday, I wanted to say this [Ms Lamwaka]12495THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024when the Prime Minister was here. I want to give you information. On Monday, during the Cabinet meeting that was held in Entebbe -(Interjection)-  I did not attend, but the Cabinet has a spokesperson who normally briefs the country, unless you do not watch.His Excellency the President gave - (Interjection) - not speculation. The President gave Tugume - At first they gave Tugume Shs 37 billion, but now they gave Tugume US$ 37 million. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Who is Tugume?MR KABANDA:  Tugume is an investor who has lied to the country that he is going to promote our coffee.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Kabanda, for correction purposes, you know that the record of Parliament is always intact. On the record of Parliament, we have never appropriated money to a person called Tugume. So, if you could refer to the entity, it would be better.MR KABANDA: Mr Speaker,  the information I would like to give you is that I sit on the Budget Committee and Tugume, together with Mr Odrek Rwabwogo, are the ones who appeared before the Budget Committee in Munyonyo. So, I am not speculating; these are the people we gave money and the Government is adding them more.The point I am driving at, Mr Speaker – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let us get a point of procedure from here. MR EKANYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our rules are clear. I am a member of the Budget Committee and all committees of Parliament present their reports here. Isn’t it procedurally right that you direct Hon. Kabanda to table to this House the proceedings of the Budget Committee meeting with the said people, whom he has alleged, so that the record of Parliament is made clear?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, let us make it easy. MR KABANDA:  Mr Speaker, I would like to make this clear. Hon. Ekanya was not a member of the Budget Committee when we were sitting in Munyonyo. He had been smuggled in, but he was not a member by then.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I will allow you, honourable. Honourable colleagues, let us not create unnecessary tension. I usually don’t like it when honourable colleagues go after each other. To the outside world and media, it is exciting because there is drama, but we then lose debate.We have never appropriated money to any person called Tugume or Odrek. Parliament only appropriates money to institutions. So, that record has to be put very clear. Secondly, if Cabinet discussed that issue and it has not yet come here, then that is anticipation. Rule 80 of our Rules of Procedure does not allow us, until it comes here formally and then Hon. Kabanda asks those hard questions for people to explain. Honourable, I request that – MR KABANDA:  Mr Speaker, I withdraw it for now, until it is brought to Cabinet. (Applause)  However, I implore the Government to also make the tourism sector a priority. It is very important for our country to widen its tax base rather than squeezing traders and you hear that their shops are closed, yet we have very many avenues where the Government can generate revenue without squeezing our local people. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable. Hon. Ameede is next.Hon. Muwada, take your time, I will give you a chance.2.21MS AGNES AMEEDE (Independent, Woman Representative, Butebo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 12496SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, for your comfort, come here because the way you are standing, we cannot get you well and the colours are related. (Laughter)  So, you better – MS AMEEDE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would have loved the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be present because I have an issue with him.In the 1990s and 2000, the Government restructured Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and most of them were required to channel the Non-Tax Revenue through the Uganda Revenue Authority. As you may note in the report, most of the departments in the Ministry of Trade, Industries and Cooperatives are collecting money at source. I wonder why they are spending money at source, meaning they are not actually hooked onto the Uganda Revenue Authority system. Why has this taken so long? In other MDAs where money is collected by Uganda Revenue Authority, there is noticeable increase of revenues vis-a-vis accountabilities. I would like whoever is representing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to take note that it has been long since they collected this money via Uganda Revenue Authority. The other issue is about advertisement, as Hon. Kabanda, alluded. It is not only Turkish Airlines, but all other airlines. You noticeably see advertisements of Rwanda gorillas and zebras in airports and on the plane. Recently, I returned on KLM and I was amused by zebras being advertised on the plane and also at Amsterdam Airport. It was quite interesting. Most people leave the airline at Kigali. Therefore, can the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities provide information about this trend? I have noticed this trend since 2014.Last is the issue of Uganda Development Bank (UDB). During the COVID-19 pandemic, Parliament passed money to support local entrepreneurship and struggling businesses. However, for friends and business people who approached me for more clarification or guidelines, I gave them information and they told me that UDB made it so difficult for them to access the money. I would like the minister to give us more information or even table a report on who received this money. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Can we leave that last point until we go to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, because UDB is under finance ministry not trade? Honourable colleagues, regarding the issue of advertisement which Hon. David Kabanda talked about and Hon. Ameede has hinted on it, we do not take advantage of low-hanging fruits. I would like to give an example. Recently, in the Magical Kenya Open where one of our young people managed to shine and his videos went viral, especially when he was doing a buddy at hole No. 18 when he was supposed to make a cut – Rugumayo.He was wearing a T-shirt promoting an airline of another country. I talked to him and he said, “But I could not even get an air ticket from our own.” It is painful; the boy nearly shed tears in my office. He said, “Look, my name and flag was watched globally among people who are billionaires and tourists of the golf game. But I was showcasing that I am being supported by another country, because my own country could not get me an air ticket of US$ 1,500.” You ask yourself, who really cannot take advantage? How come other countries have eyes for such low-hanging fruits and for us we do not? Luckily enough, I immediately called the Managing Director of Uganda Airlines and I sent him there. I hope they are working out something because the boy is going global and whenever he is playing, he is raising our flag globally while putting on that advert being watched by millions of people. He should be charging the Government of Uganda billions 12497THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024of shillings for using his name saying, he is a Ugandan because he is marketing our country. Hon. Solomon Chelangat – 2.27MR SOLOMON ALINGA (NRM, T’oo County, Bukwo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. I have interest in the issue of the human-wildlife conflict. I thank the committee and the ministry for the proposal to put a chain link across over 80 kilometres of some national parks. However, we have been on the Floor of this Parliament saying that the source of conflict in Sebei Sub-region is because of the people who were displaced from their original homes in the forest. Now that they are to put a chain link in case they get the money, what happens to these people? Because they are still homeless and suffering. Recently, there was a serious conflict between the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) rangers and the people. Animals and people were shot dead. I am perturbed as to why we have not seen in the report what we are going to do for people who were displaced from their original homes. They are not intruders in the forest, but were displaced with the promise of being resettled, but up to now, they are still in the camps. I request the minister to tell us their fate. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Member from Kyegegwa -2.29MS FLA VIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report and I have a critical passion for that particular sector, especially tourism. When we do not fund research on wildlife, we stop being serious even when we talk about tourism and our destinations because our tourism is mainly made up of wildlife. Knowledge about species, their biology, ecology, the life history and guiding appropriate conservation actions are what would come out of the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute. Therefore, if this institute is to specifically do for us this research, we would now have the right and reliable data on our species; the big five, and the critical limiting resources on conserving this kind of bio-diversity and also assessing the threats to these species. It would also assist in giving us a business case for our conservation.  Mr Speaker, if you went to the Uganda Wildlife Conservation Education Centre, what would we give as the worth of the animals sitting there? If we could give the worth of the animals that we present for tourism, this country would long be in the middle-income status. If only we understood the worth of the animals we present, we would be way above others in providing the right destination for tourism.His Excellency has called on attention to research and innovation. I wonder why the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities does not think that research is so critical when we are making tourism one of the pillars of this economy and it is bending towards wildlife conservation.I would like to plead with the honourable members that the institute in Kasese needs a lot of funding. We have researchers who cannot be deployed because the wage bill is very low. We are losing species every day and we cannot even contain their genes in our banks because we do not have the research. We even do not know the gene content of the animals we have. The research department at UWA requires this kind of investment. It has a return on investment and will give our conservation a business case. This is the pillar of the economy of this country. I plead that we get appropriate financing for the Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute. Thank you.12498SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Amero -2.33MS SUSAN AMERO (Independent, Woman Representative, Amuria):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to applaud the committee for the report. However, I have a concern about promotion of tourism. Many times, we designate tourism attaches in missions abroad to market our tourism, but the money we put into this does not come out. They do the marketing, but we do not support our agents to popularise what the marketers are doing.Recently, our representatives in Geneva had an exhibition that only Kenya and Tanzania were able to send people to yet it was an opportunity to market our country. Geneva is one of the countries which has a lot of people who basically spend on holidays and tourism. Uganda is a potential for this.When I was in the committee, the ministry came up with the issue of financing one of the most watched football clubs, like Rwanda is financing Arsenal to market it. I would like to know whether this time, the money is coming because they had proposed that Manchester United markets Uganda as the Explore Uganda Project. We expect that once they don T-shirts written on Uganda, all the supporters of Manchester United would be interested in watching and coming to Uganda to see what they are promoting. Is the money there? Rwanda is doing well with Arsenal Visit Rwanda. What are we doing regarding this?The other issue is that we are marketing tourism as one of our leading earners what about the infrastructure of the national parks? We have had issues with rough roads. The tourists come and go back when they are sick instead of going back celebrating what they had come to watch here. How much money are we putting into this infrastructure within the places where we are marketing tourism? I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Oguzu Lee and then Hon. Otimgiw. Honourable colleagues, I can see some Members standing. When we were starting the session, I picked Members and stopped on those who were here. If when I was picking Members, you were in the corridors or still somewhere. Kindly - 2.36MR DENIS OGUZU LEE (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha):  Mr Speaker, thank you. I have listened to the committee chairperson and my observation is that the report is leading the House to approve a ministerial policy statement that has not satisfied many requirements of the law. Section 13(15) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 dictates what a ministerial policy statement should contain. From the committee chairperson’s report, I would have expected to hear what actions have been taken on recommendations of Parliament in relation to the specific ministry. However, that is silent.This House has been categorical on several issues that have had financial implications that should have been reflected in the report. For example, this House recommended and resolved that the ministry should be able to compensate tobacco farmers in West Nile, but that provision has not been catered for clearly in the budget. Two, the law says we should be able to look at the procurement plans and recruitment plans of the various V otes. That will help us to appreciate how much money we need to vote into the various entities. The committee is silent on those and neither do we have the attachments in that document. Mr Speaker, we also know that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has issued indicative planning figures to all ministries and vote-holding entities. That should have informed us on how much money we should propose or put in each of those V otes. From the submissions of the committee chairperson, there is a mismatch. 12499THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024We do not know if all the recommendations they are making are guided or backed by a Certificate of Financial Implication, as required by the law. In light of all those, it is very hard to establish, one, that this policy statement will actually cater for issues of equity, gender and the required climate integration, which should have fit in a policy statement. I, therefore, invite Members who are going to vote on this matter to pay keen attention. Otherwise, we are about to rubber-stamp a policy statement, which will not address key issues. For example, in the attachments, even the asset registers of the various V otes are missing. We know there is a lot of waste in these ministries. We should have examined each of these issues to see what savings we can make from the proposed policy in the subsequent year. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Oguzu Lee. I think, well, there might be some gaps that are not fully realised or addressed. However, when you look at the major principles, they are covered. That does not mean that we should overlook the issues that Hon. Oguzu Lee is raising, and I hope the committee chairperson will answer that because they did a deep analysis. Let us have Hon. Isaac and then Hon. Rose Obigah. 2.41MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I welcome the committee’s report. I do welcome the Shs 27.62 billion that has been offered to the Uganda Tourism Board. I can see you cited Shs 4 billion, which was unfunded, which is meant to promote Uganda’s image abroad. I thought that every marketing that the Uganda Tourism Board does is for promoting Uganda’s image abroad. So, I wonder why this Shs 4 billion is set aside for the promotion of Uganda’s image. Secondly, Shs 1.5 billion has been set to help Uganda’s consulates in Kenya and Tanzania to promote tourism. However, our biggest market is actually in Europe and America. So, I assume that some money allocated to the Uganda Tourism Board should go directly to those consulates because they do operate a lot in trying to promote Uganda. I thank the committee as well for noticing that we have a risk of budget duplication here, whereby $1.34 million was not actually included in the ministerial policy statement, which was meant for electric fencing around our national parks, yet we had also allocated Shs 500 billion. On the fencing, Mr Speaker, I do feel that this is long overdue. It will save us a lot of money in terms of compensation. Wildlife attacks on our communities have increased to over 7,000 cases annually. If most of our national parks are fenced, we shall be avoiding some of these cases. So, I do welcome this money which is going to help in avoiding this. We also need a clear channel for applicants who are requesting compensation because most of them do not know how to properly access this money for compensation and the compensation policy is also very slow.On the issue of Non-Taxable Revenue (NTR), the committee has actually cited that we have some accounting officers who are utilising the NTRs at source, yet we have other entities such as in the health sector that also bring in NTRs and they are not allowed to use any single coin of those NTRs. Why are we having these double standards going on? Lastly, Mr Speaker, we are all aware that passengers traveling to West Nile must still pay while accessing the route from Masindi to Pakwach. That issue has been raised several times here. We know very well that the road from Karuma to Pakwach is still under rehabilitation. As MPs from West Nile, we have raised this on numerous occasions. Let passengers accessing West Nile through the road from Masindi to Pakwach be allowed to access it for free as we wait for that 12500SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSrehabilitation. If it is not going to be for free, then, at least let us have some concessions. For now, small vehicles have to pay 40,000! I hope that this matter can be taken up seriously so that our people can get concessions instead of paying a lot of money. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us hear from Hon. Obigah Rose.  2.44MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same vein, I join my colleagues in applauding the committee for a very good report. West Nile has been on tobacco as a cash crop or trade crop. As the committee presented on what is taking place in the trade sector, they have not had a thought about West Nile. Other areas have coffee or tea, but for West Nile after tobacco, then what? What can we trade in? This is the only crop that can put money in households. Two, on this Floor, we did mention that we used to have white rhinos. We have requested severally: can we transport these white rhinos so that they can produce and we have something in West Nile? We used to have so many tourists coming for white rhinos in West Nile. However, I have not heard this. Through you, Mr Speaker, I request that the white rhinos be relocated. Terego District had also written to the tourism sector that we –(Interjection) -  thank you, Mr Speaker. Through you, we had requested that the mountain have a lot of other animals and we had said that the tourism ministry should go and see what else they can add, but this has not been done. If it is not done, how shall we expand on tourism?  Regarding Murchison Falls National Park, we have not met the standard at most of these national parks. The quality of trees or even the roads is still substandard. The vehicles that are used by the tourists leave a lot to be desired. I think we need to standardise the type of vehicles that should be used in our tourism sector, because it has a lot to do with the comfort of the tourists. Lastly, we need to add money to the tourism sector. My brother is itching –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Katali Loy and then Hon. Faith Nakut. 2.46MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and the members for the detailed report. The chairperson of the committee noted that there are two Acts, the Accreditation Services Act, 2021 and the Sugar Act, 2020. They are wondering because they are neither part of the rationalization process nor the ministerial policy statement. As they asked, I would like to find out from the minister on when they intend to operationalise these or where they belong. Mr Speaker, Hon. Amero talked about the infrastructure in this country leading to the tourist centres.  Everyone knows that Jinja is one of the serious tourist sites in this nation, but the road is a mess. These days, if you leave Kampala at 5.00 p.m., you will reach Jinja at midnight. If you leave Jinja at 9.00 p.m., you will reach Kampala at 5.00 a.m. That is the situation.  On adverts, I know we need to run lots of adverts to tell the world that Uganda has good tourist sites. A few weeks ago, the Private Sector Foundation had the Women’s Day Katale  in Jinja. I was privileged to meet one of the exhibitors, which was an advertising company. This company has everything you need to know about Uganda in audio and video. When I asked them why they do not work together with Uganda Airlines and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, they said, they were not interested. Maybe the minister should start with that. We could contact the [Mr Otim Giw]12501THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Private Sector Foundation to get the details of these people. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Faith Nakut, Hon. Ekanya, Hon. Tom Isingoma, Hon. Roland, Hon. Balimwezo and then Hon. Nkunyingi. 2.49MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak):  Mr Speaker, I have two things to commend the committee for. One of them is showing sources for reallocation. They have done a commendable job. The committee went beyond just recommending that money be added. Added from where? I think it is a learning for the rest of the committees that when we move money, we should move from one place to another. Thank you.  The second reason I would like to commend the committee is the brilliant idea to provide funding for UTB to do international advertising.  As honourable colleagues have already explained, projecting a correct and positive image of our country is indeed critical for the tourism industry to grow. Mr Speaker, I know you are listening –(Laughter)  There are two policy areas of concern to me that have come out of this report. One of them is on Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). The committee gives a clear justification as to why UWA should be added more money. However, in my view, one of those justifications should not be that UWA is making a lot more money.  It should not be the amount of money the agency is making to determine how much we should give. It should be the need; how much is needed for efficiency, how much is needed to get the value we want, rather than how much they are generating. If we consider how much they are generating, then the Uganda Lotteries and Gaming Board will ask for more, because they also generate. Uganda Revenue Authority will also ask for more because they generate.  It should not be part of the things we use for discussing such matters in this House.  Policy issue number two is about the Uganda Export Promotion Board. How about something called the Presidential Advisory Committee on Exports and Industrial Development (PACEID)? How do the two relate? The committee recommends that we add more Shs 20 billion to the Uganda Export Promotion Board to do its work.  We acknowledge the need to promote exports, but at a time like this, should we put money on what we know is working or put money on a trial and error or on an inexistent board? I have a problem with that. I would rather we put the Shs 20 billion on what we see is working other than on a gamble. I submit. Thank you.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, if there is any statement whose discussion I am finding difficulties to control and put together without losing focus, it is this one. This is because the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is totally different from trade and UNBS. I remember, in Parliament here, there used to be - I think it was a committee for education and social services. Hon. Ekanya and Hon. Oboth can remind me. It was difficult to give serious attention to education. I was checking on the records, but it was very difficult to give serious attention to education. I think we need to look at this . Tourism is the engine of this country. (Applause)  The potential we are seated on - leave alone this oil you are running around that requires you to invest billions, tourism is more than oil and it is more sustainable.  When you look at the country – small countries are attracting millions of tourists yet they have nothing. They just have water. For us, we are even chasing the few who are on water. I think we need to look at it in the future, honourable colleagues. As I said, let us look at this one. I will discuss this with the Rt Hon. Speaker and the Business Committee. We will look at it seriously and see whether this committee should remain as the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. We need to look at –the relationship and –(Member rose_)  Honourable member, are you rising on what I am saying?  I have said I will 12502SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTStake it to the Business Committee because we cannot conclude anything. If we were to conclude, I would do it. Since we shall take it to the Business Committee, it will again come here and then you will help us.There is information that I had wanted Hon. Kateshumbwa to give us as one of the people who are doing a lot in the tourism sector. I also wanted to allow Hon. Mugole because he does for us a lot of work.  2.54MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to, first of all, thank you for giving us this time for us to discuss tourism. I thank the chairperson for the presentation and I listened carefully. The report of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife, and Antiquities indicates that the GDP contribution from tourism has fallen from 7.7 percent to 4.7 per cent, from 2019 to 2022. For me, that should be a very worrying statistics. I want to highlight other things from that report. The second one is that the tourism arrivals from the US, Europe, and China in 2023 totalled to 67,252. Compare that with Kenya, which receives more than 300,000 from the US and UK. The third extract from that report is that the population of lions in 2019 was 493, but that they have dropped. The minister is saying that we should not say the figures, but we are trying to help you.  Mr Speaker, tourism has the potential to actually solve the problem of the resource we have been talking about. The biggest problem we have, as we look for money, is that we do not seem to have a strategy that places this country at the forefront of attracting tourists as a tourism destination. We do not have national content that you can distribute across the globe to market a country called Uganda. This is why when you go to some countries, they will ask you whether you have gorillas or not. Yet, we have the biggest percentage of gorillas in the whole world. Where is the strategy that does country-level marketing that can attract people to come to Uganda?  We have sectors like – we have put money in PDM. I want to tell you, honourable colleagues, that if PDM was to succeed by 60 per cent, we would have a crisis in this country because we have not planned for the success of PDM. If PDM results in increased egg production in this country, where would you sell them? A sector like tourism would help us offload increased production out of PDM. If 10 million tourists slept in Uganda for one night, in the morning, at breakfast, you would be sure to sell 10 million eggs, 10 million sausages, and 10 million tomatoes, and everybody in the value chain would benefit. Mr Speaker, as we look at money, there are basic things that we can do. For example, this morning, I received a cry from one of the players in Queen Elizabeth National Park, where tourists checked out because there was no reliable internet connectivity. We passed money for that National Information Technology Authority – Uganda (NITA-U) project, and the minister for ICT is here. You tell us, how can we have national parks without reliable internet when people want to go take pictures, do live broadcasts, and attract other people to come to Uganda? Number two, why can’t we have reliable water and electricity in all the national parks? We can achieve those things. Number three, why can’t we make visa applications and arrival in Uganda simple? Why should people struggle to apply for visas, and then the system is struggling, yet we can actually make it simple to attract tourists to this Country. Finally, Mr Speaker, this is about communication by the Government. Sometimes we are quick to spread bad news about the country called Uganda. During the COVID-19 pandemic, you remember that one case would make the Minister of Health scream. Ten cases of COVID-19 have been discovered. [The Deputy Speaker]12503THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Recently, there was something that came from the defence ministry. We are the ones alarming the rest of the world about coming here. Why can’t we have one central communication? When you are communicating as a ministry, understand the implications of your communication on the economy. This is because if you give negative news, then you come here and ask for unfunded priorities, you should know that the sector in which your negative communication caused a shortfall in income, is the one supposed to fund you. Mr Speaker, we need to be serious with tourism. We have talked, but we need money in conservation to increase the population of lions, rhinos and all those other animals. We need infrastructure and a strategy that places Uganda at the top, wherever you go. When you are sending ambassadors out there, give them content. When you go to an embassy in London, you cannot find a flyer about Uganda. How will they market the Country? There are things we can do. We can talk, but we need to sit with the Government and have a harmonised strategy on promoting tourism so that it can grow, and contribute more than 20 per cent to our GDP. I submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ekanya. Okay, point of procedure. MR ATWIJUKIRE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural point I am raising is; aware that you will tell me that Hon. Bahati is taking notes for the absent ministers, at a time when we are processing ministerial policy statements, talking about the Budget, constraints of the economy, priorities of this country, and that none of the ministers is present from finance and the Office of the Prime Minister, in the hierarchy of one, two, three, and four; are we proceeding well? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kimosho, you said you are aware I will tell you that Hon. Bahati is taking notes – (Laughter) -  so I think we are proceeding well because even when you asked, you knew. Anyway, at this stage, honourable colleagues, this is our process now. What we mainly need are sector ministers because, after this, these statements are going to the Committee on Budget, which will engage the Minister for Finance again. Let us proceed. The Office of the Prime Minister is well represented here. Hon. Alice Kaboyo is here, we have a full minister and our senior colleague, Hon. Lokeris. He is very alert and attentive. We have a very powerful team representing the Prime Minister. Yes, Hon. Ekanya. 3.02MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, whereas Hon. Oguzu Lee tried to water down the report, I have been here for some time, and I notice that the report of this committee, your Members, and your Clerk, is top-notch. Why do I say so? Our rules demand that in the report, the Members give a summary of the performance of the sector for the previous year. The honourable member presented on how there is abuse of the resources by the accounting officers, and for that reason, it is this House that clears the names of accounting officers. I hope, Mr Speaker, that your office will take the recommendation of the honourable member, that the accounting officers who have been named in abuse of their offices, leading to corruption and loss of funds, will not be cleared by this House. Honourable colleagues, we are asking for money for tourism, but there is abuse, and the report has made it clear. Secondly, the Government of Uganda and the development partners signed a development support policy. The development support policy states and agreed to use national institutions and to avoid duplication. The development partners agreed that we shall have budget support and no off-budget support. Under what condition does the minister for finance, the Secretary to the Treasury, allow off-budget support? 12504SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSThat is contrary to the commitment to funding and supporting the Government of Uganda that for all resources, we shall use national institutions to avoid duplication and waste of resources. The honourable chairperson of the committee has highlighted that. I have not heard from another person. How can a colleague question that? The honourable member has presented a very serious matter. The issue of not sending money to the Consolidated Fund has been highlighted. Therefore, Mr Speaker, my prayer and request is that as we adopt this position, the Office of the Speaker, the ministers for finance, and all of us, should ensure that any accounting officer who has been implicated is not approved. Finally, Tororo District is one of the districts that have a World War Memorial Cemetery. Mr Speaker, when we go to America, we are taken to memorial cemeteries. I request the minister for tourism and trade to ensure that the World War Memorial Cemetery of Tororo is developed, alongside the first cable car in the entire East and Southern Africa, located on the Tororo rock. I beg to support the report. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this is when you highlight your issues. The honourable minister for tourism, Hon. Martin Mugarra, visited my constituency. In my area, in Kiyanga Subcounty, Rwoburunga, and Kigyende, we happen to have chimpanzees. The minister promised a habituation process to start because chimpanzees are like gold. I know very many tourists - there is a group that Hon. Kateshumbwa brought. They wanted to go to Queen Elizabeth National Park and see chimpanzees, and mountain gorillas. They had to cancel one day for the chimpanzees. They said they could not make it because the other side was very far, so the day for chimpanzees was removed from their itinerary. You have chimpanzees across that track. Honourable minister, you came and promised that you would start soon. When Hon. Ekanya talks about the war memorial, I also have chimpanzees. As the war memorial is going to - the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) might come in to help the honourable member. MR OBOTH: I wanted to give this House very accurate additional information. Tororo District does not only have the first and the only known World War Cemetery, but it was also the only recruitment centre in the whole of East Africa. That is why most people who died were brought there. Some of you, your great-grandparents are peacefully resting in Tororo. (Laughter)Therefore, we should highlight this through funding. What Hon. Ekanya said – Tororo Rock is the highest sedimentary rock in the whole of East and Central Africa, but it takes tourists one and a half hours to climb the rock using the cable car. These are the only things. So, I support any move to increase – Other people do not even have what they can sell to the world. For us, we have a lot. This is more than even oil; I can tell you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.3.08MR PATRICK ISINGOMA (Independent, Hoima East Division, Hoima City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me also to join the rest of my colleagues in thanking the committee for a good report presented. The theme for this year’s budget is “commercialisation of Agriculture.” However, using my experience in neighbouring countries like Kenya, where the level of commercial agriculture is slightly higher than ours, I realise that there is a very fundamental symbiotic relationship between commercial agriculture and a vibrant cooperative movement. The two reinforce each other. However, looking at the report, I think I have been listening carefully. There isn’t much focus on the rejuvenation of the cooperative movement. This is negative, Mr Speaker, because we would be happier to see efforts [Mr Ekanya]12505THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024being made to resuscitate our limping cooperative movement and primary societies. However, what we hear and read in the media is that money given to cooperative unions is being misappropriated, and eaten left and right. Can the ministry - I think Hon. Bahati is listening to these remarks very well. I can see him looking at me with -(Laughter)-  Can the ministry give us an explanation why not much emphasis is put on the revival and rejuvenation of the cooperative unions and the cooperative movement in this budget?3.10MR ROLAND NDYOMUGYENYI (Independent, Rukiga County, Rukiga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to the voices of those who have thanked the committee for the good report. There is a saying, that difficult roads lead to beautiful destinations, but the difficult roads that we have in Kigezi are appalling yet we have a national park with many mountain gorillas and the roads are impassable. We are losing a lot of revenue because of impassable roads and as such, it is very prudent and important that the Ministry of Works and Transport together with other agencies like UNRA prioritise these tourism roads. Some roads like Muhanga-Kisiizi-Kebishoni and Kisoro-Nkuringo-Mgahinga have been removed from the Project Implementation Plan (PIP), in the next financial year. Instead of starting the roads, those roads have been removed from the PIP. As Kigezi, Mr Speaker, we think that we are getting a raw deal. First of all, the money that is collected from those mountain gorillas is a lot, but the people of Kigezi are not benefiting from it. The whole of it comes to the central yet the roads are bad. In addition, I would like to add to what Hon. Kateshumbwa has said on the internet in the national parks. Recently, I was in Kanungu travelling all the way to Kasese. There is no internet in the whole of Queen Elizabeth National Park. If you are a tourist and you cannot access the internet or talk to your people wherever they are, it becomes a problem for you to come back and visit that area. Additionally, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is generating a lot of money. Although Hon. Kateshumbwa was talking about a reduction, my records show that in the year 2022 alone, they collected US$ 736 million, up from around US$ 630 million that was collected in 2021. So, the tourism sector needs to be supported. We need to enable its functionality, we need to ensure that the internet is working, and the tourism roads are done and we need to ensure that advertising is top-notch because, in the end, we are going to benefit from it. Finally, there are low-hanging fruits in the tourism sector like sports. What some people do not understand is that certain sports can promote tourism. For example, in Kigezi, we have high altitude and we can easily train many athletes who can compete on the world stage. So, if the Ministry of Education and Sports can promote that sector, we can get a lot of money from that area. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Balimwezo – no, Hon. Wandwasi, you are not among the MPs I picked. I would like to remind you, honourable colleagues. When the committee chairperson finished presenting, the colleagues who were around stood up and I said that they would be the only ones to speak. So, if you were in the corridor or canteen, and you have very good points, unfortunately, you will wait for another day.3.14MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also wish to appreciate the committee for the good work. There has been an increase in counterfeits in the entire country because UNBS has not been given money for field inspections. For almost the entire year, I have not seen UNBS do field inspections in the 12506SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTScity. They also say that they have limited staff, and this has created a menace. Particularly at our borders, there is a limited presence of UNBS staff, which creates a problem. The issue is: how much money have we put aside for the field inspection so that we can reduce the number of counterfeits in the country? Secondly, we have the poorest road infrastructure, particularly in the city. I know we shall come to that when we come to physical infrastructure, but we also need to address this because, without buses that move these tourists in the city, the majority of them are not working because of the potholes in the city. I pray that we consider that, particularly when it comes to good road infrastructure in the city. Thank you.3.16MR MUWADA NKUNYINGI (NUP, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the elaborate report.However, I have three observations:1. The report mentions Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute to be undertaking insider borrowing, and spending at source, among others, in total contravention of the Public Finance Management Act, but they fell short of a recommendation. So, isn’t it proper that you would have said that let the IGG or police, investigate and ensure that the culprits are apprehended and brought to account, as a missing recommendation because there is no recommendation to that, much as it appears like you did a thorough job of investigating especially, considering their half-year performance. Secondly on page 32, the committee brings into the picture the aspect of compensation and specifically reports that there is an increasing number of human and wildlife conflicts, including the destruction of property and lives. This is very important because we are encouraging people to visit our game parks. However, when it comes to the regulations that were issued by the ministry in 2022, the committee observed only one concern of a compensation of 2 per cent. I would like to bring your attention to the other regulations. The regulation of proving a claim is very unfair. They state that for one to allege a claim and receive compensation, they must report on the spot that they were attacked and if it is an animal, one must produce the carcass or any remainder, which is impossible in some instances. The regulations allude to a requirement that one must or shall report, which is impossible for most of the victims, aware that the report is disclosing increasing encounters between wildlife and leading to the destruction of property and lives. We must equally interrogate this. I think the recommendation, fell short, of mentioning that they must also revise these regulations to: One, give a proper timeline within which to report a complaint because the regulations provide that one must report on the spot and if there is any delay, not exceeding one day, which is hard. Secondly, the regulation talks about compensation applicable if one loses life, but they are restricting it to only Shs 20 million. We cannot purport to restrict the compensation on life to just Shs 20 million and to Shs 15 million if one has been disabled. This is in contravention and in conflict with other enabling laws, we have in this country. I beg to move that the recommendation be amended to include a thorough revision of the Uganda Wildlife Compensation Scheme, Regulations 2022 so that there is enough time offered to victims to report such encounters, and two, that the compensation is equally revised to comply with other enabling laws. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Thank you. Let us hear from the Hon. Mugole, Leader of the Opposition before I come to the ministers.[Mr Balimwezo]12507THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 20243.20MR STEPHEN MUGOLE (NRM, Kabweri County, Kibuku ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Several issues have been mentioned, even on compensation just now, yet these regulations were issued just last year, after a push by this Parliament; they are now on test. So, what I would suggest, even with the recommendations we are talking about, is first of all for the committee and the Attorney-General to look at them and determine whether those gaps are there because they are just being tested. At the same time, we are the very people appropriating. If there is a cap on how much somebody should receive, should we leave it open; that somebody would get Shs 100 million in compensation or whatever? Then we shall have beaten the purpose for which the regulation and the law were put in place. Number two, there was an issue with advertising. I recollect vividly, that the Uganda Tourism Board did research and found out that the most watched team was Manchester United, and they had gone into a contract –(Interjections)–  no, Arsenal was taken by Rwanda, and Uganda also uses Arsenal. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, honourable you can clarify. There is the most watched and the one, which makes more noise –(Laughter)-  So, clarify. MR MUGOLE:  I am not a Manchester United (Man-U) fan by the way, but it was the most watched and that is why there was that contract coming in. But I do not know how far they have gone currently.However, I suppose that there were budget cuts that hindered this contract from going on yet as you said, while the major issue in tourism is advertising, infrastructural development within the tourism network is also important. We have “sung” over this thing –(Interjections)-  that they are going to advertise is – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.3.23MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Mr Speaker, I thank the members who have made good contributions to this report. I will start with the area of trade. Mr Speaker, our policy direction should be geared towards removing trade barriers in this country. Whether they are barriers related to border restrictions or the environment, including Government-exposed restrictions, those are the areas we should focus on so that our traders can have some breathing space. Right now in the entire country, the traders are feeling the heat, in part because the policy environment that the Government has put in place is not enabling enough for the trade sector to thrive. The minister and the policy statement have also not adequately addressed the issues that we have been raising here. On the falling prices, I had expected that to come more clearly.Mr Speaker, I remember you had directed that in processing the policy statements, the issue of the tea farmers in the West, the issue of the falling maize prices in the entire country and even the oil seeds should be addressed. This has not come really - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It was Zombo mainly. MR ODUR:  Yes, wherever it is, have not come out very well. The second point I would like to highlight under trade is the composition of our international delegations. I read in the report somewhere, that the committee has recommended and allocated money for our delegations to go abroad. Most times, assembling a group of friends, relatives and in-laws to go to very high-level delegations, requires knowledge and thinking because you are going to engage other countries, that are going to bring experts and people who know it. 12508SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSOnly one statement can confuse the entire delegation of Uganda – (Laughter) – and I have examples that have come to my attention. The point I am making is that let us be serious and take those opportunities that come. Finally, on trade, I would like to emphasise what my colleagues mentioned. We have had resolutions from this Parliament that required the Ministry of Trade or Government to act upon, but they have been ignored, including a resolution on the accounting officer of the Ministry. It was determined here; we do not know the fate and I want the Minister to comment because as Parliament our only tool is when we are respected. If we make a resolution, but then it is not implemented and the same entities come here looking for money, it can demotivate other accounting officers because they do not see us biting enough. On the issue of tourism, I have this comment. For people who did economics and maybe statistics, there is this subject called econometrics, which is using economic theory and when you apply statistics and mathematics to that economic theory, then you come up with a model that can give you some economic phenomenon. In short, you turn the economic theory into viable policy positions. When I listened to the discussion here, I noticed that our input into the tourism sector does not match the output that we would like to get from there. So, without putting in enough resources and investments that are required to enable tourism, we cannot succeed because tourism, in my understanding – (Interjection) - I will take information from first –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member; I do not have that time.MR ODUR: Okay, let me conclude. Tourism is anchored on some economic pillars. You need the roads and the small airstrips to be viable. Electricity has also been mentioned. You also need health facilities, where a tourist will feel comfortable that when they get a problem in West Nile or Kigezi, there is a health facility available to attend to them. When you look at all these, put together, you find that our investments are not yet enough. I would like to end by mentioning the issue of the image of the country, which has been elaborately covered. Our image, as a country, is at stake because I believe we even have internal saboteurs, both in the Government and the other side, who do not reflect on what they say and where they say it from – and at what point to say that. This is very alarming. Until the Government comes up with proper guidance on how to communicate certain positions - even when something has happened, how do you parcel your information so that when it goes out, it does not alarm our tourists? Mr Speaker, I would like to end there and appeal to the committee to look at only one issue. One day, when we were going to West Nile to attend the burial of the wife of our colleague, we found our representative to the East African Legislative Assembly, Hon. Veronica Kadogo, who had a vehicle with an EAC number plate. She is a Ugandan, but the rates were different. They gave her the rate as an individual because she is a Ugandan, but they denied her car. They said that the car that belongs to the East African Community must pay a higher price. I think that is a small issue that probably the Ministry of Tourism can deal with. Let us have something uniform. If I am a Ugandan, driving a car probably licensed in Tanzania and the rest, I think the rate that applies to Ugandan vehicles should also automatically apply. It would help. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sure. I totally agree with you because if we are paying the same school fees in universities, why should we pay higher in other sectors? All of you have five minutes. You are not going to go issue by issue; you will have another opportunity to interact with us. Chairperson, use one minute; you will leave the rest to the minister.[Mr Odur]12509THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Members for their comments on the report. I would like to clarify a few things. The first comment came from Hon. Kabanda, who complained about the committee’s allocations to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. I would like to inform the honourable colleague that the allocations made by the committee are based on the ministerial policy statement that the ministries present to this House and are referred to the sectoral committees to process. So, that is the only source that the committee, in terms of funding to allocate resources to the sector.Secondly, there was a comment by Hon. Oguzu Lee. I would like to say that it was because of the time factor that I had to rush over the report and do a summary. Otherwise, if you are to look through, you will notice that the issue of compliance was well addressed by the committee, in detail, starting from page 5, where there is the issue of gender equity requirements and on page 42, the Ministry of Trade clearly details the issue of compliance. Mr Speaker, on the matter of irregularities, in terms of spending funds contrary to the Public Finance Management Act, I stated that very clearly in the report though I only highlighted a few areas. I requested Members to read through the report carefully. Otherwise, we came up with a report on actions taken and also recommendations by the committee. One of them was for Uganda Cooperative Alliance Limited, where the committee declined to approve Shs 3 billion because of the failure by the ministry to ensure that they completed and formalised the working relationship between them, according to the law. So, the committee declined to give Shs 3 billion to Uganda Cooperative Alliance Limited. That is one among others.The recommendations on irregularity of spending at source were clearly highlighted. Among them was the issue of the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Secretary ensuring that disciplinary actions are taken. I request that Members read through the report carefully to understand and appreciate the position –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson. Honourable minister? I have two; I will start with the tourism minister. Honourable colleagues, as the minister comes, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of women leaders from the Central Uganda Conference of the Seventh-day Adventist (SDA) Church. They have come to visit the SDA Parliamentary Fellowship, chaired by Hon. Josephat Tumwesigye. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  Oh, there is also a man. (Laughter)  The man has escorted the women – for the record. 3.33THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOUR -ISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the chair -person and the committee for the report, and the Members for their contribution and sup -port. Indeed, I do not think that Sir Winston Churchill, in his book of 1908, My African Journey , didn’t refer to Uganda as the “Pearl of Africa” for nothing and I see it when you speak about her tourism potential. Mr Speaker, I agree with you: there should be a distinction between tourism and trade so that they are handled separately.I would like to respond to the issues raised in the report, the first having to do with the Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute, which is a training institute in Jinja, where issues were raised by the committee about how the school was spending money at source.I remember the Principal then tabled a letter – I think it is referred to in the report - to him from the PS/ST, allowing him to spend, but the most important issue is what happens - UHTTI is a training institute. It is an application hotel, 12510SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSwhere we train our students in the tourism sector. The challenge that UHTTI has, compared to other institutions such as Makerere and Makerere University Business School universities, is that most of these universities frontload money to run. In the scenario of UHTTI, they get their money through a subvention from the ministry and, sometimes, there are delays with when the money comes. That is why sometimes the principal’s hands are tied. Otherwise, yes, the money is drawn off the account and deposited back when the money finally comes from the ministry as a subvention. We all agree that despite the challenge that the money was being picked on and off, there was no single loss recorded. The money was always brought back and re-deposited. That is why we asked the committee to guide us, going forward. Unless we also run a system like the one for other institutions where money is frontloaded, then, we will still have challenges running this institution, if we are going to wait for money coming in quarters. I think that is the challenge. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You do not need guidance from the committee. Sit as the Government. Get the minister for tourism and you go to the minister for finance, categorise and sort it out. It is an issue which should not come here.MR MUGARRA: I think that is where the challenge was. Secondly, on the recommendation by the committee to raise the allocation of money for compensation from two per cent to five per cent, is still an issue of Parliament because this is provided for in the Act. We cannot change it by guideline; we have to come back to Parliament and amend the Act.Also, the Uganda Wildlife Act provides that in a scenario where the resources are inadequate, Parliament can allocate money from the Consolidated Fund to support the two per cent that would be going to the Uganda Wildlife Authority for compensation. Otherwise, we agree that there are some challenges and delays. Of course, we passed the regulation a bit late. We have so far given around Shs 900 million as we speak. We believe that we are going to revise the guidelines to make it easier for a person to access it, also keeping in mind that you also have to keep regulations a bit tight, so that the money is not abused. There must be some evidence that there was damage caused. So, this is a matter that we are handling. Anyway, still on UWA, this matter kept coming up and I thank the committee for recommending that the UWA ceiling be raised because when you look at what we are discussing in the ministerial policy statement today, you will notice that what we have been given as a ministry is Shs 202 billion, but the money that we have been given from the finance ministry is Shs 177 billion. That is the reason I do not know whether some of the issues arising out of the committee report will be implemented or not because there is already a reduction in the budget as per the corrigenda. Now, UWA will be getting around Shs 72 billion yet it has around 3,200 employees. Just pension, gratuity and salary alone of UWA officials will be around Shs 60 billion. Therefore, we shall have a balance of around 12 billion to run, operate, feeding costs and all this. It will be impossible for this institution to manage 10 parks, 12 wildlife areas; over 40 protected areas. This is where we want to request the Parliament to support the recommendation of the committee. First, the money we are talking about is collected by UWA itself; it is not that we are going to get it from the Consolidated Fund. We are saying, that if you raise this ceiling so that UWA can be able to operate well, then definitely, we will continue raising more money for the sector. However, once the ceiling is raised -  and we have told finance that because of the shortages [Mr Mugarra]12511THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024in terms of funding, UWA can also contribute to the Consolidated Fund of Shs 15 billion to Shs 20 billion. Of course, we request that once that contribution is made, that money still comes to support the other agencies of the ministry. It is my prayer - if this budget is passed as is, definitely UWA will not be operational - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do not add yourself time. That is a sign that you have used up your time. Please conclude. Otherwise, you have gone into so many issues as if you are presenting before a committee. MR MUGARRA: Thank you. I thought I should say those. Several issues have come up and I will speak to a few. On the issue of advertising, we all agree with what Hon. Kateshumbwa said that the potential of the sector is enormous. Once we invest money in this sector, definitely we will get results and indeed you will not even compare us to oil. Still, the mandate – (Interjections) - yes, this is true and we have said this - is still with you, Members of Parliament. Ours is just to present what we have and within what we can spend. On the issue that has been raised by Members on the access to the road between Masindi to Pakwach, yes, I agree that Members of Parliament, like any other members of the community who pay, are supposed to pay. This road was initially a tourism road different from the one going through Queen Elizabeth in Kasese because through that one would go through without paying. Otherwise, from time immemorial, to access that road, you had to pay a park entry fee and it was specifically built for tourism. That is the reason there is an opposite access route. Sometimes, when there are issues with the main Pakwach Road, we have given clearance and allowed them to go through, but when you say that we stop the collection and let access to this road be like for any other road, it becomes a challenge. The revenues - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That was not the issue. The issue was, because of her number plate, which was for the East African Community – East African Legislative Assembly (EALA), you charged her a higher figure that she is not a Ugandan. As an individual, you charged her a Ugandan fee, but they said that the car was not Ugandan; the car belonged to East Africa yet it should be the same rate. MR MUGARRA: Mr Speaker, that was an anomaly. The rates for East Africans are the same rates we charge for Ugandans, be it for a vehicle or an individual. That is from me. Probably, it is something I can revisit, but we treat all East Africans as Ugandans; we have one rate for everyone.On the issue of marketing – and I do not want to go into the argument of the budgets and allocations. I do not want to say how much Rwanda or Tanzania invests, but trust me, with a Shs 10 billion budget for marketing this destination, you will not get any serious results compared to the other countries. So, I want to – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Minister for Trade. 3.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (IN -DUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are assured of our support, honourable minister. MR BAHATI: Thank you, committee chairperson and Members for the issues you have raised. Uganda Export Promotion Board vis-a-vis the Presidential Initiative on Exports and Industrial Development, these two institutions do work together to achieve the objective of increasing our exports to now, next year, 7 billion. We are working in harmony and 12512SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSI support the position of the Speaker that we should split the committee into two, that is, trade and tourism. Somebody raised the issue of sugar structures; we brought the Bill here and you requested us to go and do more consultations. We are glad to hear that you need it back and we are ready to return it. Hon. Isingoma, on the issue of cooperatives, we have now registered 10,638 primary cooperatives in Uganda and we are working out a strategy to re-establish a cooperative bank. We are now at Cabinet level and we will be coming to inform the Parliament on how far we have gone. I appreciate the committee for creating a separate vote for the Uganda Development Corporation (UDC), but I want to urge Parliament again that creating a vote alone without appropriating money to it, won’t let us achieve much. Honourable colleagues, we have a strategy of value addition, import substitution and export promotion. We have agreed that we should increase our Gross Domestic Product (GDP) from currently Shs 55 billion to Shs 500 billion in the next five years. To achieve this, we must add value to the things that we are producing and our contribution to the industrial sector now stands at 27.4 per cent of the national GDP. To achieve this value addition and industrialisation, we must invest in sectors that actually will achieve that objective, and UDC is one of the arms of the Government that can help us achieve industrialisation. We need to process our cocoa in Kasese, starch in Northern Uganda, Irish potatoes in Southern Uganda and fruits across the country. We must end the importation of old clothes to Uganda gradually and to do this, we need resources. Yes, the private sector is moving ahead to do a lot of things that we are seeing, but some sectors are not very attractive to the private sector and some of these sectors can be worked out through investment in UDC. Therefore, while the creation of the V ote is important, appropriating money to it is more important. I urge the Members to do that. The acting Leader of the Opposition raised the issue of the removal of trade barriers. Indeed, we are doing that through the East African Community and African Continental Free Trade Area - (Mr Nsereko rose_) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, please - Honourable minister, conclude. MR BAHATI:  … and  African Continental Free Trade Area are all the things that we should do. On the resolutions of Parliament regarding accounting officers, Mr Speaker, you are custodians of the resolutions. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That one, we shall handle. MR BAHATI: Yes, you will handle it. Finally, on a selfish note, Hon. Oboth raised an issue of tourism for Tororo and he painted a picture that some of the sites in Tororo were the best in East Africa. There is a saying related to the truth of the Bible that wise men come from the East and settle in the West. (Laughter)  I want to reinforce the point that the tourism potential in Kigezi, as Hon. Ndyomugyenyi said, Lake Bunyonyi is the second deepest lake in Africa. When you look at the three mountains of Muhavura, one at the border of Rwanda, DRC, and another at the border of Uganda.  The blacksmiths there are the best in the whole of Africa. So, Hon. Oboth, I support you and the Members who have raised these potentials of tourism as one of the key sectors in the economy that can increase our resources in addition to trade and industry. [Mr Bahati]12513THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024I thank you, honourable colleagues, for the issues that you have raised, and we look forward to your support of the sector of trade and industry so that we can grow our economy tenfold, as we have set the target. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statement and Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted with the proposed amendments.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, we have our technical staff from all sides who have been here since morning. We can have some time to move out and get a cup of tea. They also need a small break so we are going to have a health break for 10 minutes and resume immediately. (The House was suspended at 3.48 p.m.)(On resumption at 4.12 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)(V) COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR THE FY 2024/20254.12THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Flavia Kabahenda):  Mr Speaker, I would like to present a report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and Equal Opportunities Commission for the Financial Year 2024/2025. Before I present the report, allow me to lay on the Table a copy of the report and the alternative policy statement for Gender, Labour and Social Development. We considered and had some recommendations in our report and the minutes of the meetings, plus some of the documents that we were given when we interfaced with the witnesses. I beg to lay.Mr Speaker, allow me not to go to pages 1, 2 and 3. Page 4 is about the sector mandate, legal framework, and methodology. Allow me to start from page 6 where we have the half-year financial performance for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Financial Year 2023/2024. That is in the table, but I will go to page 7 to make some observations about the actual outputs for the ministry at half a year. The committee observed that the ministry realised outputs among others, as indicated in Annex A, which is attached on the report. However, information on the actual achievements against planned annual cost budgets was not provided, hence rendering verification of performance impractical. The committee recommends that in the next reporting period, actual outputs against planned cost outputs should be availed to enable proper assessment of the performance of the planned activities. We also observe that the indicators set and reported on were unrealistic and misplaced in assessing value for money. We recommend that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development sets realistic and measurable indicators to enable easy assessment of value for money in the next performance reporting period. About the budget by programme allocation for the Financial Year 2024/2025, our observation is that the Community Mobilisation and Mind-set Change Programme, which is critical in the socio-economic transformation of the communities, has the lowest budget yet it is core in the performance of all the other programmes, including PDM. We recommend that the Community Mobilisation and Mind-set Change Programme be prioritised. 12514SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMr Speaker, allow me to skip the consistency of Ministry of Gender to the NDP III. Members can read about the legal compliance of the ministerial policy statement to the PFMA. I go to page 10, about the Gender and Equity Assessment for the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Gender for the Financial Year 2024/2025.In accordance with Section 13(15) (g)(i) and (ii) of the PFMA, 2015, as amended, the minister responsible for finance in consultation with the Equal Opportunities Commission shall issue a certificate:a.  Certifying that the policy statement is gender and equity responsive, andb.  Specifying measures taken to equalise opportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities and marginalised groups. The 96-per cent score for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development with respect to gender and equity planning and budgeting, is commendable and exhibits a fair compliance with the law. Mr Speaker, I beg that we go on and Members can continue to read. For purposes of time, permit me to take you to page 14; the Off-Budget Support for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the Financial Year 2024/2025. As shown in the table below, which is table 6, off-budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is to the tune of Shs 1.78 billion. The Gender and Social Protection sub-programme takes the lion’s share of the budget by 46.1 per cent, followed by the Labour and Employment Services sub-programme with 37.3 per cent and lastly, the Community Sensitisation and Empowerment Programme takes the least share of 16.1 per cent. Our observation is that the Community Sensitisation and Empowerment sub-programme, which is very critical in bringing the desired socio-economic transformation in the communities, has a much lower off-budget of Shs 0.295 billion when compared to other programmes, including the Human Development Programme. The recommendation is that the Ministry of Gender should embark on a robust resource mobilisation effort by engaging with more development partners to support interventions under this very critical programme. Mr Speaker, allow me to take you to page 17 of the committee observations and recommendations. V ote 018 - Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is what I will start with. Observation number one is on the restoration of funds reallocated from the ministry when finalising the budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024. The committee was informed that during the process of finalising the Financial Year 2023/2024 budget, the Budget Committee made a reallocation of Shs 32.9 billion from the Ministry of MoGLSD by labelling the associated items as “consumptive”. The reallocation affected and left zero allocation for food and non-consumptive food items to remand homes and rehabilitation centres for PWDs; subventions to special interest groups councils, and other institutions - women, youth, PWDs and older persons, Children Authority, Inter-Religious Council, Public Library of Uganda and the Ugandan National Cultural Centre; flagship programmes of the ministry like UWEP/YLP, Special Grant for Older Persons with Disabilities, Special Grant for Older Persons, Green Jobs, Chemical Safety and Security Programmes (CHESASE ). The committee was further informed that a supplementary budget of Shs 30.2 billion was processed to correct this anomaly in the Financial Year 2023/2024. The expectation of the ministry was that the fix would be mainstreamed in the MTEF and that the funds be reinstated in the proceeding financial year. It is, however, noted that the Financial Year 2024/2025 Ministerial Policy Statement has not taken care of these critical shortfalls. [Ms Kabahenda]12515THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024We recommend that Shs 1. Shs 32.9 billion be reinstated and mainstreamed into the budget to comply with proper budgeting principles and avoid the non-provision of critical services in the ministry. Food and non-food items for children and youth institutions and persons with disabilities in rehabilitationThe committee observes as follows:(i) The need to provide food and non-food items under subventions to juvenile remand homes/rehabilitation centres to support their operation; and(ii) Provision of food and non-food items in the vocational rehabilitation institutions to facilitate training for young people with disabilities in vocational skills to enhance their employability to support their operationalisation. The available funding for this activity is Shs 0.755 billion out of the required Shs 1.50 billion, thus leaving a shortage of Shs 0.745 billion. We recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails Shs 0.745 billion to cater for food and non-food items for children, youth institutions and PWDs in rehabilitation.   Mobilising communities to embrace the Parish Development ModelThe committee noted with concern that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is the lead institution in the implementation of Pillar No.5 on community mobilization, mind-set change and cross-cutting issues). This pillar supports and inspires communities to appreciate and effectively participate in development programmes. However, the pillar was allocated only Shs l billion out of the required Shs 7 billion in the first year of the programme and subsequently, no allocation of funds in the Financial Year 2023/2024 as well as the Financial Year 2024/2025 National Budget Framework Paper. In the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development ministerial policy statement, there is a Shs 5 billion critical funding gap from the deployment of the Parish Development Model sensitisation manual guidelines.The committee further noted the uncoordinated nature of funding for community mobilisation. Whereas it is the mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to implement the National Community Mobilisation Strategy, which is already developed, funds for community mobilisation are spread out across various institutions. This makes it difficult to coherently implement an effective community mobilisation campaign.We recommendation that Shs 5 billion should be availed to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to coherently implement an effective community mobilisation campaign for the PDM in communities.4. Establish and Operationalise the Kiswahili CouncilThe committee was informed that the Cabinet, under Minute Extract No. 437 (CT 2022), approved the waiver to establish the Uganda National Kiswahili Council in order to recruit and pay staff salaries equivalent to Shs 1.5 billion and initial operations of the Council, of Shs 3.5 billion. This requires resources in the Financial Year 2024/2025 to support the ministry in this undertaking. The Uganda Kiswahili Council Bill 2024 was read for the first time and is under consideration by the committee. The committee was further informed that the establishment of the Uganda National Kiswahili Council is a regional commitment of the East African Cooperation. Notably, Kenya and Tanzania have already established this Council. This was meant to have been effective from the Financial Year 12516SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS2023/2024. However, the Ministry was not allocated any funds to this effect.We recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide Shs 10 billion for the establishment and operationalisation of the Uganda National Kiswahili Council.  Increase social sector development grant allocation to Local Governments in Financial Year 2024/2025The committee noted that for effective mobilisation of communities, the Ministry of Gender and other Government entities are working towards enhancing the effective mobilisation of families, communities and citizens for national development and achieving strengthened institutional capacity of central, local government and non-state actors. This can be achieved by full operationalisation of the community-based services at the local Government level. The social development grant is meant to support the coordination of community-based services in the districts -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Madam Chairperson, sorry for the interruption. Honourable colleagues, we have statutory deadlines on these reports and I would want more debate. We have Tax Bills coming - since the reports have been uploaded and members are reading, please go through the recommendations so that we save time for members to debate. Then the whole report will be captured on the Hansard,  other than reading for long and only having 10 minutes of debate.(The report is hereto attached.)MS KABAHENDA:  Most obliged, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.MS KABAHENDA:  The recommendation on No.5 is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should reinstate the social sector development grant by an additional Shs 6.36 billion to enable the full functionality of community-based structures in districts and sub-counties.5. The implementation of Cabinet’s directive on emoluments to traditional leadersOn this we recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Social Development avails Shs 31.330 billion to cater for the implementation of the Cabinet’s directive on emoluments to the 17 gazetted traditional/cultural leaders.6.  The construction of palaces for the ItesoOn this, Mr Speaker, allow me to correct this by replacing the Iteso with Lango because the Iteso and Kumam budgets are taken care of under the Ministry for Teso Affairs. We, therefore, have Lango, Tieng Adhola, Buruli and Rwenzururu Kingdoms.We recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 17.2 billion for the construction of palaces for the Lango, Tieng Adhola, Buruli and Rwenzururu kingdoms as directed by His Excellency, the President.7.  Implementation of the Externalisation of Labour ProgrammeOn this, we recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides the funding shortfall of Shs 2 billion for the implementation of the externalisation of the labour programme to enhance safe and decent external employment.The fund should be created to manage and operate the externalisation of labour.8.  Provision of counterpart funding towards interventions under the Generating Growth Opportunities and Productivity for Women Enterprise (GROW) project that are not provided for.[Ms Kabahenda]12517THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024We recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide Shs 0.500 billion as Government counterpart funding for the GROW project in the Financial Year 2024/2025 budget in fulfilment of the Government commitment.9.  The National Apprenticeship and Graduate V olunteer SchemeWe recommend - after noticing a shortfall, the Ministry of Finance to provide a shortfall of Shs 18.096 billion to the Ministry of Gender, in the Financial Year 2024/2025, to provide at least 1000 work placements for educated and semi-skilled young people including graduates and school drop-outs annually for purposes of skills acquisition through apprenticeships and volunteering.10.  Withdrawal, rehabilitation and settlement of street childrenOn this we recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides funds worth Shs 5 billion for the withdrawal, rehabilitation and settlement of Street Children from all the urban centres of the Country and not only KCCA.11.  Special enterprise grant for older personsWe recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should enhance the Financial Year 2024/2025 budgetary allocation to Guidelines for the Special Enterprise Grant for Older Persons (SEGOP) by providing Shs 9 billion to accommodate the growing number of eligible older persons who should remain in the money economy. (Applause)12. Integration of International and National Ceremonies (Labour Day and Women’s Day) in the ministry’s budgetWe recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails Shs 1.661 billion to cater for the integration of international and national ceremonies (Labour Day and Women’s Day in the ministry’s budget.Mr Speaker, you are aware just like honourable members are, that the Ministry of Gender through the National Council for Women has been availing Shs 3 million to each district for national celebrations for women, but this money has been removed from the ministerial policy statement, we would like reinstated. Therefore, Shs 1.661 billion should be put back so that Members are not tasked with financing such celebrations.13. Supporting the Jua-Kali enterprises to transition into the formal economy programmeMr Speaker, we recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails Shs 18.6 billion to support Jua-Kali to transition the young people and women entrepreneurs into the formal economy programme. This is one area where we can skill the young people without retooling. So, I implore Members that we provide this Shs18.6 billion to support Jua-Kali . 14. Elimination of child labour and school-drop out programmeMr Speaker, our recommendation is for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avail Shs 17.72 billion to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to support this intervention. 15.  Decent work increased/enhanced Our recommendation is that given the need to address the challenges above, the Government is required to fund Decent Work Country Programme as a programme for workers in order to enhance productivity, and a budget of Shs 16.2 billion is required for this activity. Subventions under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 8.0 National Council for Persons with a Disability Mr Speaker, our recommendation is that Shs 1.5 billion be availed to the National Council 12518SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSfor PWDs to enable them to perform their oversight monitoring of disability inclusion at district and lower council levels. Clearing gratuity areasWe recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails National Council for Persons with Disabilities Shs 0.750 billion to cater for gratuity areas as notified by the internal and Auditor-General’s office. Renovation of the council offices at Kireka Rehabilitation CentreMr Speaker, this requires Shs 0.460 billion to the National Council for Persons with Disabilities to cater for the renovation of council office premises at Kireka Rehabilitation Centre, as this would fulfil the right to physical accessibility by PWDs. 9.0 National Council for Older PersonsConducting civic education for older persons in the four regions on the electoral processesMr Speaker, our recommendation is to provide Shs 0.3 billion to enable the council to conduct civic education and sensitise older persons on the electoral processes in preparation for the coming elections of 2026 in the four regions of the country. Funds to 176 cities/districts/municipalities meant to support and operationalise their councils for older persons and at the lower local government levelsOn this, we recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 2.1 billion to be disbursed to districts and lower local government councils in all the 176 districts, cities and municipalities to enable them to ease their operations. Commemoration of the International Day for Older Persons and the World Elder Abuse Awareness Day The recommendation is to avail Shs 0.16 billion to cater for the commemoration of the International Day for Older Persons and World Elder Abuse Awareness Day. Prevention of elder abuse and access to justice through a regional dialogue with key stakeholdersThis requires that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails Shs 0.15 billion to cater for the promotion of justice and prevention of older persons’ abuse throughout the four regions. Parish Councils for Older Persons trained in their rolesThis requires Shs 0.46 billion to be availed for the training of older persons on mobilisation, advocacy, data collection and monitoring of the participation of older persons in government programmes, including the Parish Moment Model, Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) and Special Enterprise Grant for Older Persons (SEGOP). Geriatric courses developed for training in all health training institutions Mr Speaker, on this we recommend that Shs 0.2 billion be availed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to enable the council to engage the medical and nurses councils, the academia, the National Council for Higher Education and the Ministry of Health to undertake the process of developing geriatric courses for training in all health training institutions. 10.0 National Women’s Council. On skilling, tooling and offering an alternative livelihood, peer-to-peer training to 5,000 teenage mothers for 50 local governments, we recommend that Shs 3.1 billion be availed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the National Women’s Council as an intervention that will reduce the teenage pregnancy prevalence, hence reducing and saving the Government unnecessary costs. [Ms Kabahenda]12519THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024146 Districts/cities women’s councils supported at national level to commemorate International Women’s Day 2025 (Shs 3,000,000 per district/city).The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail Shs 1.805 billion to the National Women’s Council to enable them to support successful Women’s Day celebrations at districts, cities and municipality levels. On supporting National Women’s Council to execute their mandate through the Women’s Council’s institutional support, we recommend that Shs 0.638 billion be availed to the National Women’s Council to enable them undertake the successful implementation of government programmes.11.0 National Youth CouncilThere is a recommendation that Shs 3.434 billion be availed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for the procurement of 202 motorcycles for the district, city and municipality youth leaders to support them with supervision of beneficiary youth groups in Youth Livelihood Programme and PDM for better recovery of funds and effective participation. 12.0 National Children’s Authority Conducting a national mapping exercise for child-headed families in UgandaOur recommendation is for the Ministry of Finance to avail Shs 300 million to enable the National Children Authority to conduct a national mapping exercise for the child-headed families in Uganda to establish their level of vulnerability and provide statistics for planning and intervention. Carrying out a national survey on the street children phenomenon to inform the national programme on the elimination of street children in UgandaThis requires that Shs 0.250 billion be availed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that it is carried out. 13.0 The Industrial CourtRecruitment of three judges of the Industrial Court We recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails Shs 1.350 billion to cater for the recruitment of the three Industrial Court judges. Recruitment of staff within the approved public service structure The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should avail Shs 0.522 billion for the recruitment of 45 staff members to fill the vacancies in the structure.  Provision of adequate space/premises for the Industrial CourtWe recommend that Shs 1.2 billion be availed by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to cater for adequate space premises for the Industrial Court to enable it to carry out its mandate effectively. Digitalisation of court hallsMr Speaker, our recommendation is for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide Shs 4 billion to the Industrial Court to enable it to develop and cater for the digitalisation of its court halls. 14.0 Uganda National Cultural Centre (UNCC)The subventionsOn the subventions under National Cultural Centre, we recommend that the finance ministry avails Shs 9.126 billion to UNCC to enable it to pay for salaries of its staff, operation expenses and gratuity arrears.12520SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSFeasibility study process and tendering through PPP arrangement for the redevelopment of the national theatreThis requires Shs 0.7597 billion to be availed for the redevelopment of UNCC land and the renovation of the National Theatre as a National Centre of Excellence for Art and Culture in Uganda. Actually, they require Shs 7 billion, Mr Speaker, I think there was an error there. Development of two regional centres Mr Speaker, this requires that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 22 billion for the establishment of at least one regional cultural centre.Mr Speaker, allow me to go to V ote 124 for the Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC). I request Members to allow me to skip page 39 and go to page 41 to the actual output for EOC at half a year.The committee observes that the performance of some indicators was above target while some were below, and others had no performance at all.We recommend that the Equal Opportunities Commission sets realistic and measurable indicators to enable easy assessment of value for money in the next performance report.The other observation we have is on 15.4, page 42, on gender and equity assessment for ministerial policy statements for the Equal Opportunities Commission for the Financial Year 2024/2025.Honourable members, this is done in accordance with Section 13(15) (g) (i) and (ii) of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015. We all know that the performance of EOC is at 91 per cent lower than some of the other agencies when actually it is the implementer. Therefore, as a committee, we recommend that EOC pulls up its socks because it cannot fail to walk the talk.I will skip 15.6, on page 46. Mr Speaker, I would like to take Members to page 50 on observations and recommendations.  1. Scale up the implementation of gender and equity planning and budgeting for both local and central Government 2. On this, we recommend that Shs 6 billion be provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Equal Opportunities Commission to enable it to cater for the comprehensive implementation of gender and Equity Planning. 3. Comprehensive research and report on the state of equal opportunities in the country4. This requires that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 2 billion for the Equal Opportunities Commission to carry out this comprehensive research and report on the state of equal opportunities in the country.5. Tribunal hearings and public inquiry to create access to social justice 6. The recommendation is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides Shs 3 billion to cater for tribunal hearings as this would lead to an increase in access to social justice.7. Strengthening the capacity of State and Non-State Actors to mainstream equal opportunities and affirmative action in all policies, laws, plans, programmes and practicesOur recommendation is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails Shs 2 billion to enable the Equal Opportunities Commission to undertake the strengthening of the capacity of state and non-state actors to mainstream equal opportunities and affirmative action in all policies, laws, plans, programmes and practices.[Ms Kabahenda]12521THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Annex C has a list of all our budget priorities where we seek budget enhancement and budget provisions.Mr Speaker, in conclusion, I beg to move that the Budget for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and that of the Equal Opportunities Commission for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be approved not as per Table 15 below because at the Appropriation Bill, some of the figures changed and so, the latest table provides under the recurrent component that the total recurrent is now Shs 171,207,684,000. The total development component is Shs 207,922,331,000 and the overall total for vote 018 is Shs 379,130,015,000. Under V ote 124 for Equal Opportunities Commission, the recurrent component is Shs 16,952,879,000 and the development component is Shs 194,400,000.The overall total for the Equal Opportunities Commission is 17,147,279,000 as per the Appropriations Bill that was laid.Our prayer as a committee is that the committee observations and recommendations be strongly considered as per Annex C . Mr Speaker. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson. Honourable colleagues, I will pick only 10 Members, starting with the Member from Lyantonde, two youth representatives, and Hon. Mpindi – let me first pick Members representing the interest groups. I am looking for a Member for the elderly –(Laughter) - Hon. Bosco, Hon. Santa, Member from UPC, Member from DP, Member from FDC, Dr Opio, Hon. Nyangweso – no, by the way, the shadow minister presented in the committee and the statement that has come here is a combination of the minister’s and the shadow minister. Therefore, when discussing ministerial policy statements, shadow ministers are not given priority. They can be allowed, but I do not pick you because you are a shadow minister since your views were considered.How many are those? Oh, I will pick another Independent Member and that is Hon. Linda. I have Workers’ representatives. Honourable colleagues, depending on how you behave, I can pick more. Let us sit.Honourable colleagues, this time I am not – and a member of UWOPA is a must. These are very critical issues – veterans are not under this committee, so, Hon. Kahonda, stop pleading. Let us be quick. 4.52MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its detailed report – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Point of order.MR IDDI ISABIRYE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a honourable colleague I have seen since morning enjoying the Front Bench. I do not know whether he is a member of the Cabinet. My worry is that he may confuse the appointing authority to think that the Front Bench is full of ministers.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, today is free sitting, so it is a chance to enjoy the Front Bench. Yes, Member from Lyantonde?MS KEMIREMBE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for recommending that some money totalling Shs 7.4 billion be added to the Community Development Officers (CDOs). These people are doing a lot of work for us in the constituencies. There is a lot of domestic violence, child neglect, and all that. These people always come in to help us.  I think allocating them more money will help us. There is also a challenge. I see everywhere that the finance ministry should add some money. However, we do not see where you are getting this money. For example, saying that Shs 5 billion should be given to reallocation of street children and their rehabilitation.12522SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSI think this is too much money for this activity –(Interjection)-  even if it is an entire country because even Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) has the same components yet those street children are mostly found here. There is also I think double budgeting where they say Shs 250 million should be availed to the National Council of Children yet it is in the other Shs 5 billion. I think we should reallocate the Shs 250 million. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I had forgotten Hon. Milton Muwuma, the one for children’s affairs. Either Hon. Makhoha or Hon. Muwuma, usually handles -4.53 MR EDSON RUGUMAYO (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for a detailed report and I support the recommendation. We are grappling with unemployment and the report states 82 per cent of our young people in the country are unemployed because of mismatched skills. I would implore the House that we support the recommendation that at least 18 billion be provided for the National Apprenticeship and V olunteer Scheme to help us solve that problem. Secondly, we have many skilling centres in the country, including the State House Skilling Hubs, that are churning out young people who have skills, but they do not have tools and equipment. I support the recommendation of the committee that at least 17 billion be provided because the Jua-Kali  Programme is the only one, which has a component of giving tools to these people who are skilled without the tools and equipment.Thirdly, I want to thank the Government for putting in place these several programs, Emyooga, Parish Development Model (PDM), and Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP). These help the youth a lot, but they need to be consistently mobilised to participate and benefit from these programmes. I support the recommendation of the committee to make sure they put in place motorcycles for these youth leaders to help mobilise their fellows to participate in these programs. I think the last bunch of motorcycles for Districts, Municipalities and Cities was in 2014- 10 years down the road; these are too old, and they cannot help a lot. I recommend that we support the money required for these motorcycles, three point something billion, be provided for these motorcycles to help these youth mobilise their fellows. Lastly, it is a common adage that you reap what you sow.  I wonder why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wants to reap where they have not sowed.  Every young person who leaves this country to go and work abroad should make a contribution to the fund at the Ministry of Gender.  Secondly, when we look at the report, we have at least Shs 105 billion remittances from migrant workers abroad. I wonder why it is very difficult for the Government to provide at least Shs 4 billion to support the labour externalisation unit to make sure that they can deploy labour attachés in these countries and monitor these migrant workers that send back money to this country. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Okot.4.55MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you Mr Speaker. I just have two concerns. One is on page 24 of the report, which talks about the integration of international and national ceremonies in the ministry’s Budget. From the report that I have read and the formidable presentation that I have listened to, I have only seen three events provided. That is the International Labour Day, International Women’s Day, and the International Day for Older Persons. I support the very passionate [Ms Kemirembe]12523THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024appeal for allocations for these celebrations, which are right under the charge of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  However, I am aware that the 12th of August every year is a calendar date and it is a celebration of International Youth Day. For two financial years, we have had this day celebrated belatedly on account of financial constraints with absolutely no allocation this year and not talk about it in the Ministerial Policy Statement and the report. What is the hope of the youth in celebrating this International Youth Day this year? Secondly, can we also start making these numerous celebrations more meaningful and impactful rather than events where people just go and come back? Can we make these events like what Tarahe Sita does? They leave a mark and footprint. Where they go, clean and do community service; these days should just not be rituals.Finally, Mr Speaker, the National Youth Council. Uganda is celebrated and respected as a model for youth representation in terms of the structures of the entire governance. However, there is a contemporary dilemma that this Parliament must deal with. That is how meaningful and impactful all these councils can be to the livelihood of the youth and its impact on our economy. This particular phase that our councils are in really needs significant investments. I want to applaud the committee and second their appeal to have motorcycles for the 202 motorcycles for youth leaders to facilitate their monitoring and supervising of other processes. However, these leaders are better – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I do not know whether I am thinking radically. This money we spend on celebrations when you have very important items on the Budget, which you cannot even fund, and the same people in Government, the same mobilisers, are the ones I see in this celebration. In Karamoja, they are the same people, somewhere else the same people, the one for youth is not led by the youth. The one for women is not - How much do we spend? Honourable minister, maybe I can just make a quick inquiry; that national celebration which you have. I do not know what we celebrate with the unemployment we have. How much do we spend on it, for example?4.59 THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, the international days are commemorated first because Uganda is a signatory to the International Conventions. Two, when we celebrate these days, we take it to the local government.  For example, in Katakwi, which hosted Women’s Day, prior to that day. For one week we conducted serious sensitisation and training. We took all the Government Agencies like the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO), National Animal Genetic Resource Centre (NAGRC), Diary Development Authority, and URI to train women and skill them, and they are now doing follow-up to support them with tools. When we undertake these activities, we showcase that area, pick the progress that has been made, but also what that community requires for the central government to intervene, and we will always have follow-up activities. It is a day that we undertake progress and accountability for the progress made, but also determine what we need to do and make a follow-up.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   How much do you spend on that day? MS BETTY AMONGI:  It depends. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Leave alone the activities. MS BETTY AMONGI:  Yes. On the day. 12524SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The tents, the music, that food you give us, the per diem we get for going there, fuel and-MS BETTY AMONGI:  A standard event is Shs 500 million. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes. Okay. Honourable colleagues, I leave it to you, but I can bet it is not less than a billion. For example, what which was done in Katakwi, honourable minister - what the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) does on Tarehe Sita , where you say, to celebrate the youth or the women, we are going to choose a certain region and you balance. This year, you are in the Northern region, next year you are in the Western region and the other year you are in the Central region. You do related activities, without us going to eat meat and drink tea and water, and then we get per diem for inland travel.  I am just thinking aloud. Where is Hon. Mpindi? I had already picked Hon. Bosco.  When you consider the number of days we have in a year, with each day taking about a billion, I can tell you that we spend over Shs 10 billion.  5.03MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi):  I would like to sincerely thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to contribute to this very elaborate report presented by my sister. Sincerely speaking, this report was spot on.  However, I have a few concerns, and mine specifically goes to item No.7. Item No. 7 is in respect to cultural institutions. You have alluded to the fact that there is a directive from His Excellency the President, wherein he directed that we do the construction of cultural institutions. To begin with, there is Iteso, Kumam, Tieng Adhola, Buruli and Rwenzururu, as directed by His Excellency.  The money allocated to that, according to the budgeting plan, is about Shs 17.2 billion. Now, even if you did the simple mathematics of allocating that to the cultural institutions listed, each institution would receive approximately Shs 4.3 billion for the construction of those palaces.  However, there was a bit of an adjustment, which you made that for the Iteso and the Kumam cultural institutions, they should be delisted from this and brought under the Ministry of Teso Affairs. Now, the Ministry of Teso Affairs is an affirmative ministry. The cultural institutions by law are under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. I want us to realign this. This is a preserve of the Ministry of Gender. All cultural institutions in the country. I have just talked to a technical person from the Ministry of Teso Affairs. They are saying that the Shs 200 million that we have seen in social media, is out of their ingenuity in their budgets because they feel a lot of pressure when they are down. However, they are saying that obligation is not supposed to be their responsibility. I think we have got to realign and not take away this responsibility for these cultural institutions of the Iteso and Kumam. It should stay in the mainstream ministry. Shs 200 million, even if I gave it to you each financial year, when will you finish constructing? I request that we – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Okiror, this is where Committee on Budget comes in. We send these proposals to the Budget Committee for harmonisation. We ensure that there is no double budgeting from Ministry A to Ministry B. I think let us handle it - committee chairpersons are members of the Budget Committee. We are going to do that. MR OKIROR:  My humble request, Mr Speaker, is that even if it progresses to that level, that duty should stay with the main ministry. Permit me to yield to information from the honourable member. Thank you very much.12525THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024MR ODUR:  Thank you, Hon. Okiror. The information I would like to give to the House is that a similar promise was made to the people of Lango under the affirmative Ministry of Northern Uganda. To date, there has been no delivery of even one cent of that project. I wanted to give him information that under the Ministry of Gender, there is some assurance that the project may be delivered. Therefore, Teso should insist on being part of the one under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. (Laughter)   THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Are you giving an assurance because the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is from UPC party? (Laughter)  MR OKIROR:  Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for the very constructive information. He is actually the right person to inform me. Most obliged. Thank you.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  For sure, let us agree that cultural institutions are under the Ministry of Cultural Affairs. (Applause)  Budget Committee, when you go back, harmonise this and ensure that it is under Cultural Affairs.  The same applies to the issue of children. I was reading the statement of the Ministry for KCCA, Presidential Affairs. Now they are budgeting for children off the street, only for Kampala. Then you have Ministry of Gender. For Ministry of Kampala, the issue is simple: to get children off the streets. But these ones rehabilitate; they go, manage and rehabilitate. I would say, also that money should all be under the Ministry of Gender so that we harmonise and these children are not just thrown off the streets; let them be taken and managed well as children. Not just saying our streets no longer have children. The Budget Committee should harmonise all these issues. Hon. Beatrice Anywar, what is – 5.08THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the paper. We are already talking about how we can facilitate our cultural institutions. I have heard the report mentioning the different parts of the country where the cultural institutions are. Acholi Subregion has not been mentioned. We do not know why that budget has not included Acholi Subregion. (Laughter)  I would like to seek clarification. I am now speaking as a Member of Parliament representing my people. We need to have this projected so that we know our position.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, did you raise this in the Cabinet meeting? (Laughter)  This budget came to the Cabinet before it came here. The budget comes from Cabinet and then it comes here.  Yes, Hon. Mpindi – 5.09MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative):  Thank you, Mr Speaker.  12.4 per cent of the total population of Uganda consists of persons with disability. Some years back, this Parliament decided to support persons with disability from this country with a grant, which we call the Special Grant. This special grant has been given to persons with disabilities for, I think, the last eight years. It is meant to support groups of persons with disabilities to come out with a project that can sustain them. It is given to a group of between six to 15 people, in all districts of Uganda.  Now, it has become a practice that every budgeting period, this money is removed from the budget. Ever since I joined this Parliament, we have been fighting to bring back this money in the budget, including this financial year that we are running. We fought until this money was brought back.  12526SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSNow, in the coming Financial Year 2024/2025, again the money has been removed. I do not know why the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is targeting persons with disability. Secondly, it is embarrassing to hear that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development cannot allocate Shs 745 million to feed children with disabilities in the rehabilitation centre, is alarming and shaming. I do not know what is happening, about feeding children who were abandoned at the rehabilitation centre and then we come here to lament about that money. Those are Ugandans. Mr Speaker, in other countries, when you are a person with a disability, you enjoy almost everything. (Laughter)  In Uganda, it is a completely different thing. Now when we go to the Shs 1.5 – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mpindi, remember you enjoyed something in that corner. (Laughter)  you have enjoyed, my brother. MR MPINDI: That was not financial. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, this Parliament enacted the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2020, and the implementation of that Act is supposed to be done by the National Council for Disability. This Act is very beautiful because it has everything that can lift the standards of persons with disabilities in Uganda. However, it is not given money to monitor the implementation of Government programmes for persons with disabilities. It has quite a number of responsibilities in terms of monitoring the functions, but without money. How can it do anything? I appeal to this House to consider the recommendations of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development; in as far as persons with disabilities are concerned, so that we put a smile on their faces. Members, this special grant also comes to your constituency. Every constituency and district receives this money. If it is removed, we are in trouble. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 5.14MS SANTA OKOT (PPP, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you know I must call you, for record purposes. (Laughter) MS SANTA OKOT:  Sorry.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Santa. MS SANTA OKOT: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good report that they presented. I know that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is in charge of all the special interest groups. There is one issue that has been appearing on the Floor of Parliament every year; that is the issue of the children affected by nodding syndrome during the war. Up to today, some of them have never walked, some are limping, some are on medication and they are doing well. I believe the issue of nodding syndrome cuts across the two ministries; Ministry of Gender and Ministry of Health, for medication, welfare under Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.When the chairperson presented the budget, I did not hear any mention of these children. Some weeks ago, the Speaker the Acholi Parliamentary Group, to do assessment on this issue. We went to Omoro, Pader, Kitgum and Lamwo, we invited the people who were in Lango. When we met the community and those children, the main thing that the parents requested for was to revive the rehabilitation and habitation centres, which were opened up by some time back by a white lady. However, when she ran out of the money, the Government did not complete the centres. [Mr Bumali Mpindi]12527THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024She handed over the centres to the districts, which were unable to handle them. Most of the parents have requested that these rehabilitation centres be reinstated. A woman told us that she has four children affected by nodding syndrome, and that she will kill them and also die. A man told us that he has seven children also affected. Most of them told us that if we were not the Acholi Parliamentary Group, they would chase us away, because several people have gone to them, but have not assisted them. The Archbishop of Northern Uganda, John Baptist Odama, put up a habitation centre in Kitgum, which has about only 10 children, whom we took there on stretchers, but they are now doing better. I propose that the issue of the rehabilitation and habitation centres for these children should be included in the Budget and financed handed over to the Archbishop because he can handle those centres very well, so that the parents who have been living with these children for all these years - information from the minister-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No. Honourable, we do not have that time. Thank you. Honourable minister for Gender, we discussed the issue of nodding syndrome extensively and it was a very sad tale. There is no way we can go through this coming financial year without considering it. (Applause)  I am going to ask the chairpersons for the committees on Gender and Health, ministers for Gender and Health, to meet the Acholi Parliamentary group and cost this. (Applause)  I do not know whether that centre is better under the Ministry of Health or Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, but it would be better under the Ministry of Health. Chairperson for the Committee on Health, did you capture anything like that in your report? I have not read your report yet. 5.19THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Charles Ayume):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. We decided to handle the issue of Nodding Disease Syndrome from an integrated perspective and not only singling it out as nodding syndrome, but ensuring that the medicines are in the health facilities. However, the social aspect should be a preserve of Ministry for Gender. We had recommended that they take stock of the number of Nodding Disease Syndrome patients. For example, if they are 3,000, add a cost of maybe Shs 50,000, just like the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) for the adults because there is a nutritional component that these children and survivors of nodding syndrome need. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Gender, the condition of these children is extremely painful. ( Hon. Anywar rose_ ) Hon. Betty Anywar, I know you are from Acholi, but I want to first get the responsible ministries. The facilities where they can be helped- the Committee on Health recommended that because it involves a lot of social aspects it should be under your ministry. Have you captured it anywhere? Or should we give you time to go and quickly cost it? We promised that this is one of the issues we must allocate money to, this financial year without fail. (Applause)5.21THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Mr Speaker, if we are given the responsibility, we have managed the shelter for the children. The psychosocial issues are with us, and all the experts that deal with those issues are with us. We will be open to welcome the responsibility and mandate under the ministry. We will liaise 12528SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSwith the Committee on Health, Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and work out a figure that they can present to the Committee on Budget. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Work it out with the Chairperson, Committee on Health and the Acholi Parliamentary Group. Let us get the figures and please, the chairperson for the Committee on, the issue of nodding syndrome is bad. We shall be harshly. I do not know how we shall go to Acholi, as Members of Parliament. (Ms Anywar rose_)  Hon. Beatrice Anwar, we debated this here for two days – extensively. Okay? I do not want us to go back to that.5.22DR ABDULHU BYAKATONDA (Indepen -dent, Workers’ Representative):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee chairperson for the report. Mr Speaker, there are a number of unfunded priorities, one of them being empowering the Industrial Court. The Industrial Court has only two judges, and this makes workers with disputes to take over nine years waiting for their cases, yet this court is meant to have many serious issues and timeliness is one of the core aspects. I beg that - it is just Shs 1.35 billion – the money be found and we empower this court so that we provide justice for our workers.Secondly, Mr Speaker, there is an acute understaffing and the minister looked at Shs 522 billion. The court has the panelists and then the staff – the key staff. The staffing level is very low, actually below 20 per cent, which is a very serious matter. This fails on the compliance issues, Uganda being an International Labour Organisation constituency. The other aspect is digitalisation. The courts, when they are going to the regional circuits, have to carry a truckful of files and move with them, yet these things could be digitalised so that, at least, by a click of a button, a file is found and the matter is handled. It is Shs 4 billion which is proposed and unfunded here. I wish, Mr Speaker, this could be found and we empower this court so that we become compliant, have industrial harmony and increase productivity. Lastly, Mr Speaker is the issue of the cultural institutions. You have ever been to those ends of the Nkolera Kida Kyonka  in Bugwere. The fights are too much over the institution of Waikumbania. When you talk of PDM, most people do not even form SACCOs together because they are fighting over the Waikumbania. I do not know whether the ministry has a solution, because this has taken over 10 years now. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, as we talk about Shs 4 billion being little money – or Shs 1 billion – we should remember that the corrigenda, which was issued, has revised the budget downwards by Shs 2.7 trillion. So, we are giving Hon. Isiagi and the team a very difficult job. It is today that I have seen this. Corrigenda always takes the budget up, but for this one, you first supplied us air of Shs 2.7 trillion! (Laughter)  From the committees, we are recommending more, but you have, again, revised it by Shs 2.7 trillion. However, we trust our colleagues on the Budget Committee to analyse it, deeply. That is why we want to give you a lot of time to go in, deeply, and see how we can prioritise.5.25MR DENNIS NYANGWESO (Independent, Samia Bugwe Central County, Busia):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the committee for a very good report. I have two issues to raise pertaining to the report that has been presented.The first is on the half-year performance on page 6 of the report. Mr Speaker, when you look at the figures there, you realise that wage, for the two quarters, had performed at 50 per cent release, non-recurrent was at 54.9 per cent and development was at 50 per cent. Mr Speaker, for the last three years that I have been in this House, whenever there is a time like this to consider the budget estimates, we [Ms Amongi]12529THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024realise that when you consider the half-year performance, it is always very rosy at 50 per cent, given the two quarters. However, as we go to the third and fourth quarters, as we look at the previous financial year releases, we realise that the releases almost got stuck at quarter two. When you go to quarter three and quarter four, you find that an entity has performed at almost 55 or 60 per cent.So, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has realised that since entities are required to report to this House as they represent their ministerial policy statements, they are required to report on their half-year performance. The ministry has been very religious in releasing money for the first two quarters in the financial year. (Laughter)  When it comes to the last two quarters, there is no release.So, as the picture is being painted here that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is doing very well in terms of supporting the appropriation, in the final quarters, there is no money. There is need for the ministry to come and explain why. Is there a problem with cash flow or is it a deliberate issue – because it cannot be year in, year out? Lastly, Mr Speaker, you have alluded to the corrigenda where Shs 2.7 trillion has been slashed and there is a need for this House to support the Government in trying to look at where we can make a saving. The committee has just presented that we need to allocate Shs 300 million to the children’s authority for a survey on child-headed families. Shs 300 million, Mr Speaker, for a survey of this magnitude, aware that UBOS is going to conduct –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, Hon. Nyangweso. MR NYANGWESO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was of the view that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should liaise with UBOS as they develop the questionnaires. This should clearly come out of the survey by UBOS, other than looking for Shs 300 million just to give to the National Children Authority for this activity. Thank you so much.5.28MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee chairperson for their good report. I will start with the issue to do with SAGE. I do not know whether we are sentencing older persons. This is because, if you look at the budget that was given last year – or in the running year – vis-à-vis  what is being provided, we feel that the finance ministry is living on planet Mars, not Earth. Mr Speaker, last weekend I was visited by a mzee  who was moving on crutches, crying and saying: “Kindly, go and tell President Museveni that he promised us money for older persons, but I am going to die without getting this money.” The number of eligible people are growing because the life expectancy of Ugandans has improved. Now we, who are in charge of allocating resources, are cutting what should be due to them. I appeal to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be sensitive and sympathetic to these older persons because this is where we are all headed. This programme of SEGOP, which is looking at people between 61 and 75 years, is a grant. Whereas they have been having Shs 5 billion, now, they have removed Shs 4 billion and there is a provision of Shs 1 billion only. What are we telling these older persons?Mr Speaker, when I heard my colleague talking about removing the Shs 5 billion, again, from children – my sister from Lyantonde is just being sensitive. Last year, the issue to do with the children was given Shs 20 million. The Ministry of Youth and children was given only Shs 20 million to remove children from the streets in the entire country, not Kampala alone. Now, we are proposing for them to get at least Shs 5 billion to be able to remove children from Mbale, Jinja, Mbarara, Gulu and everywhere. 12530SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSNow, when a colleague says this is too much money – really, we need to be part of Uganda. We should deliberate and speak for Ugandans. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER. On that point, most of these children are from Napak - Karamoja. Let me amend my list. 5.31MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee and this House. When we raised a motion in this House on the matter of these street children, you understood the problem and you agreed with us that an action must be taken. Today, when I heard the chairperson reading about the Shs 5 billion, I was happy that at least our cry has been heard by this Parliament. If we wish to end that vice of children coming to the street to beg, we need to be deliberate and putting that money there will do a great job. The actions that KCCA has been doing, for example, removing the children during Conference of Speakers and Presiding Officers (CSPOC) and the NAM conference was only to remove and dump them. It was nothing else. Uganda Women’s Effort to Save Orphans (UWESO) received about 1,000 children, but they had nothing to do with the children. They asked me to mobilise resources to feed those children in the UWESO home, but what about rehabilitation and resettling them? Mr Speaker, it is a good thing that we need invest in this so that these children can get back home and begin to live normal lives as children. My honourable colleague from Lyantonde does not know; she was not there when we were presenting the motion at that time so she has not understood the details of the crisis we are in. It is my appeal that this House considers the position the committee has presented. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable member for Tochi – 5.33MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. Most projects or programmes have failed due to counterpart funding. On Women’s Day, Generating Growth Opportunities and Productivity for Women Enterprises (GROW) was launched in Katakwi, but it is disheartening to hear that there is no counterpart funding to ensure that this programme runs. In most cases, the counterpart funding from Government is what is taken as operational cost in most of these local governments. Without operational cost, projects run down because the staff are not facilitated to follow up this project. Therefore, I support the committee’s proposal that the Government’s counterpart funding should be found so that this programme runs well. In most district local governments, CDOs are the focal persons for most of these programmes, but you find that in most districts, these positions are being held on acting capacity. I do not know what the ministry is thinking- Why have most positions of CDOs remained in acting capacity instead of making them substantive? Otherwise, one takes responsibility when he or she is substantively appointed in a position, and that person can take responsibility for the position. I am happy, Mr Speaker because you said what we are approving here will be taken to the Committee of Budget for harmonisation. I see a lot of duplication in most of these budgets. For example, in the Committee on Presidential Affairs, you find that under National Council of Science and Technology, they have a budget to operationalise the centre in Lyantonde. I am of the view that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should coordinate with the department where you are talking of finding a budget to place 1,000 youth from universities and technical colleges. This [Mr Muwuma]12531THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024is because this is the place they can be taken to, in which case, the budget should be shifted to another unfunded priority. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Linda and then Hon. Dr Opio. 5.36MS LINDA AUMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira):   Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the recommendation of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and I implore my honourable colleagues to support the recommendations on this ground and on some areas that I would like to emphasise, especially the one on reinforcement or reinstatement of Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP)UWEP programme ended yet it was meant to be a revolving fund. The funds we are requiring for the reinstatement of this programme were the funds paid back by the women who received this money. So, it would be unfair for finance not to allocate these funds when  women  have shown goodwill to pay back this money.  If you look at all the grants given to most of the different groups in this country, UWEP  has paid so well so I implore Members to support this.On GROW co-funding, Mr Speaker, GROW is alone and it has already started running. The population, especially the women have undergone various trainings and this is additional support to the women in different enterprises. This project is meant for all categories of women, but because of the co-funding, we have not yet kick-started this. Therefore, I implore my honourable colleagues, especially members of the Budget Committee to at least allocate Shs 500 million for the cofounding of this programme. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Dr Opio- 5.38DR SAMUEL OPIO (Independent, Kole North County, Kole):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report, specifically the recommendation to allocate Shs 17.2 billion for the construction of the palaces, including the Lango Cultural Palace. Three years ago, we did a ground breaking for the Lango Cultural Palace. The President was the Chief Guest, and the late Speaker represented him. All ministers from Lango and Members of Parliament were there. Even the contractor was introduced. Today, the construction site is a grazing ground. The iron sheets that were used to fence that place were taken by the contractor. So I pray that this time, this budget is allocated. On the issue of unemployment which we should address, we need a job creation strategy as a country. When you look at the high income countries that have the lowest level of unemployment, 75 per cent of the employed people are in the service sector, 22 per cent are in the manufacturing sector, and the remaining 3 per cent are in agriculture. In the low income countries, it is the reverse. We have 59 per cent in agriculture, 31 per cent in the service sector and only 10 per cent in manufacturing. I appeal that we need to come up with a job creation strategy and policy as a country to push more people in the service and manufacturing sectors. Programmes such as the Emyooga , which is under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning should ideally be under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The last issue is on labour statistics. USA has labour statistics of employment created in January, February and March. They have the sectors where those employments have been created. In Uganda, we do not have those statistics. We do not even know which sectors the employment is being created. We have our NDP III which talks of five million jobs to be created, but we do not know where the 5 million jobs are coming from. 12532SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. LOP – do not mind, honourable colleague because on the next statement, I will start with you. Let me allow UWOPA. 5.40MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for its detailed report however, I have issues of concern, some of which have already been raised. One of them is that I am wondering how you can get Shs 800 billion availed to you as a country and then you cannot provide Shs 500 million. What is wrong with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? This money should be availed because we all know that majority of the women do not have collateral so once we have such programmes, this is how women get some capital that can help them improve their economic status. Second is the issue of the Parish Development Model. This is a programme that, if funds were available, would have benefited the majority of our people. However, the funding is not adequate. When I see Shs 5 billion for community mobilisation, it would go a long way in supporting 5,000 additional people. I am not in support of availing funds for community mobilisation. The people are already aware of PDM and actually, we have committees functioning at the parish level. So, why should we have Shs 5 billion allocated for mobilisation? The other issue that I would like to talk about is the Kiswahili Council. There is a shortfall of Shs 10 billion needed for the Council. Mr Speaker, is this a priority? Rather than put this money in the Kiswahili Council for now, let us support the PDM and youth.There is also the National Apprenticeship and Graduate V olunteer Scheme that needs Shs 18 billion, but this money is not available – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, when we were handling the Ministerial Policy Statement for the East African Community the other day, we delved into the issue of Kiswahili extensively. What we mainly need is the teaching of Kiswahili. The Chairperson of the Budget Committee is here. Chairperson and members of the Budget Committee, when a loan is brought to this House, one of the conditions is a commitment from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that they are going to bring counterpart funding. It is a commitment. They must state here on record that they are going to provide money for counterpart funding to unlock this loan. The moment they do not provide for it, please cut from a certain item and provide for that money. (Applause)  The reason is that we are going to have loans here, which we are paying interest for without absorption. We already have many; we cannot continue like this. Read the report of the Uganda National Roads Authority. When you look at this report, we have a lot of external financing, but you do not have counterpart funding to unlock it, yet we are paying huge loans. So, let us be strict. If the finance ministry commits on this Floor that “I have brought a loan called GROW and for it to work, I need Shs 500 million for counterpart funding. I guarantee that I will provide it.” If they do not provide it, we will provide it. (Applause)  These are minimums because these are their commitments. Otherwise, we would not have passed a loan if we knew there was no counterpart funding. We would have said, “Go back and first sort it out”. That is not debatable. Honourable colleagues, let us assert ourselves on such issues and be clear. Otherwise, we shall continue sending the country in the wrong direction. 5.45THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will commence by encouraging my sister from the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association to throw her weight behind the 12533THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024recommendation in the report, especially on the Uganda National Kiswahili Council. In fact, we are lagging behind. Our neighbours, Kenya and Tanzania, are far ahead. This language is a lingua franca ; there is no way you can now ignore it. The Uganda National Kiswahili Council discharges very important roles. Apart from designing a regulatory framework, it is responsible for propagating Kiswahili in schools. As you know, there is now a directive that Kiswahili is compulsory. It also promotes the language. We have already embraced it in the region to facilitate trade and commerce, and it is a unifier. Mr Speaker, I would like to remind or even impress upon the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, whom I should salute for her incessant intervention in the rifts of the Bamasaba Cultural Institution. You are aware of more than one - I think there are two - pledges that His Excellency the President has made, pertaining construction of the palace. The Government is also in arrears of rent for the land that is being occupied by the barracks. I do not know why Bugisu is conspicuously missing from that list.Moreover, over Shs 17 billion is good enough to stretch it to all these palaces, including Bugisu Cultural Palace, Madam Minister. You are aware that the President has lived up to his word to honour this pledge. You should not be the one letting him down. Mr Speaker, I do not know why this ministry is oblivious to the hanging fruits that it has. I will labour this point with the Budget Committee to subject scrutiny of how much the ministry is earning from the labour externalisation industry. Are you aware that so far, they have received $1.3 billion? It is a huge sum of money – (Interruption)MS NANTONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker and my LOP. This is information, particularly on that matter. Like the LOP was saying, the labour externalisation sector is very lucrative. We receive so much money; $1.3 billion annually. In August 2022, the Government collected Shs 12 billion from this sector. Right now, we are crying to the finance minister to give us only Shs 2 billion, yet the sector is bringing in so much money, but our girls are out there suffering. The Government collects $30 per job order.Mr Speaker, I believe, that the finance ministry needs to fund this sector because it is bringing in so much money, but we are not receiving the money to fund the sector and make the labour externalisation sector better. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister – (Hon. Nambeshe rose_) - No, LOP, you are done; your time is up. Please, we do not have time for appreciation here. (Laughter)  We have a serious debate to make here. We shall appreciate in the corridors.5.50THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to pronounce myself on one matter where my chairperson of UWOPA thought that community mobilisation and sensitisation are only coming because of PDM. This is to remind us that this is a mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; community mobilisation and mindset change is a whole mandate.Secondly, if you only give money to PDM, but cannot guide these people on the choice of enterprise, where to invest and effective participation, then you will be putting it on the rocks. I want to give you an example. We have visited Youth Livelihood Support Programme beneficiaries. You find a group of boda boda association members has gotten Shs 13 million from YLP. They then buy a plot, put in bricks, and buy cement and sand, but there is no money for labour and construction. They then sit, stuck with the money like that. 12534SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSBy the time of payment, the money is not making another money, they cannot repay, but they are stuck with the materials and the plot. They need that sensitisation to choose how to invest so that the investment makes returns. We need this community mobilisation and mindset change for people to know which enterprises are working in the situations where they are, and to also effectively participate in all the other programmes of the Government. Mr Speaker, I plead with my Chairperson, Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) to understand that this is a very critical thing to support in times of funds. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER; Thank you. Without doubting my sister, Hon. Betty Amongi, for me, on the Parish Development Model, the mindset change we need is mainly business-oriented and we have Enterprise Uganda, which has been doing a fantastic job. Let Enterprise Uganda visit your area; you will see how much they will change in terms of perception. For them, they focus on business mindset change not major social issues. I know Hon. Betty Amongi will coordinate with them very well. Honourable minister, you do not need to respond to everything. 5.52THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Members for all the support that they have rendered to the report. Just to highlight the issue of palaces, I have all the directives. However, before I bring the directives to the House, I need; First, to have a land title. Most of the palaces that we have left out have not given us land titles. Secondly, there should be no conflicts. In the case of many of the ones that we have left out; Acholi, Ikumbania and others, some conflicts have not been resolved. Therefore, for Bugisu, I have not seen the directive, but the Shs 17 billion can accommodate the cultural institution that has no contestation. We can include Bugisu, for example, and if it does not complete the construction, we can come for the next phase in the next financial year. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, no clarification nor information. Kindly, conclude. MS AMONGI: Thank you. Most of you supported Jua kali ; I agree with you. The externalisation of labour; we have surpassed coffee. We are now the first in foreign direct money that comes into the country and I request the Budget Committee to look at this very critically. The most important issue, again, in the corrigenda and previously before the corrigenda, is the omission of the Shs 32.9 billion, which are subvention to those councils which come to you; the Women Council, Youth Council, Council for Persons with Disability and Council for Older Persons. A total of Shs 32.9 billion subvention was cut by the finance ministry, yet in a Cabinet meeting, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was directed that all the ministries’ budgets should be reinstated to the current budget. However, after the Cabinet meeting, we are now seeing a corrigendum that has not followed the Cabinet directive and the Shs 32.9 billion, the cultural institution, Shs 60 million per month, all were approved by the Cabinet and His Excellency the President. I hope that in the Budget Committee, the finance ministry should be able to ensure – (Mr Opolot-Isiagi: “Mr Speaker, clarification.”)   MS AMONGI: I was told that there is no clarification. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Budget Committee, we do not access a [Ms Kabahenda]12535THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024microphone without permission from the Speaker. I am sorry. Honourable minister –MS AMONGI: I would like to allay the fear of the youth. The youth day of 12 August shall be celebrated and most of the costs for international days that we commemorate, a big number of the finances come from development partners. In most cases, we might have only Shs 200 to 300 million from the Government. Lastly, the committee chairperson has indicated –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Amongi, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee is a very important person. This is where the statements are going. He is the one who can be kind enough to give you some money. MR OPOLOT-ISIAGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is from the statement by the minister that the Cabinet directed the finance ministry to at least maintain each sector’s budgets to the current state. Now, we are wondering how the corrigenda comes in. Being a senior Cabinet minister, can she clarify where the corrigenda came from, and tell this House whether to respect that corrigenda if it was smuggled? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In short, did the corrigenda go through the Cabinet? It is reducing the budget and cutting all of you down. MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I can confidently state that we had a special Cabinet meeting on Tuesday, where we went through the budget one by one. The priorities were stated and one of the priorities in my sector was the creative industry and the cultural institutions, and I have all the Cabinet directives. The corrigenda has not gone through the Cabinet; I can confirm that. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is enough. MS AMONGI: The Cabinet decision was after the priority articulated by the Cabinet and approved, it was indicated that at least each ministry should retain what they have for this financial year as a minimum. That was what was in the Cabinet. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odur has said that people from the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) party are very honest. (Laughter) MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude with the Industrial Court. It is a very important court because it supports all the cases that come from labour officers. They have only two judges yet they need five judges. I was proposing that if its budget being under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is disadvantaging them, it is better we move back their agenda to the Judiciary because its budget is protected. Otherwise, they are suffering because they moved their budget under us because that court is under the ministry. It would be very important and unfair that the rest of the judges are enjoying all the privileges under the Judiciary and this court is not. I beg to move and request. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oboth, what would be your comment on that? This is about all courts going back to the Judiciary. 5.59THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): I agree with the line minister for that very proactive proposal to this House. I believe that all those judges go through the same law school and have the same qualification. Nobody under the Constitution of Uganda is supposed to get less than what others are getting. In a special way, I thank her for - I do not know whether the proposal is coming too late, but it is never too late for this House to do justice for those judges in the Industrial Court. 12536SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, let me assign the Attorney-General this issue. Let him come next week and guide this House on this matter. If the budget of the Judiciary is protected, it is statutory, the industrial court, wherever they are and without moving to say we put them under-we can say, it was for all courts and all judicial officers wherever they are. Honourable colleagues, let me not open up this because it might delay us. I now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.(VI) COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Chairperson-procedure Hon. Martin Muzaale - MR MUZAALE:  Mr Speaker, you had earlier guided that the Committee on Budget will handle the corrigenda, but I do not know whether it has ever been laid here and whether we should say that it is an existing document because the minister already said that they are not aware of it. Are we proceeding well? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Muzaale. I had a consult with the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. The Committee is not yet considering the document because it is not yet laid and it has to be laid with clear justifications on the work plans, which had been agreed upon. For now, it was issued to the agencies, but for Parliament, it is until the minister lays it on the Table that is when the Committee on Budget can refer to it and that is when the sectoral committees would have referred to it, but now they cannot go to it formally because it is not yet laid. Thank you. Honourable Chairperson for Defence - 6.18THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Kajwengye):  Mr Speaker, thank you, for this opportunity to present a report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025. First, I take the opportunity to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings in considering the Ministerial Policy Statements. This report considers the following votes:V ote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs. V ote 009: Ministry of Internal Affairs. V ote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control.V ote 124: Uganda Police Force. V ote 145: Uganda Prisons.V ote 135: Directorate of Government –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Oguzu Lee –MR OGUZU:  Mr Speaker, earlier on I addressed myself to a law on which a ministerial policy statement is anchored and I did say that when the chairpersons are laying on the Table the minutes, we should have received the documents they processed which should have helped us address our mind to whether there was compliance with the law. You are aware that we are dealing with fiscal deficit problems and we must be able to justify every expenditure as proposed in the policy statements. We also know that the committee is handling ministries where there is a lot of waste in defense. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The procedural matter?MR OGUZU: Is it right that we are going to receive this report when the key documents that should have informed our decision are not laid along with the minutes? 12537THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Oguzu Lee, you said - if I heard you properly, and I said we must lay this. It is not you to determine what is laid here or to declare that chairperson, you must first lay A, B, C, D. As a presiding officer I am satisfied, the minutes are laid, let us get the report and we go into - what if the details are in the minutes? Honourable colleagues know that your opinion here cannot be final. If you want something, just be humble, and say,” We expect A, B, C, D”, but you cannot say, “I said you must” no, it cannot. Honourable Chairperson, please. MR KAJWENGYE: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I present this report in accordance with Article 90 and Article 155(4) of the Constitution, our Rules of Procedure and Public Finance Management Act, 2015. This report was uploaded onto the parliamentary system three days ago and can be accessed. Scope The committee considered ministerial policy statements and the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025, on the votes that I earlier enumerated. Maybe I did not touch vote 135: Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DIGAL) and vote 137: National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). MethodologyWe entertained all the ministries and agencies, including entertaining and listening to the opposition’s alternative policy statement under the committee. We also ascertained that a certificate of gender and equity compliance was laid and we followed all the laws and regulations. We analysed the statements and juxtaposed them with the National Development Plan III, looked at the performance of the previous budgets and I beg to report the following:5.3 The National Development PlanThe NDP III identified 20 development programmes- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, these are uploaded, we have read them. Just go to recommendations so that we save time for debate, but also Clerk - though I did not like the approach of my brother, Hon. Oguzu, I know that these documents were submitted, but most of them are bulky.So, upload in soft copy form on alfresco so that any Member who needs them can access and go through so that they do not say we processed a budget that had no supporting and required documents. Thank you. MR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On V ote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs, the budget performance for the first half of 2023/2024, the wage Bill under the Ministry and Veterans Affairs amounted to Shs 477.04 billion against a half a year release of Shs 552 billion, which represents a performance of 50 per cent and an absorption of 91 per cent. This is against the threat of terrorism, mainly from ADF, Al-Shabaab and their affiliates, which remain a significant security challenge to the country and to counter the threat, the UPDF reinforced border deployments and also mobilised 594 local defence personnel in Kamwenge and Bunyangabo districts to augment the troop levels and bridge the security gaps in the subregion. As I present this now, Mr Speaker, we applaud our gallant forces, the UPDF, for maintaining us safe and secure both internally and staving off threats from abroad. The non-wage recurrent release expenditure performed at 47 per cent, spending 86 per cent of the released funds during the Financial Year 2023/2024 half period. The low absorption was due to the ongoing verifications of pensioners, among others. Despite the low absorption, the country experienced some subversive activities perpetrated by nascent groups, including the 12538SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSUganda Lord’s Salvation Army (ULSA) and Uganda Divine Salvation Army (UDSA). Such occurrences draw resources from the budget, even when they are not planned. Parliament had approved a supplementary budget, including Shs 188 billion and Shs 1 billion for classified expenditure and commencement of infrastructure works for the military museum, respectively, in the second quarter under recurrent spending. During the first half –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable member, I guided you.MR KAJWENGYE:  We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs expedites the review of the UPDF Act 2005 to accommodate current developments to guide interventions and establish a regulatory framework for the national service before the end of the Financial Year 2023/2024.Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 6.2.2.1 Overall budgetImportant to note here is that as the Government had earlier on promised, the ministry will continue with phased salary enhancement for soldiers of lower ranks. The table shows salary enhancement for captain to private or private to captain – whichever way you approach it. We recommend that the salary enhancement for the lower-cadre staff of the UPDF and recruitment be prioritised and that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides an additional allocation to the wage bill of Shs 962.23 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025.Development budget On this, we note the need to construct 1,400 housing units worth Shs 100 billion; common user facilities like water, electricity and roads; administration facilities; storage facilities; and completion of the National Military Referral Hospital. We recommend that the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs develops a comprehensive infrastructure development project to guide investment rather than undertaking such projects under the retooling project for ease of monitoring and evaluation.The security situation in Karamoja, Mr Speaker, continues to stabilise. The committee observes that the Anti-Stock Theft Operations have been successful. I have put down the achievements made by the UPDF and the Anti-Stock Theft Operations. It is very impressive, but we note that this activity is fully funded with a provision of Shs 27.5 billion to combat insecurity. The committee recommends that the provision of Shs 27.5 billion to the ministry to combat insecurity in the Karamoja region be revised downwards since the security situation has improved, to finance other critical needs in the sector during the Financial Year 2024/2025. (Interjections) Yes.Mr Speaker, on the National Military Referral Hospital and other - this has been an ongoing project. We recommend that the military expedites the completion of the National Military Referral Hospital by the end of the Financial Year 2024/2025.On recruitment and training, we note that UPDF plans to recruit 9,000 personnel into the force, based on the district quota system during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to professionalise the UPDF. We recommend a provision of Shs 56.8 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 towards recruiting 9,000 personnel and retraining up to 40,000 personnel to equip the force with relevant skills and knowledge to execute military operations and missions effectively. On subventions to National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) and Uganda Air Cargo [Mr Kajwengye]12539THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Corporation (UACC), we recommend an additional Shs 6.9 billion to be provided to NEC to cover its operations and invest in research and development for Luwero Industries during the Financial Year 2024/2025. Additionally, the committee recommends that Shs 381.1 billion be provided to Uganda Air Cargo Corporation to procure a new aircraft to increase its revenue streams. On land compensation claims, we noticed that, operationally, UPDF gets land that is strategic and relevant to the needs to secure the defence of the country. Eventually, they should be compensating the owners. We recommend an additional provision of Shs 190 billion to be provided in the Financial Year 2024/2025 budget estimates under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to cover these outstanding claims for land that has been taken over by the UPDF. On budget for consultancies, the committee noted that the ministry budgeted for military operations of Shujaa in DRC worth Shs 22.5 billion, Operation Usalama Kwa Wote in Karamoja worth Shs 27.5 billion and Fisheries Protection Unit worth Shs 0.866 billion. We consider this a misclassification, which needs to be addressed in the Charter of Accounts. In addition, the ministry has a budget of Shs 0.866 billion for consultancies to undertake mid-term evaluation. We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development creates items in the Charter of Accounts that relate to special military operations. Further, a total of Shs 0.866 billion be reallocated to critical needs of the V otes under the committee’s purview.On regulatory and legal framework, we recommend that the ministry prioritises and expedites the review of the Defence Policy, the UPDF Act, 2005 and the National Service Policy during the Financial Year 2024/2025. On gender compliance, we applaud that they are doing well and they should keep it up, because it was assessed at 80 per cent. V ote 009 - Ministry of Internal AffairsFor budget performance for the first half, the annex is provided – and all other issues outlined. We, therefore, recommend that;(i) The ministry expedites the capturing of all its human resources on the human capital management system before the end of Financial Year 2023/2024 to avoid the creation of wage bill arrears.(ii) The ministry should expedite the development of the information system on trafficking in persons to keep track of trafficked persons and amend the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act to create punitive measures against the offenders.(iii) The ministry should stay the review of the Non-Government Organisation (NGO) Act until the Government process of rationalization of Government institutions is concluded.On the performance of the development budget, we recommend that the ministry should improve its procurement planning to limit the non-absorption of funds geared towards improving service delivery.Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) performanceBudget estimates for Financial Year 2024/2025The annex is provided in the report, but on provision for Non-wage recurrent, we recommend, that the ministry should prioritise the allocation of statutory obligations within its budget ceilings before allocation towards discretionary expenditure items.On the ministry’s development budget, the committee recommends that the ministry develops other projects to carry out multi-year investments that will improve efficiency in service delivery.(i) On regulatory and legal framework, the committee recommends that additional funding of Shs 5.4 billion for the Non-12540SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSGovernment Organisation (NGO) Bureau be provided in the Budget for Financial Year 2024/2025, specifically for the following: Shs 1.173 billion for the facility of the NGO Bureau Board of Directors arrears accumulation;(ii) Shs 1 billion for the facilitation of the NGO adjudication committee;(iii) Shs 0.435 billion for the automation of the NGO Bureau services; and(iv) Shs 2.814 billion to implement the action items to enhance compliance with standards of the anti-money laundering and combating financing of terrorism.On outsourcing ministry consultancy services, we recommend the reallocation of Shs 0.3 billion from the ministry to critical areas of service delivery under the committee’s purview.Budget for Anti-Money Laundering and Combating Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT)We recommend the provision of Shs 0.25 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 budget estimates to cater for the meeting and training in money laundering and terrorism financing assets.On community services, we recommend a provision of Shs 2 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 to decentralise ministry services at the regional level and expedite the amendment of the Community Services Act.On reception centres for the rescued trafficked persons, we recommend that Shs 0.2 billion be provided in the Financial Year 2024/2025 to kick-start establishing reception centres for trafficked persons. On the implementation of the Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Act, 2023, the law this august House passed last year, the committee recommends that the ministry prioritises the development of the regulations during the Financial Year 2024 and that Shs 10 billion be provided for this purpose to kick-start its implementation.On the implementation of the Explosives Act, 2023, the committee recommends a provision of an additional Shs 0.2 billion to develop regulations to guide the implementation of the Explosives Act and staff training during the Financial Year 2024/2025. On coordination of internal security and other advisory services, the committee recommends a provision of Shs 7.146 billion to the Ministry of Internal Affairs to enhance its coordination role of the above institutions effectively.Gender compliance We applaud the ministry; they scored 67 per cent. We encourage them to aim higher. V ote 120: National Citizenship and Immigration Control (NCIC) The budget performance for the first year is in Annex 1 of  the report.(i) The committee, therefore, recommends that- the National Citizenship and Immigration Control(NCIC) should expedite access of the newly recruited staff to the human capital management system to improve wage bill absorption; (ii) The directorate should ensure adequate monitoring of the joint venture agreement with USPC, where the service provider should meet the timely supply quantities of the passports to avoid disruptions in the service delivery; (iii) The directorate should develop new projects to cater for the construction activities rather than budgeting them under the retooling project;(iv) The directorate should be provided with sufficient financing to continue with ongoing activities funded by the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) where insufficient provisions have been made. [Mr Kajwengye]12541THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024E-immigration systemThe committee recommends that the DCIC fully develops and automates the passport and other travel documents control process, support services and enforcement of immigration laws. In addition, the directorate should liaise with the National Information Technology Authority, Uganda (NITA-U) to provide reliable internet services. Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025  Annex 2 is attached on the report for ease of reference.The overall budget Mr Speaker, we notice that the budget is projected to decline by Shs 0.84 billion for the Financial Year 2024/2025. This will affect the recurrent budget, especially for citizenship and immigration and the non-wage bill.Recommendations(i)  Statutory expenditure should be given a first call of resources with a provision of Shs 1.36 billion for wage shortfalls;(ii) Shs 0.379 billion be provided in the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024 for gratuity to avoid the creation of arrears. Border control and surveillanceThe committee recommends collaboration with other sister agencies to ensure border control and an addition of Shs 4.898 billion be provided to the directorate during the Financial Year 2024/2025 for border control management. In addition, the directorate should consider equipping all border posts with state-of-the-art technology to facilitate border control in the medium term.Post-entry management of immigrantsThe committee recommends an additional Shs 4.590 billion to enhance post-entry management of immigrant activities. Budgeting for consultanciesWe note that the call circular from the PSST to all accounting officers guided that all MDAs should desist from over-reliance on outsourcing activities to consultancies, especially in the areas with internal capacity.We, therefore, recommend reallocating Shs 0.95 billion meant for consultancies for activities where the directorates should have developed the capacity to undertake the above exercise. Land acquisition, construction and infrastructure developmentThe committee recommends that the directorate expedites the preparation of development projects to undertake capital investments during the Financial Year 2024/2025. Accordingly, the committee upholds the Government’s policy to stay in a new office accommodation construction.Passport systemWe note that this is not yet end-to-end as partial automation of the e-passport system causes inefficiencies in the passport service delivery.(i) We recommend, therefore, that - Uganda Security Printing Company (USPC) should fully automate the e-passport system per the terms of the contract of the joint venture agreement;(ii) DCIC should expedite the development of a credible IT governance structure and set up robust systems to avoid revenue leakages.On the performance of the vendor USPC under the joint venture, the committee recommends a review of the Joint Venture Agreement between the Government of Uganda and a private company (VERIDOS) in the manufacture of security documents before the end of Financial Year 2023/2024.12542SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSGender ComplianceOn gender compliance, the directorate scored 68.1 per cent. It is an improvement. We want them to aim higher. V ote 144: Uganda Police Force (UPF)The performance of the first half of the 2023-2024 budget is annexed for ease of reference. The overall performance is also laid down. We recommend that the UPF should devise mechanisms to deal with attrition in the police force and improve procurement planning to improve service delivery. Refurbishment of the CIID Training School at Kibuli. Mr Speaker, this very important facility needs refurbishment and the committee recommends an additional Shs 12.42 billion to be provided to refurbish the CIID Training School in Kibuli to improve investigation skills for officers and reduce the remand period and prisoner population growth. On Territorial PolicingWe recommend rationalisation of the resources within the territorial policing by merging some of the departments since they are operational. For example, patrols and metropolitan policing cannot be distinguished from operations. On criminal investigationsWe continue to note the detective case workload, which was one detective per 42 cases. This is above the target of one detective per 39 ratio. This implies the detectives are overloaded to deliver their mandates, also in part due to limited technology being employed, hence affecting their efficiency. To reduce this workload, more detectives need to be recruited, equipped and trained to minimise the time lags for investigation and prosecution. Fifteen million for effective investigation on average. On average, police register 4,000 capital cases annually. This translates into an annual requirement of Shs 60 billion against a provision of Shs 10 billion. We, therefore, recommend a provision of an additional Shs 6 billion to CIID to improve the quality of investigations during the Finacial Year 2024/2025 and the balance over the medium term. On the budget estimates for Financial Year 2024/2025 the annex is attached for ease of reference. Overall budget under Uganda Police Force, it is projected to increase from UGX Shs 824.42 billion in  the Financial Year 2023/2024 to Shs 828.286 billion in  the Financial Year 2024/2025.This is primarily due to an increase in the non-wage budget and the development budget by Shs 1 billion.We, therefore, recommend that the Uganda Police Force should conclude all its commitments under the assistance of the Uganda Police Project and not extend beyond the Finacial Year 2024/2025. Going forward, the Uganda Police Force should develop a successor infrastructure project that is comprehensive enough to guide country-wide investments. Budgeting for consultanciesMr Speaker, we observed that the Uganda Police Force had budgeted for Shs 0.4 billion to conduct pre-feasibility studies to implement an electronic policing information system project. In addition, consultancy services are being sought to conduct a detailed analysis of the different options for meeting accommodation needs at Shs 0.450 billion.The committee recommends that the above amount, totalling Shs 0.850 billion for consultancy services, be reallocated to critical areas under the committee’s purview. [Mr Kajwengye]12543THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Where there are internal capacity challenges, the National Planning Authority should undertake the studies.On budgeting for Anti-Money Laundering, and Combating Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT)We recommend that the Uganda Police Force implement the strategic deficiencies under its jurisdiction on pending action items from the National Risk Assessment of 2023. Traffic and Road SafetyWe note that this department implements an express penalty scheme, which forms the bulk of NTR. We, therefore, recommend an additional Shs 8.6 billion for the procurement of transport equipment and installation of an IOV inspection lane and certification centre and Shs 18 billion for the procurement of 10 mobile inspection stations for IOV . Police Accommodation and Ongoing Con -struction ProjectsThere is continued construction of 240 staff  houses in Jinja and Entebbe, which requires an additional Shs 69.986 billion. Construction of eight accommodation blocks at the headquarters in Nakasongola, Sheema, Busolwe, Mitooma, Kanungu, and Kakumiro has a funding gap of Uganda’s Shs 2.24 billion, among others. These projects need independent project designs with national coverage, standardisation and ease of project monitoring? Therefore, we recommend developing a comprehensive project to undertake countrywide interventions with the same standards to ease the monitoring of such infrastructure. Subcounty Policing Model This model is premised on concentrating limited resources at a subcounty for efficiency and effectiveness in providing policing services to the communities. This requires the following:(i) Deploying a minimum of 18 personnel; (ii) 2 motorcycles per police station; (iii) 1 motor vehicle;(iv) A counter phone and radio communication;(v) An office.If this model is to be phased, starting with high-risk crime levels, taking 30 subcounties that have been planned requires Shs 36.946 billion. However, only Shs 5.6 billion has been provided in the Financial Year 2024/2025 budget for only 9 subcounties. We, therefore, recommend that Uganda Police Force first pilot this model with the existing funds provided in the budget and expand it given the lessons learned in the piloted subcounties. On crime management We note that Uganda Police Force intends to expand the Canine units to 10 districts of Nebbi, Koboko, Budaka, Bukomansimbi, Butambala, Zombo, Adjumani, Madi-Okollo, Packwach and Kaberamaido during FY 2024/2025 with a provision of Shs 0.709 billion out of the required Shs 2.968 billion, leaving a gap of Shs 2.259 billion.We, therefore, recommend providing Shs 2.259 billion for the canine unit to take its services to the above districts and closer to communities in the Finacial Year 2024/2025 budget. In addition, the Uganda Police Force should sensitize the masses on the importance of not interfering with scenes of crime to deploy canine dogs effectively in the investigative mechanism.On stationery, Mr Speaker, we note that the shortage of stationery at police units is a source of perceived corruption, dissatisfaction, loss of confidence and ultimately poor police image. A provision of Shs 2.172 billion has been made for the Financial Year 2024/2025, yet the 12544SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSrequired amount is Shs 6.1 billion to provide 120 various police forms and 3l books.The committee recommends an additional provision of Shs 3.9 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 budget to procure sufficient stationery needed at all police stations and units to stop the public from procuring police forms.On transport equipment, the Uganda Police Force intends to acquire a new fleet of patrol vehicles for all districts, troop carriers and motorcycles at Shs 539.303 billion. However, Shs 22.037 billion has been provided during the Financial Year 2024/2025, leaving a funding gap of Shs 517.266 billion.We recommend therefore, a provision of Shs 19.47 billion be provided to procure transport equipment for all districts during the Financial Year 2024/2025 and the balance over the medium term.On gender compliance, the Uganda Police Force scored 75.4 per cent from 73 per cent in the last financial year. We encourage them to aim higher. 6.6 V ote 145: Uganda Prisons Service (UPS)6.6.1 Budget performance for the first half of the Financial Year 2023/2024 is annexed for reference.The overall budget performance is at 50.8 per cent of the annual budget, above the pro-rata target of 50 per cent.Mr Speaker, we recommend that the Uganda Prisons Service plans its procurement to improve service delivery. In addition, UPS should develop a comprehensive development project to guide the implementation of construction subprojects and strengthen governance in project implementation.6.6.1.2 Prisoners accommodationThe current (as of 19 March 2024) prisoner population stands at 76,052, of which 95.2 per cent are male and 4.8 per cent are female. Of the population, 53.8 per cent are convicted and serving their sentences, while 45.5 per cent are on remand. The remaining others are debtors. The Uganda Prisons have an approved capacity of 20,996, implying 55,056 prisoners are over the approved capacity, implying an occupancy rate of 362.2 per cent. This is alarming. This means that congestion at Uganda Prisons Service is partly created by delayed justice from the Judiciary, a slow pace at increasing the holding capacity of prisons, rising levels of crime or offenders of the law, and arrests without warrants, among others.Constructing a mini-max prison requires Shs 102.9 billion, and three low-security prisons require Shs 24 billion.The committee, therefore, recommends that the funding for the mini-max prison be provided in a phased manner. Effectively a provision of Shs 18 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 will be prioritised to provide funds for constructing one mini-max prison in Mbarara.6.6.2  Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 is annexed and the overall performance is also laid there. Regarding prisoner accommodation, as of l9 March 2024, the prisoner population – I have already highlighted that the congestion is alarming. We recommend that the Uganda Prisons Service should be provided with an additional Shs 3 billion to acquire land in Mpigi for additional space to accommodate prisoners. Further, there is a need to enhance access to justice through prison alignments to courts of law and the timely production of prisoners to court by procuring transport machinery, among others.On ICT, we noted that the Uganda Prisons Service established Prisons Management Information System (PMIS), which is being rolled out in three prisons: Upper, Murchison Bay and Luzira Women. However, phase 2 requires Shs 6 billion, but only Shs 1 billion has been provided.[Mr Kajwengye]12545THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024We, therefore, recommend an additional provision of Shs 5 billion for implementing phase 2 of the Prisons Management Information System during the Financial Year 2024/2025.6.6.2.4 Budgeting for consultanciesWe noted that Uganda Prisons Service has budgeted Shs 0.6 billion for consultancy to conduct a feasibility study to ascertain the financial and economic viability of the Prisons Tannery and Footwear, Furniture and Garment Industry Project; Shs 0.30 billion for the development of the strategic development plan and conduct of an end term review of the ending one; Shs 2.1 billion for the development of architectural plans, bills of quantities, designs and drawings for the establishment of a training school.However, over the years, capacity has been developed in planning across government and studies like feasibility studies; review or development of plans can be undertaken in-house with support from the National Planning Authority (NPA). Parliament should note that the preparation of designs and drawings is part of an appraisal process of a project, which can be done in collaboration with NPA and the Ministry of Works and Transport. We, therefore, recommend that the total amount of consultancies amounting to Shs 2.2 billion be re-allocated to other critical areas under the committee’s purview.On staff accommodation, a provision of Shs 1.1 billion has been made to construct 70 staff  houses, which include 30 blocks of 10 units at Awei, Odina, Pingire, Aswa 1&2 to increase staff properly housed to 45.3 per cent. What has been provided is for four blocks at Aswa l&2. To have the 30 blocks, a provision of Shs 8.350 billion will be required. However, this has a funding gap of Shs 7.250 billion.The committee recommends the provision of Shs 7.250 billion during the Financial Year 2024/2025 to enable Uganda Prisons Service to increase staff accommodation facilities.6.6.2.5 Re-location of prisons headquartersThis has remained outstanding during the current Financial Year 2023/2024. Plans for relocation need to be concluded in the coming Financial Year 2024/2025 from the current premises on Parliamentary Avenue, to pave the way for additional office space for the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. This is premised on the need for Parliament to eliminate the substantial rental costs in other areas, including Kingdom Kampala.The committee recommends that the Government provides Uganda Prisons Service with a new home to pave the way for Parliament’s occupation of the premises.Mr Speaker, on prisoners feeding, we note that the daily average of 85,237 prisoners at a cost of Shs 5,500 per prisoner per day, including food from prison farms worth Shs 21.825 billion, and a provision of Shs 94.639 billion was provided in the Financial Year 2024/2025. This left a short fall of Shs 76,474 billion. The net gap taking into account -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure -MS NALUYIMA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As earlier noted, we also wish that the earlier committee chairperson gives us the headlines and recommendations of the committee so that we have enough time for input. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The chairperson defied me. I told him two times and I just want to inform you of my history with Hon. Kajwengye. He is my elder; I am among the young people he identified and mentored when he was in the youth movement. He was mentoring youth across the political divide and at that time, I was in the Opposition, but he was giving me very good mentoring while he was in NRM. When he defies you two times, the next time he will call me in-disciplined so, I decided to keep quiet. My senior brother, Hon.  Kajwengye, conclude. 12546SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMR KAJWENGYE: Much Obliged, Mr Speaker. What an honour and privilege. I will, therefore, go to recommendations.The committee recommends the provision of Shs 54.6 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 for prisoners’ feeding and also eliminate the outstanding arrears of Shs 123.846 billion. In addition, mechanisms to avoid accumulation of new arrears should be instituted.6.6.2.8 Prisoners Uniform Mr Speaker, we recommend the provision of additional Shs 5.685 billion to procure prisoners’ uniforms.6.6.2.9 Prisoners’ BeddingsThe committee recommends a provision of Shs 8.574 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 budget to procure a pair of blanket for each prisoner. 6.6.2.10 Timely delivery of prisoners to 246 courtsWe recommend that Shs 7.176 billion be provided in the Financial Year 2024/2025 for the procurement of additional fuel, vehicle maintenance and escort services to ensure timely delivery of prisoners to court.6.6.2.11 Land surveying and boundary openingWe recommend an additional provision Shs 2 billion to be provided in the Financial Year 2024/25 to survey the un-surveyed five pieces of land of Uganda Prisons Services. 6.6.2.12 Gender ComplianceWe applaud Prisons Service for scoring 75.4 per cent and we urge them to aim higher. 6.7 V ote 135 - Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL)We recommend that the Ministries of Internal Affairs and Public Service expedite clearance procedures of recruitment by DGAL before the end of the Financial Year 2023/2024. On the Budget estimates, the Annex is attached, including the overall.6.7.2.2 The construction of the National DNA databankThe committee recommends a provision of Shs 34.282 billion to DGAL for the construction of the National DNA data bank over the medium term.6.7.2.3 Budgeting for ConsultanciesWe recommend re-allocation of Shs O.710 billion to critical needs under the committee’s purview.6.7.2.4 Acquisition of Motor VehiclesThe committee recommends a provision of Shs 0.973 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 to procure four motor vehicles for Regional Forensic Laboratories.6.7.2.5 Operationalisation of DGAL regional laboratoriesWe recommend an additional provision of Shs 12.4 billion to operationalise the regional forensic labs during the Financial Year 2024/2025.6.7.2.6 Acquisition of modern scientific equipmentWe recommend an additional provision of Shs 5.4 billion for the procurement of modern scientific equipment to provide independent scientific forensic and analytical services, aiding the administration of justice, safeguarding public health and safety of the environment during the Financial Year 2024/25.6.7.2.7 On Gender ComplianceWe noticed that they have scored 64 percent; we encourage them to aim higher. 6.8 V ote 137 - National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA)The budget performance for the first half is annexed. We also note the non-absorption of 12547THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024funds and recommend that NIRA expedites filling vacant positions in the Authority during the Financial Year 2024/2025. In addition, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should release the outstanding balance before the end of the Financial Year 2023/24 to enable the Authority to meet the deadline for mass renewal of National Identity Cards. Budget estimates are annexed. 6.8.2.1 Mass enrolment and renewal ProjectWe recommend that a provision of Shs 366.858 billion be made to meet the strict deadlines for general elections road map in the Financial Year 2024/2025.6.8.2.2 Registration of special groupsWe recommend that NIRA registers the special group category during the mass enrolment and renewal of national IDs exercise. In addition, NIRA should collaborate with Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) and undertake a joint exercise to capture all information needed, during the forthcoming census exercise.6.8.2.3 Strengthening birth and death registration in health facilitiesWe notice a funding gap of Shs 34.271 billion and recommend collaboration between the Ministry of Health and National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) in the registration of births and deaths in health facilities.6.8.2.4 Systems IntegrationWe recommend that Shs 2.620 billion be provided to NIRA to undertake the automation of its business processes and provide full online services.6.8.2.5 Inadequate staff of NIRA  We recommend that Shs 6.785 billion be provided to reach underserved districts to improve efficiency in the delivery of the authority’s mandate in the Financial Year 2024/2025.6.8.2.6 Budget for consultanciesWe recommend the re-allocation of Shs 0.3 billion to critical areas under the committee’s purview. 6.8.2.7 NIRA headquartersMr Speaker, NIRA is housed at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. The committee, therefore, recommends that NIRA should be provided with Shs 20 billion to acquire its own home to house its headquarters. We reached at this recommendation noting that when there is a National function, NIRA`s activities are curtailed.  6.8.2.8 Gender ComplianceWe note that NIRA has remained at 73 percent; they should come up. Conclusion The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs appreciates that the institutions under it are critical in achieving a peaceful and secure country. During the ministerial policy statements presentation, there was a shared concern that these institutions continue to attract minimal funding, making it extremely difficult to attain their respective mandates.The Budget strategy for the Financial Year 2024/2025 will only be achieved if the above institutions are supported in executing their mandate. The committee made adjustments in the Budget proposals, as indicated in Annex 3 below, to ensure the effective utilisation of resources. In light of the above, it is the prayer of the committee that this House adopts its report and approves the Budget estimates that incorporates the committee recommendations for the respective V otes for the Financial Year 2024/2025. I beg to report. (Applause)  12548SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson.  This is a very big committee. (Members rose_)  But, chairperson for budget, we are sending the report to you for harmonisation. The moment you express your opinion – (Laughter)  Let us have Hon. Kwizera, Hon. Rose Obigah, Hon. Akamba, Hon. Margaret, Hon. Omara, Hon. Tonny, Hon. Bwiire, Hon. Itaza, Hon. Nabukeera, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the vice-chairperson. I am first looking at colleagues and I will also – Chairperson, Budget Committee, I will allow you a comment so, just be near. We will also have Hon. Phyllis and the Member for Kiruhura.  Honourable colleagues, I am going to pick colleagues who have not submitted today. Let us do it quickly so that I can pick more. 7.01MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro):  Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for a very good report. However, I wish to note the following for the concern of the ministry, especially those responsible for police. There is the issue of deployment of police to individuals where you find an individual citizen is guarded by 30 police officers, yet you find that in my constituency, the whole subcounty does not have even one police officer. We need a guard policy to address that matter. The question of saying that we are going to have 18 policemen guarding a subcounty – First of all, you are saying there is no money. So, can’t we first use the forces we have, equitably shared or deployed, instead of having one person guarded by 20 people when we do not have enough resources? Secondly, I have also observed in Parliament here that there is over-deployment. I do not know the formula which they use. We need to reduce this congestion at Parliament. It should be scientific. If someone is given a police guard, that person should be paying, because they should not pay tax for someone to guard someone, even when he is not a VIP. We should have gazetted officers who can be guarded. Another issue I would like to talk about is the welfare of police and the duty of facilitation allowances. When you go to the office of the CID, you find the regional CID officer has about Shs 50,000 that he is going to use for investigation. You cannot win a case when it is poorly investigated. Let us put resources because without investigating cases, the Government will lose cases. Another issue is about the domestic arrears by the supplier – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. (Mr Kabanda rose_)  Hon. Kabanda, what information did you want to give? I know you came to my office on Tuesday and you were complaining about the same issue. MR DA VID KABANDA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity.  The information I wanted to give to Hon. Kwizera is related to the issue I was raising in your office. Last week, one of my supporters was involved in a case that I will not mention here on the Floor because it is under investigation. When I went to the police, the CID in my constituency requested me to facilitate him; to give him Shs 30,000 to go and investigate this issue. When the CID investigated, he had to send a file to the district. When I went to the district, the district CID also wanted Shs 150,000 to go and verify this issue.  The information I wanted to give this Parliament is that I have seen Hon. Kajwengye putting in his report that the CID needs Shs 6 billion to handle the cases. Most of the people that go to court – for most of the cases that have been dropped by the DPP, the reason they give is that they were not well investigated. In 2022, Grace Akullo, who was the then Director of CID, said that an officer needs Shs 50,000 to investigate a small case. For the middle-level cases, an officer needs Shs 500,000 to investigate them thoroughly. For 12549THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024murder cases; these big cases, she said they need between Shs 5 and 10 million. Mr Speaker, I would request – It is unfortunate that the minister for finance is not here. They could go and maybe create a V ote, specifically for CID. If you go to some countries such as Kenya and Rwanda, CID has a V ote. Mr Speaker, if this Parliament allows, we could ring-fence this money that has been appropriated – (Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Kabanda, you have brought an important point and we will capture it. Honourable colleagues, for each one of us, in one way or another, you will find that we need the CID to expeditiously handle a case. Even criminals need CID to help them. I remember, honourable colleagues – Hon. Isiagi is here – the time when we sat down and talked about the issue of ISO. We found that a DISO was receiving around Shs 1,500 for fuel per day and we pushed, through this House. Now, ISO has stabilised.  For CID, despite the praises – you hear that Mr Tom Magambo does not sleep, but it will stop on words if he or the team is not given capacity. If they remain a subvention where their money is not even protected – when their money arrives at the Ministry of Internal Affairs, internal affairs starts looking at the priorities they have. They are handling very sensitive things.  I think we should put it very clearly that CID needs their V ote.  Chairperson, Budget Committee, I do not know how that can be handled. If we fail to get a V ote, at least we should ring-fence – but they need their own V ote. (Applause) If immigration has a V ote, what about CID, which is more critical for the mass of Ugandans?  7.09MR PATRICK ISIAGI-OPOLOT (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea):  Mr Speaker, I concur because even part of these recommendations of building more prisons are because of congestion caused by poor investigation and delay in the justice system. Even if we amass a lot of money in the Judiciary when the investigations are not properly done, we shall be investing wrongly. Since it has come that there is marginalisation of the department of CID, it is really right that we quickly recommend or direct that a V ote be created for CID. (Applause)  That is the best that can happen. Thank you. If there is a delay, then we shall ring-fence money meant for police - Information. (Laughter)MR OCHAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. We should not only talk about investigation, but we should also talk about intelligence. This is because those two functions are different and they reinforce each other. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That is why I talked about the Internal Security Organisation (ISO) and the action we took to give them Shs 30 billion. ISO had last bought cars in 2007. Now, they have cars and when you call them, they reach out. However, for a CID officer, the day you have a case in your area and you need a report written, they cannot help you. Your relatives would be in prison. Let us take a stand. It is a proposed amendment to the report. We shall vote on it at the end when we are handling the reports. Hon. Rose –7.11MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank Hon. Kajwengye and the committee for a very good report.I kindly ask the committee not to remove that money for Karamoja. (Applause)  The security in Karamoja has become an issue of late. The Pokot – Actually, all their neighbours are attacking them. Unless we are saying we want to clear the Karamojong and we no longer need them in Uganda, we can downsize this money. (Member rose_) 12550SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMr Speaker, I am not going to give room for information for now because they will sit me down. Let me first say these few things. On the phased salary increment for the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), I kindly request you not to forget the police, prisons - Actually the armed team. If you see what these people are paid, you will cry, yet they provide us security. What kind of security is being provided by a person who is earning peanuts? I request that you do not stop with UPDF. Phase it out for police, prisons and others. Mr Speaker, on the construction work that is taking place for accommodation, I am so embarrassed. We gave money to the police and instead of working on the areas we told them to; Nsambya, Jinja, Naguru where you see dilapidated buildings that needed to be crushed and good ones built, these people bought uniports and tents. In uniports, you find two to three families sleeping. How do you perform conjugal obligations? Are you not embarrassed? It is very bad to treat – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Rose Obigah, are you a member of the committee? MS ROSE OBIGAH: No. They appeared in the Committee on Human Rights when we talked about human rights issues. This kind of accommodation is degrading and it is mistreatment, yet they are called officers. How can four officers occupy one uniport? We need to phase out the uniports - (Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I forgot to respond to Hon. Kwizera’s question. We are under-deploying at Parliament. In other parliaments, every Member of Parliament has security. Our MPs are at risk. You are serving the nation; you are in your official capacity. In fact, in other countries, they have a parliamentary service police, independent and clearly provided for. When you talk of over-deployment, I want to inform you that we have under-deployed and we would like to deploy more for your own security. You might take it lightly, but Gen. Kavuma, UPDF, we civilians are saying Karamoja is now okay, and that you should withdraw the money. That is why we have them here because they help us on these issues. 7.14LT GEN. SAM KA VUMA (UPDF Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I join honourable colleagues to thank the committee chair and the team for a wonderful and detailed report. About cutting or moving Shs 27 billion from the Karamoja operations because the security has improved, this is not a very good strategic recommendation. (Applause) This is a typical way of doing things.I have been trying to carry out research on why many Ugandans die and the diseases that kill us. I have my findings, but one of them is that 99 per cent of Ugandans do not go for periodic or regular medical check-ups. We live on self-medication. When you get a problem, you rush to the nearest pharmacy and the pharmacist prescribes medicine. Even then, this small girl or boy says, take this medicine for seven days. When you go home, you take it for a day and a half and when the pain goes away, you keep it somewhere. If you want to prove this point, when you go back to your homes, in your bedrooms, all of you and those who are not here, you will find that each one of us has got a mini-pharmacy. Therefore, I do not want to – A few months ago, the Karamojong, Acholi, Langi and Itesot were up in arms because of the insecurity caused by Karamojong warriors. Plans and budgets were put in place to solve this problem. We are here celebrating halfway-solved problems, and when we take away this money, we will go back to zero. I strongly – (Member rose) -  I do not want to reject, but advise. I strongly advise the committee – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Here, you do not advise. You recommend so that we vote on that recommendation. [Ms Obigah]12551THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024LT GEN. KA VUMA: Therefore, to be able to sustain the security that is improving in Karamoja and their neighbours, we should maintain this budget until we are fully secure. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, kindly note that Gen. Kavuma is now a Lieutenant General. I have seen you showing his title as Major General. I do not want problems after this. Please update our records. Hon. Phyllis -Chairperson of the Budget Committee, I want you to first listen to Members and advise us. 7.19MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I thank the committee for the very detailed report that they have given us. My concern is about accommodation in prisons. I always visit prisons in Kapchorwa. At least every Christmas, I take gifts for them. I enter their rooms, where they sleep. The problem that I see is congestion, as they have said. Another one which is more annoying is bed bugs and lice. These people are enjoyed by bed bugs and lice. When I did my research, I discovered that bed bugs are common in all the prisons in Uganda. Therefore, in the budget, I recommend that there should be a budget for drugs for fumigation, and also, once in a while, cleaning the houses where they sleep. The other one is about the quality of food that they eat. The posho  they eat is of poor quality maybe because of poor storage, it must be having aflatoxins and mycotoxins -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you know it will end with that. Do you see why I do not want information at this stage? When you switch on a microphone, you start afresh and that disturbs my time. Conclude. MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI: I would like to recommend  that much as the committee has a budget for the prisons service, they should include chemicals for fumigation of all the houses. 7.20MS JOV ANICE TWINOBUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura):  Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I join my colleagues to thank the chairperson of the committee and the entire committee for their excellent work. I support the committee on the issue of an increment of the salary of the lower cadres of UPDF. These brothers of ours have families, they provide security to our country, and we want to maintain that security. Therefore, I recommend or support the recommendation of the committee of Shs 962 billion to that effect.I also support the committee on the issue of recruitment of staff under NIRA. Mr Speaker, when you see what we go through when we are registering, we have to support - We need staff, considering the unemployment that we have in this country, yet there is that opportunity. I also support the Shs 20 million for the accommodation of NIRA offices as recommended by the committee. I thank you and I submit.7.22MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the elaborate report. Mr Speaker, on behalf of the people of Karamoja, I applaud the men and women in uniform for ushering in the peace that we are enjoying in Karamoja today. (Applause)The committee has observed rightly that the security situation in Karamoja is beginning to stabilise, but I disagree with the recommendation that the budget should be revised downwards because the security situation in Karamoja is still very fragile. A few guns have gone silent. We are still being attacked by the Turkana, especially in Kotido, Kaabong and Karenga Districts. 12552SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSIn this one year, we have been attacked by the Turkana and Kotido alone has been attacked four times in just this month. Many of our herd boys have been slaughtered by the Turkana and our animals taken. I think the peace that we have realised should be nurtured for some time so that we are able to achieve sustainable peace and be able to also contribute productively to this country. Mr Speaker, I also observe the recommendation by the committee on the budget to support recruitment. While I support this budget for recruitment, we have always faced a challenge during the recruitment process. We have tried to mobilise our young people to join the UPDF, but shockingly and surprisingly, the recruiting team comes with a fleet of young people from unknown destinations. They do not respect the recruitment quota of the people of Karamoja. These people tend to take up the recruitment quota and our people are left out of the recruitment. Lastly, I thank NIRA for the job well done, except for the only challenge we have and which I know is across the country. NIRA district collection points are quite a distance from the communities. For example, in my district, I have the farthest point, which is 70 kilometres from the collection point and you find that when people come, they have to wait and sleep - This is a very big challenge. Therefore, they do not go with their identification. I would recommend that NIRA staff be facilitated to go nearer to the subcounty points in order to give people their identification cards. Thank you, Mr Speaker.7.25MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs for the good job done. Despite the fact that you said the chairperson trained you, we should look at the magnitude of the budget we are talking about. The bigger the magnitude, the bigger the time we allow the committees to present. I state that security is very vital for all of us. Without security, we cannot do much. I also thank the Lieutenant General who has talked about Karamoja - You know, I am a Karimojong. We need -(Interjection)-  Yes, ask the Karimojong, they will tell you. We need security in Karamoja and we need more investment in Karamoja. Mr Speaker, on the issue of CIID, it has also to deal with DGAL; DGAL deals with forensic services. Unless we invest more there, we cannot do much. We can be talking about CIID, but CIID depends too much on DGAL. We should put more money in CIID, but also more money in DGAL, and we should make sure that we do more - (Interjection)-  Thank you. It is called DGAL because it is D-G-A-L and I am right to mention it that way, if you are not aware. In fact, we are talking about regions, but it should be beyond. We met the people of DGAL one time and they said they have a lot of specimens, but the facilities to deal with those specimens are not there. That means when they do not deal with those specimens by doing the forensic testing, they are delaying justice and the CIID cannot move. This applies also to DPP because DPP also cannot prosecute without that evidence. Today when we were meeting the DPP, they were saying that there are so many cases which they have not handled because they have not got sufficient evidence to be able to prosecute the matters - (Hon. Opolot rose )- Mr Speaker, do I? The Speaker has refused, but I am well informed. (Laughter)Mr Speaker, I want to plead with the House -(Interjection)-  but the Speaker has refused. You know I am one of those who accepts information. Mr Speaker, as a House, we should look at the entire chain as far as criminal issues are concerned, up to court. We have facilitated courts better, but we have not facilitated the people who feed into the courts and that is where we are saying the CIID, the Office of [Ms Aleper]12553THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024DPP, DGAL - We can talk about a V ote, but how much are we putting into the V ote? Somebody will give you a V ote and put a billion shillings -(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi.MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising this because you have mentioned it very well. Until you have faced police, CIID, you will know what I am talking about. Until you have faced what an investigation by DGAL, you will know what I am talking about. As a Committee of the whole House, we have the powers to direct and I am happy the Chairman of the Budget Committee is here. This is a non-compromising issue. We want to put enough money for DGAL, at an appropriate time for CIID. We could say, under classified expenditure, let us put this amount of money for CIID pending the Secretary to Treasury providing us with a V ote for CIID because it might take years to do it, but we can use that opening in police and we put it that we are putting more money, under classified, for CIID for purposes of investigation. I am sure no Member of Parliament here will refuse that budget. Mr Speaker, as you stated, we need to deal with this. Some time back, in South Africa, when the Government was changing, they asked the Minister of Internal Affairs what he wanted in his budget. He said, “We should invest more in the prisons because all of us are heading there.” I request that we invest more in these services of CIID, DGAL, DPP or prisons because all of us are potential candidates for those areas. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this financial year running, I think we tried on DPP. Number one, we removed the tax on their salaries. Number two, we provided money for recruitment of more state attorneys and I think they have recruited more state attorneys. I know there is still a gap, but now the one of CIID – Indeed, the Directorate of Government and Analytical Laboratories (DGAL) is extremely critical, but my fear is that in my subcounties - the cases I have and the cases you have down there - When you have a case in Kampala, CIID can easily come in and they mobilise and handle. However, for those in the villages, our people are dying in prisons. For them, there are no issues of going to the analytical laboratory. The fact is that on the ground, our people are doing badly. Let us look at DGAL and CIID. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, why we are emphasising the issue of the V ote and ring-fencing is because you need a subvention. With a subvention, you can send the money to the minister, and they reallocate with the permission of the ministry. However, if it is a V ote and money has gone to a V ote, the ministry will not be playing around with it. That is why we are saying, whatever little money we send, we should have it protected and ring-fenced, knowing that it is going directly to CIID without anyone touching it for other critical emergencies that might come. That was the spirit. 7.32MS DORCUS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this very elaborate report with very good recommendations. From where I sit, I support the Shs 27 billion which is supposed to be utilised to maintain peace in Karamoja. As a neighbour to Karamoja, we suffered so much last year. We know that the issues in Karamoja can be very fluid; it can subside within this period and escalate within the next period. For us to maintain peace, we need that money to remain there. Under V ote 144 - Uganda Police Force, I support the recommendation from the committee, especially in the area of maintaining and ensuring provision of good accommodation to police staff. As a Member, I have received several calls from police officers who are from 12554SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSmy district when they are transferred and they do not have where to put their property. You find that someone is transferred maybe from Kasese to Kampala and they have to keep their household items, including beddings like mattresses, on the verandas of the unipots. This is very practical –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Lower the microphone a little. MS ACEN:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this is much better. When passing around Jinja Road Police Station, it is common for one to find their beddings, like mattresses, just put around the verandas of those unipots and that is quite appalling. As a country, it is high time we addressed our minds to such realities. Thank you. 7.34MR PAUL AKAMBA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the very elaborate report. Among the great achievements of this Government is peace and security, and it does not need to be over emphasised because it is vital to every Ugandan and the same has to be maintained. There is no way we can maintain peace and security in this country if we do not adequately fund the sector. I, therefore, propose that we should not cut any funding for the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs together with Ministry Internal Affairs. If we do, we will be calling for insecurity in this country and the home for refugees will be the one sending Ugandans out there. I propose that we pay the men and women in uniform across the board; UPDF, Uganda Police Force and Uganda Prisoners Service well. The lower cadres and generally officers, are not paid well and we need to enhance their payments. I will single out the importance of the rule of law. The spirit behind enhancing the pay for the Judiciary and DPP was to ensure that this critical rule of law is handled. Justice can best be achieved when any case has been properly investigated and presented to court. The Judiciary and DPP can do so little when it comes to criminal justice without the input of the police. We need to pay the police officers well  -(Member timed out.)7.37MR STEPHEN ASEERA (Independent, Buhaguzi East County, Kikuube):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity that you have given to me. Once again, I add my voice to appreciate the chairperson and the team for the wonderful report and the good recommendations. Mine is about prisons accommodation. I concur with the committee on the issue of coming up with extra accommodation to deal with the congestion. However, it has been observed in quite a number of cases that many inmates in prisons are there for purposes of civil cases that could be handled at the level of LC 1. I recommend that we look into strengthening our lower local councils. I remember while we were in our 20s that our LC 1s were extremely strong at that level. However, it now looks like police has become an issue whereby when you have simple wrangles and quarrels between neighbours, it ends up at the police. At that level, if you do not have money, the referrals will be made to prison. As we look at the congestion level, let us look at how to strengthen our LC1 chairpersons and local governments and have some appropriation made towards that. Secondly, regarding the high level of crime rate, I concur with the committee on the 10 districts where expansion of canine units has been spearheaded. However, as we look at the Karamoja case, Kikuube and the entire Albertine region also have high crime rates, specifically because of oil and gas and it has caused us issues. In my constituency of Buhaguzi East, we have had eight cases of mysterious deaths that have occurred under the umbrella of rape and others. As we consider this, let us also include [Ms Acen]12555THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024Kikuube and the entire Albertine region, given that the -(Member timed out.)  7.40MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are three Arms of Government and the Legislature is one of them. I got worried when my colleague was complaining that there is over deployment at Parliament. Just like you emphasised, we are under-deployed. (Applause)I would like to request that the Parliament should be jealously guarded because we handle very many sensitive issues and we need maximum security and protection. So, instead of a minus, we need a two-plus, such that we are secure because we handle very serious issues that stir the development of this country. You cannot attain development without security, in simple terms. Uganda is going to celebrate, we shall have a lot of statistics on how we are growing and developing, but this development can be eroded in a minute if there is no security.Honourable members, on issues of security of this country, we should be very serious. I would like to appreciate the committee because you thoroughly looked at all issues that cut across security. In my district, a Criminal Investigations and Intelligence Directorate (CIID) officer is meant to travel 30 kilometres to attend to a very serious case. I thank the committee and Government that we at least provided transport for the District Police Commanders, but CIID officers do not have transport. What are you investigating when you have not reached the locus? I would like to support that a special V ote be put and we give money to the CIID office, such that the officers do a good job. In the report, for which I thank the committee, they were talking about the Shs 10 million –(Member timed out.)7.43MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and committee for this elaborate report. Mine is about the allocation of Shs 3 billion to buy land in Mpigi for more prisoners. We did not look at why these prisoners keep accumulating. It is because the Judiciary has a backlog of cases. If we do not institute speedy trials, this problem will not be solved. We shall keep buying land all over the country, trying to expand the prisons. You gave us some statistics regarding debtors, but the court has a provision for those who borrowed less than Shs 50 million. So, I encourage the Judiciary to look at that scheme to reduce on the civil debtors in prisons to avoid congestion and spending taxpayers’ money on buying more land. I submit. 7.45MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Peace and security are everything for a country to grow. On this note, as a teacher, I may rate this Government at 89 per cent on security. (Applause)  The 11 per cent is because they sometimes create insecurity and solve it by themselves. (Laughter)For example, in Kitgum, Acholi Subregion, the Government is allowing the Karimojong to come intentionally to rape the Acholi and then move to solve the same issue.Secondly, Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert Olanya, let us not take that line. I know you are a very clear-headed legislator. Sort out that; I do not need a colleague to put you on order. MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the guidance. For somebody to get 89 per cent, that is above average and it is good. I pray that the country remains peaceful -12556SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Hon. Olanya. If you do not sort that out, I will not allow you to talk about Apaa and balaalo . (Laughter)MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, I withdraw that part.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, that is the only way to scare Hon. Olanya. (Laughter)  When you tell him not to talk about Apaa and balaalo, he then behaves.MR OLANYA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, Government needs to be very serious on the accommodation of prisoners. We have visited very many prisons and right from the 10th Parliament up to now, the situation has never changed. You find that a room meant for 50 inmates has more than 200 inmates in it. The Government needs to look into this very critically because our prisoners are suffering. You cannot have two or three inmates sharing a very small room. On issues of payment of our security personnel, like my colleague alluded, our police and UPDF officers are working in pain and since they work under orders, they cannot talk. Sincerely, they are always telling Members of Parliament to advocate for them because their pay is quite low. Mr Speaker, we can afford to pay our security personnel well. While you are sleeping inside the house, they are sleeping outside. Some of them may take more than two months without reaching their families. Please, let us motivate them and make sure our security personnel work under good conditions. (Applause)7.48MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank the committee. I will need guidance from the committee chairperson and the minister. When they talked about the subcounty policing model, they mentioned the different inputs – the mission vehicles and motorcycles – but they forgot that there are areas which are islands where the opposite of the vehicle is the boat. At the same time, we have had so many fire accidents in this country and some of them happen in the islands. On the mainland, when we are budgeting, we budget for these fire brigades. I have never seen any provision – whether old, dilapidated or in the plan – to procure a fire boat. In most cases, we actually do not report these fire outbreaks because there is normally no response. The other issue is that when we procured police patrol vehicles, we procured for every district, but we did not procure boats to work as patrols for the islands. So, it is very difficult to monitor such areas. Mr Speaker, when I looked at prisons – I do not know whether the committee chairperson got it well – there was an issue to do with uniforms for prisoners. You indicated that the requirement is 85,237 – that was the total number of prisoners – and you indicated that what is provided is 35,204, leaving a gap of 50,000 uniforms. The amount you mentioned was Shs 5.68 billion. This implies that every set of that yellow uniform is Shs 113,000 – and this is really a good suit in Kampala. Committee chairperson, is that the rate for the yellow attire that they put on – Shs 113,000? (Laughter) Going by that rate, we can actually use that same money –(Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Betty Naluyima? 7.52MS BETTY NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we talk about matters of the men and women in uniform, we really need to find how best to facilitate them, especially when it comes to our police officers who are doing community policing. 12557THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024For all the crimes we have around, many times, they are unable to finalise and concretise the findings. Why? Those days, local governments used to aid a little, but now, they also do not have. Many times, you find that a crime is on, but when you call a District Police Commander (DPC) or a CID officer, there is no facilitation. So, let us take this as something that is key. Also, for the information of the committee – as written on page 11 of the report – about the payroll, as the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, while we were handling the Human Capital Management (HCM), we were informed that even under validation, some officers were fully verified, but there are those who were partially verified and that there was a second opportunity to ensure that they were fully verified. However, what is happening is that because of the fewer numbers, we have less number of servants planned for as far as the wage is concerned and as we know, we have already considered wages to take a first call in this country. So, I caution that as we handle all these ministerial policy statements, we should ensure that we plan for all those people of ours who are civil servants, but are yet to be fully verified so that we do not get salary arrears. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Tonny Ayoo? 7.54MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee and its chairperson. I am touched by the recommendation of the committee on the security situation in Karamoja. In their report, they have stated that 368 firearms and 3,334 rounds of ammunition have been recovered, but Karamoja is estimated to have over 15,000 guns in circulation. Now, when we have recovered only 338 and then we say the situation is okay, let us reduce the money, I do not think this is fair. Secondly, around 2012, Karamoja was so peaceful that one could travel at night and during the day without any problem, but later on, the situation got bad. Parts of my family are in Otuke and Alebtong. I feel touched if we are thinking that because the cattle rustling has gone down a little bit then the security situation in Karamoja is okay. It is on this ground that I urge this Parliament that we do not pass this recommendation of the committee, but instead amend it and ensure that the Shs 27.5 billion is maintained - (Applause) - so that better operation - It is not only about cattle rustling, but ensuring that Karamoja is pacified and it becomes peaceful, permanently. (Applause) Mr Speaker, the committee had recommended the provision of money for traffic and road safety by providing Shs 8 billion for motorcycles and about Shs 19 billion for the inspection of vehicles by the Inspectorate of Vehicles (IOV) and putting mobile stations. However, as I have been listening to presentations here, my concern is that the Government has provided the resource envelope for the budget, but our recommendations are calling for provision of additional money for additional activities under the unfunded priorities. Now, I want to understand: as we make recommendations on this, where do we expect, either the Committee on Budget or ministry of Finance to expand, yet the resource envelope has been provided for the Budget and it is limited? This is what has been puzzling me and as we move forward, this question must be answered so that we see how to deal with reality. This is because if we are providing for additional resources then it will require us to look for sources of – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Paul Omara?12558SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS7.57MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me time. I appreciate the honourable member for Nyabushozi for the good report.   As a representative of the people of Otuke, the recommendation of the committee that the Shs 27 billion be revised downwards is actually not good news at all. Last year, the President invited the Members of Parliament from Karamoja, Lango, Acholi and Teso to my constituency and they all came. The matter was about insecurity in the region. We have just had a lull of peace and tranquillity, but that does not mean the problem has gone away. So, we should keep the money. I recommend that this money be stayed so that we can look at the issues of insecurity in the region. (Applause) The second issue is about the pay for members of our security forces. We have been looking at the numbers. The committee chairperson said that Shs 1.3 trillion for wages for UPDF - We have always calculated that if we are going to pay the army more than Shs 1 trillion then as a basis for the ordinary soldiers, at least they should get Shs 1 million.I have seen the recommendations of the committee and I think we need to look at every soldier at the lowest level and as a bare minimum, they should have Shs 1 million as pay. I think the same thing should stand for the police and even the prisons officers. We need to sit down with the ministry. As a Budget Committee, we shall investigate and look at those priorities. I think one of the demotivating items is pay. We just need to make sure that our soldiers are paid well. A lot has been talked about housing. In the last financial year, we gave UPDF Shs 40 billion for housing and I think UPDF has made progress. For the police, it has been alleged that they bought mabaati . That is a colonial mentality; that is how we were treated in the past. This Government should be able to build decent houses for the police and I want to recommend – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Since we shall be having you as a Budget Committee member, conclude. MR OMARA: I want to recommend that we should ring fence some money to the police, specifically for housing - not for mabaati  houses, but for serious houses. Not unipots. We do not want to see unipots. We have talked about prisoners. You can imagine the injustice where 45.5 per cent out of the 76,052 prisoners are on remand. It means they have not faced justice so for us to build more prisons is actually to keep those people suffering in perpetuity. What we need to do is to unlock the judicial system. I support the recommendation which has been made for us to give more money to the investigators and the forensics so that we can provide justice to these people - (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Thank you. Chairperson, Budget Committee – 8.01THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Mr Patrick Isiagi-Opolot ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to thank this very able Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs for that very good, wonderful report. (Applause) I say it is wonderful because specifically, they have cited issues that will lead the justice system to operate correctly. However, I do not agree with the part of investing a lot in feeding prisoners, buying uniforms and building more prisons. We must abandon that approach and invest qualitatively in exit and entry into the prisons. Minimize entry into the prison and accelerate exit by funding those areas. Honourable colleagues, I come from Teso. When Karamoja sneezes, Teso, Acholi, Lango, Bugisu, and Sebei Subregion get diarrhoea –12559THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024(Laughter)-  but I thank the committee. I know it is so popular here that the Shs 27 billion should be retained. This is a committee that has scrutinised the Budget and this committee has very alert members so there must be a reason the committee is proposing to reduce that amount of money. We must understand: is it this money doing the work of providing security in Karamoja? Is it allowances for the soldiers who are in Karamoja? Is it feeding the security personnel or is this double-counting money? You may find the committee has made a proposal which is spot-on. Before we conclude that this money should stay, the chairperson should clarify what is this amount of money; the Shs 27 billion, and what role has it been playing in providing security in Karamoja? We must be very careful. Some people can take us for a ride and just defend this money for the sake of defending, yet this money is double counted. Is it a salary for the soldiers? Is it fuel? Information -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, honourable chairperson, I had stopped that. Continue and conclude. MR OPOLOT:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to continue. It is very easy because we are all aware that there is a general budget for fuel for security personnel and for salaries for the soldiers. They are employees of the UPDF and so on. There is transport provided so can the chairperson clarify what this money is for?I thank you, Chairperson - There was an honourable member who said we are talking of increasing money, where is it coming from? I thank the chairperson for proposing a reduction so that this money, which is redundant - Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Chairperson, Budget, I know in your predicament, you are hunting for money to reallocate. When a chairperson of the committee presents his report, it is a report of the committee. All the reasoning is written down in the report. The reasoning he has given is that the operations have been successful and therefore, we should scale down. The Members are saying, no, sleeping trouble, premature - and one of the senior commander, who goes and spends sleepless nights on the ground, tells you, “Look, do not be misled that Karamoja is now okay”. Hon. Max, do you want to say something? 8.06MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. In economic governance and management, the stability of a territory, a country, or a subregion, is a sine qua non  for development. If I were to mark the submission by the chairperson, I would give it 98 per cent. The 2 per cent would be accounted for by the omission of tracing the marginal output arising out of spending one additional shilling in this sector. Since under the programme approach, we have not focused so much on outcomes, I will give them the 2 per cent. The 98 per cent, to me, is based on the strong recommendations that they have come up with, including the recommendation on the security in the Karamoja subregion. It does not stop us whatsoever from coming up with tomorrow’s budget supplementary to take into account any emergency that may arise. Going by the recommendation of the committee and otherwise, what we are proposing, we are actually going to distort the strategic allocation of available resources. We are not a resource-rich country. We have limited resources so I would rather allocate what we have efficiently, provide money in the contingency and when the need arises, we appropriate it accordingly.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable chairperson, this is not a stage where we do guesswork. What you have said here is that it should be revised downwards. You have not told us by how much. As a committee, you should have assessed and said, 12560SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSwe have seen successes registered and we believe they can scale down by 10, five or one per cent. Therefore, out of the Shs 27 billion, we say maintain Shs 20 billion. Are there some reasons beyond what is written here that made the committee recommend this way? MR KAJWENGYE:  Straight on that because I have an opportunity to respond on others –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, respond to all.  I received the alternative policy statement from the Opposition. This is not one where it is a right.MR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker and the honourable colleagues for the immense interest in this. I also thank my committee members. This is not my work alone, but the work of the honourable colleagues behind me. The interest that the House has picked is commensurate to the man and woman hours that the honourable colleagues put into producing this.About Karamoja, it is a fact that the security situation there has tremendously improved. That, however, has not been born out of money alone, but also a change of command. Provision of money, however, is also central to the improving security situation in Karamoja.We were of the view, as a committee, that now that the security situation has improved and bearing in mind that we looked for resources to appropriate to other critical needs, there was a need to downsize the financial provision. Mr Speaker, the reason the committee presents to the main House is that we are ready to be convinced by the majority views of the main House –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, committee chairperson. You have a chance to interact with these people; to scrutinise. Did you make this proposal to the leadership of the UPDF and the ministry, engage them and show the pros and cons?MR KAJWENGYE:  Mr Speaker, we interacted with the Defence officials led by the able, Hon. Oboth and the commanders at the time they were making the ministerial policy statement before us. We have not had the opportunity to share with them the recommendations after we made them; this is the only opportunity we have. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. MR KAJWENGYE:  Having said that, on decongesting – Mr Speaker, I will be restrained from making comments on others. Although I am seated here, the minister will have to respond. I restrain myself and remain aware that I am a legislator, not a member of the Executive. Therefore, I will not make some comments.However, there are those that are within my reach, like the need to decongest our prisons. Hon. Nabukeera said that. We put a question to the leadership of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. They said that prison over congestion is a fact. Why we need to buy land within the Mpigi area is that all the appellate courts are concentrated in Kampala. Decongesting Luzira and other prisons is an action in the immediate. The issue of relocation is not within our reach yet. Two, on the islands, as Hon. Migadde raised, again, I think the minister has to respond to that. As for prison uniforms at a cost of Shs 100,000, may I have the opportunity to report to the august House that we have made provision for two sets so it is not one. On salary enhancement for police, again, that is for the minister to respond. I am happy that the whole House has come to recognise, like they have done before, that central to our criminal justice system lies CIID and Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL). As the committee chairperson, I support the idea of creating a V ote or, in the immediate, ring-fencing provisions for CIID. (Applause)[The Deputy Speaker]12561THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024On the rest, you have answered. I thought I would comment on those. The ministers are present, they can comment on the rest and we continue.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, on Karamoja, this is an issue we should assign that the Budget Committee interrogates it deeply to see where this money had been allocated. Is it real money for operations? Rarely does a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs say, cut this money. This can be even in camera, Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. You can look at this much earlier. You can even call the commanders and interrogate them deeply.We know there is an urge for maintaining security in Karamoja, but when the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs says, scale down on this money, we need to go deeper. Let us have that balance. We do not just dismiss what our committee has said. Minister for Defence, you will engage with the committees deeply, they will give you their reasoning behind it, maybe some of it is not for putting before the camera. Honourable colleagues, one thing we forgot about the police is, we have been receiving reports here that the air wing of police is down. They have the choppers, but cannot operate because they do not have the requisite human resources that are required for licensing. Which kind of operational police force that does not have an air wing? I am told that for them to fly, they need certification from a private operator because they do not have the manpower. Committee chairperson, did that come to your attention? MR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you. Unfortunately, the specific item did not come to our attention, but I am happy that you have raised it. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The Inspector-General of Police (IGP) has written to us. I will forward it to you so that your people can look at it.MR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The honourable minister can also touch it. Let us start with defence - maybe before you come in, the Leader of the Opposition has something to say.8.18THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP ( Mr John Baptist Nambeshe ): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was perplexed by the downsizing of this 27-point-something billion. I was making a comparison. Why is it very selective, Mr Speaker? In the late 2023, there were equal improvements in security, courtesy of the good work of the joint regional force together with Shujaa  in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). That is why the regional force withdrew. Shujaa has equally done very good work, yet theirs is about Shs 22 point something billion. Now that there are slight security improvements in Congo, that budget should have also been downsized. Going for that one of Karamoja where there are no signs of improvement would be selective and therefore lopsided. Finally, Mr Speaker, I am wondering if we indeed have a meagre resource envelope which is a fact, and this is the time to consider austerity measures to reduce public spending. You would wonder and I request you to compare the two; development of regulations for Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances Act has had an allocation of a whopping Shs 10 billion. Moreover, the one of explosives regulation to guide the implementation of explosives Act is Shs 0.2 billion. Look at the variance. What could be informing this Shs 10 billion against the Shs 0.2 billion? It is merely about the development of regulations for the Act. That would be one way of noticing these wastages, and I do not think that he has justification for that discrepancy. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Committee chairperson, do you want to clarify something? Just go ahead and then honourable minister will come in.12562SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSMR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you. Page 15 talks about implementation of the Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Act, 2023. The development of regulations and operationalisation of structures such as the Secretariat, Narcotics Committee - The Board will follow that Act that has created a national requirement so, it is not only regulations. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Nambeshe’s issue was on explosives that you are not providing.MR NAMBESHE:  Mr Speaker, do not again be lopsided. Go for Explosives Act regulations.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Shs 200 million versus Shs 10 billion.MR NAMBESHE:  The grave concern is that both are regulations for different Acts. Why would one be as low as Shs 200 million and the other is so high at Shs 10 billion?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe what we could ask the minister is how much he had proposed. That question is for the Minister of Internal Affairs because they are the ones who planned. 8.22THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank honourable Members of Parliament who are here and have debated this matter. I also thank the chairperson together with the committee members. I know that Mr Speaker is listening, so I will continue. I would like to respond to two things. It is shocking and causing a lot of anxiety and suspicion, which is a preserve of the people in the stock exchange. This is Parliament, we should not employ suspicion and speculation. I had the opportunity to ask the committee chairperson what could have informed him other than what is written here. When we met with the chairperson and members, we narrated the performance and made accountability that this is how far the monies you have been giving us, as Parliament, has taken us. We did not say withdraw some because we have succeeded. (Applause)  That would inform the committee that we do not need the money. When we went there, we told them that there were new issues coming up in Karamoja.The other month, we heard that the two Presidents of Kenya and Uganda were supposed to meet there. Their tweet is coming up. Up to now, I am still asking, what formed the decision to make that recommendation? The faith was even diminished further when the Chairperson of the Budget Committee came up - I appeal to this House that the decision to save the operation Usalama Kwa Wote  in Karamoja lies with this House. Mr Speaker, sending me before a judge who has made his decision known, with another committee member who has also made his decision known - I appeal to this House, save Karamoja, Acholi, Teso and Lango. (Applause)  This is an operation, not a normal business. Things keep changing. We cannot get a clean sheet that says Usalama Kwa Wote  has been called off. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I would like to allay your fears. Number one, they have said scale down. What if they said scale down by Shs 1 million, would it affect your - You can argue that. Number two, what I can guarantee you is that if there are any allies you have - I have, on several occasions, seen Hon. Isiagi Opolot sometimes dictating that the budget on defence is not debatable. I reassure you of that. Maybe they might be having a few questions that were not satisfactory answered and I am sure they will give you justice. MR OBOTH:  Mr Speaker, I do not doubt, I know the Chairperson of the Budget Committee very well. He is one of the few people to whose home I have gone. We are friends. I also know the committee members well for many years, just as much as you know.12563THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024I am a trembling and fearing brand new Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs. (Laughter)  When I see my appointment put at stake, I have to make reasonable appeal that is within my means and I am hereby doing so. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well noted. MR OBOTH:  This is the first time this is happening. Actually, it is not that the figure is not known. The recommendation is so advisory that you do downward revision with this figure; Shs 27.5 billion, remove this and direct it to a more critical area. These are matters of operation. We are not constructing a hospital that we can say, “Do not build that hospital”.Unfortunately, we cannot quantify matters of security and the options of doing nothing about it - I hope this House can advise that we do nothing about it so that we come back for Karamoja. The House can also make that recommendation. I would like to make this very passionate appeal to you; that let us retain the figure in the operation unless the recommendation is directed at my new appointment. (Laughter) That is the kind of -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, that is vintage Hon. Oboth Oboth.MR OBOTH:  Secondly, on enhancement of salaries, I would like to thank Members for acknowledging the need across and I will speak about the inter-ministerial committee. It may not be captured in this because there are other things that are going on that at an appropriate time - There is hope that something good will happen from the lower ranks to the captain, for the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF), police and prisons. However, there is nothing yet to report since we just had a meeting with the Prime Minister and the relevant ministers last week and we need your support. Security is a precursor, as most of you have said, even for us to be in this House. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Oboth Oboth. He knows how to appeal to our emotions. I know he was a chairperson here for long, but thank you for remaining our colleague. You are always here with us in the canteen and everywhere. We appreciate that. Honourable minister, welcome back. Honourable colleagues, as you know, the honourable minister lost his mother. We are glad that you are now back to perform your duties after giving her a befitting send-off.8.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I hope that sympathy extends to the budget. (Laughter)  If I can use the empathy for my late mother.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Now he is going to claim to be an orphan saying, “The budget of this orphan.” (Laughter)GEN. MUHOOZI:  However, that aside, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for a splendid job and also the members for the range of issues you raised, which were all supportive of the MDAs under the ministry that we supervise. What you seek is to improve their effectiveness. This process is the only point where we seek a convergence between the ends we seek, especially on this Front Bench, the ways and the means to achieve those ends. However, quite often, we have a mismatch, but desirably, this is the moment to plug the gaps. Starting with Karamoja, I want to add my voice because I also, in a way, fall in the same space like General Kavuma. You know I carry the title of being Member of Parliament for the UPDF, but also the issue of Karamoja is multi-sectoral.The army leads, but we support them and I would like to plead with this House that rather than - Because I see the spirit of recommending for a reduction is more to do with crisis 12564SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSmanagement; that since the situation has improved here, we can now take the money the other side. This is like fire brigading. What happens when it goes back again for the worse? We need to maintain the momentum and allow that money to remain there. On the other aspects of the Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, there are many issues to do with the hardware and software, ranging from vehicles, accommodation, systems - people singled out the Criminal Investigation and Intelligence Directorate (CIID). Yes, support CIID, but also support it in a more comprehensive way like Hon. Nandala-Mafabi said. The chain of the criminal justice system is longer. If you support CIID, support crime intelligence. If you are to create or ring-fence some money for them, certainly they need money to improve. Support the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL) to support them and all the other enablers for efficient investigations.We certainly need to work on prisoner congestion. There is no doubt about it and the committee was spot on in its recommendations.Remuneration, welfare - We cannot thank the chairperson of the committee and numerable members enough for adding your voice to improve the welfare of the rank and file of the people in uniform; the police and prisons. Sir, you commented about the air wing of the police. It needs revamping and it is key. Remember that we have this unit called the Flying Squad. The idea was coined from their ability to react, including by air, where there is crime, but we cannot do so when the air wing is not functional. We need to revamp the Fire Brigade and the Marines unit, like the Members submitted. But overall, I wish that this House approves the recommendations of the committee to ensure that we do our work effectively. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. I now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted with proposed amendments. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reports we have done today are all referred to the Committee on Budget for harmonisation and one of the proposed amendments was to review the recommendation of the committee as far as revising the budget of Karamoja is concerned. However, that does not mean that the Committee on Budget does not engage the honourable minister and look into it.Honourable colleagues, there is a lot of jam outside. (Laughter)  So, next item -(VII) COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCESTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Chairperson, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources, let us go to the recommendations because the whole report will be captured on the Hansard .(The report is hereto attached.)8.37THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Emmanuel Otaala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your resilience and encouraging all the others to keep strong. Equally, I want to thank the technocrats who are here for their resilience. Hon. Okiror - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Mr Chairperson, can you present the report? That is what I called you to do. You seem to be very fresh. [Gen. Muhoozi]12565THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024DR OTAALA:  Before I dive into presenting the report, I would like to lay on the Table a copy of the report, together with minutes of the proceedings. I am going to summarise and I am now on page 4 of the report. My committee considered the following V otes: (i) V ote 017: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development(ii) V ote 139: Petroleum Authority of Uganda (PAU) (iii) V ote 019: Ministry of Water and Environ -ment (iv) V ote 150: National Environment Manage -ment Authority (NEMA) (v) V ote 157: National Forestry Authority (NFA) (vi) V ote 109: Uganda National Meteorologi -cal Authority (UNMA) Subventions:(i) National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) (ii) Atomic Energy Council (iii) Uganda Electricity Credit Capitalisation Company (iv) Electricity Disputes TribunalMr Speaker, on page 5 there is the structure of our report and we also discuss the aggregate budget allocations for the two sectors. I will not go into the details and I would like to quickly dive to page 12 – observations and recommendations, under the energy and mineral development sector. My first point of focus is the wage shortfall under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Mr Speaker, the committee noted that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development wage provision in the ministerial policy statement has reduced by Shs 2.61 billion from Shs 19.3 billion in Financial Year 2023/2024 to Shs 16.7 billion for the Financial Year 2024/2025, yet the ministry’s staffing levels remained the same.The committee was informed that if the wage is not revised or reinstated to Shs 19.3 billion then, some of the staff in post will not be paid.Our recommendation, therefore, is that an additional Shs 2.61 billion be provided to reinstate the wage ceiling back to Shs 19.3 billion.Mineral development programmeMr Speaker, you will find that there is persistent underfunding of the mineral development sector yet it is identified by the National Development Plan (NDP) III as one of the key growth areas for industrialisation and value addition. We realised that whereas NDP III proposes that in the Financial Year 2024/2025, the mineral subsector should be receiving Shs 699 billion, only Shs 31.6 billion is allocated, yet as most Members agree with me that this is a sector from which we can earn revenue, more than even the oil and gas sector where much focus has been for quite a long time.The mineral subsector – I am now on page 13 – requires quite a lot of money to invest in the National Mining Company, as provided by the Mining and Minerals Act, 2022. They also need money, which is Shs 130 billion, for the National Mining Company and also need a mineral laboratory at a cost of Shs 148.2 billion. They need to undertake a feasibility study at Kibiro and Panyimur geothermal prospects. This will help us to diversify energy generation. Mr Speaker, the committee therefore strongly recommends that the Government provides Shs 474 billion for the above named interventions under the mineral development programme.We also recommend that the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should harmonise the action plans on weighing and measuring goods in transit to avoid the duplication of projects and for overall resource optimisation. You find that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is buying weighbridges, while the Ministry of Works and Transport is also buying weighbridges. 12566SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSWe wonder whether these weighbridges cannot be located in strategic positions, where the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development as well the Ministry of Works and Transport can utilise the same.Another recommendation is that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should enter into memoranda of understanding with the Ministry of Works and Transport and UNRA to facilitate the use of the existing weighbridges, rather than focusing so much attention on buying new ones.I now move to the establishment of the National Mining Company. As I had already explained, we need this company – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Committee chairperson, you need to listen to the Speaker’s guidance: read the recommendations.DR OTAALA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the establishment of the National Mining Company, our recommendation is that the Government should provide Shs 130 billion for investment of the National Mining Company for the Financial Year 2024/2025.The Government should, in the medium term, plan for the capitalisation of the National Mining Company to the tune of Shs 500 billion over five years.Regarding feasibility studies at Kibiro and Panyimur geothermal prospects, our recommendation is that the Government should provide Shs 196 billion for feasibility studies at Kibiro and Panyimur for the Financial Year 2024/2025.As a background, let me just give additional information that the target of the Government is to be able to generate 52,000 megawatts of electricity by 2040. We are now at 1,900. The lead time for developing either a hydro or geothermal plant takes not less than 10 years and, so, we must start now to avoid the country falling into an energy crisis.Mr Speaker, I now move to the sustainable energy development programme. We noted that there was underfunding of the Atomic Energy Regulation. As you may be aware, we are now moving into the use of our own Uranium to generate electricity. That is what we call “peaceful use of Uranium”. The committee recommends that Shs 15 billion be re-allocated to Atomic Energy Council from the following sources within the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development: Shs 10 billion from Project 1793 (Midstream Petroleum Infrastructure Development Project Phase II) and Shs 5 billion from Project 1611 (Petroleum Exploration and Promotion of Frontier Basins).Mr Speaker, last year we ring-fenced Shs 5 billion for Atomic Energy Council. This gave them a stride ahead to enable them to begin to pursue the use of Uranium for generating electricity. It is part of the package that will lead the Government to achieve 52,000MW in total.Mr Speaker, the International Atomic Agency – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable chairperson, I know you usually take long to finish –(Laughter)-  but be kind to your honourable colleagues.DR OTAALA:  Not on the other one, but it is also good to take long.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, read the recommendations.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, read the recommendations.DR OTAALA:  Let me move on to the next recommendation. Regarding Government’s preparedness to take over from UMEME in 2025, we are recommending that -[Dr Otaala]12567THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024i.  Government gives UEDCL access to financing through the Minutes of Finance, Planning and Economic Development by borrowing to develop the electricity infrastructure and raise financing for the Umeme buyout, which is due next year in March. ii.  The Auditor-General needs to quickly establish the exact amount required for the buyout of Umeme. On funding shortfall for land compensation for various energy sector projects , our recommendation is that Government provides Shs 180 billion to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for land compensation. Under funding of rural electrification projects Mr Speaker, each one of us appreciates this more than anything. The demand is enormous and the surplus demand is ever growing.  This is the right time for us to squarely address this issue before actually we face our electorates. The committee, therefore, recommends that – (a)  Shs 30 billion be reallocated allocated to rural electrification and connectivity projects from the following sources: (i) Shs 10 billion from liquefied petroleum gas. We feel that can hold on a little bit because now more people still do not appreciate cooking using liquefied gas. (ii) Shs 10 billion be re allocated from energy and minerals land acquisition and infrastructure studies project to rural electrification; and(iii) Shs 10 billion from National Petroleum Data Repository Infrastructure project under PAU.(b)  the Government provides additional Shs 335 billion from any other sector. At the risk of disagreeing with you, Mr Speaker, energy is the driver of socio-economic transformation. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Where are we disagreeing?  (Laughter)  DR OTAALA:  Mr Speaker, earlier on today, you said tourism was the engine. I am saying at the risk of contradicting what you said, I am saying energy is the primer and the driver of socio-economic transformation. We therefore need to allocate this. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think today Dr Otaala has come for me. DR OTAALA:  Not really, Mr Speaker. I will now move to -Sustainable development of petroleum resources programmeUnder the gas pipeline feasibility study, the committee recommends that Government provides Shs 9 billion to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the gas pipeline feasibility study. Regarding construction of offices in Tanga , where our oil will be delivered to, the committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 25 billion to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for the construction of the said offices. The Petroleum Authority of Uganda There is also a wage shortfall under the Petroleum Authority of Uganda. We recommend that an additional Shs 4.219 billion be provided to reinstate the wage ceiling back to what it is currently, which is Shs 28.7 billion. Recruitment of additional staff under Petroleum Authority of Uganda  This is in view of the workload now going on and nearing our production of our oil out of the ground by May 2025. The committee recommends that Government allocates an additional Shs 12.13 billion to enable Petroleum Authority of Uganda recruit additional staff. 12568SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSThe Petroleum Authority of Uganda also wants to do a real-time monitoring centre so that they know the amount of oil being pumped at any one time. The committee recommends that Government allocates additional Shs 50.7 billion to enable the Petroleum Authority of Uganda to develop the real time monitoring centre. On the disaster recovery solution, the committee recommends that the Government allocates an additional Shs 8.15 billion to enable power to develop the disaster recovery solution. Mr Speaker, those are the recommendations on the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. I now move to the Ministry of Water and Environment. Allow me also to premise my presentation by saying that water is life. There is a lot of contamination of the waters that we drink. If you go to developed countries, you find that you can drink water directly from a tap. We cannot do that here in Uganda. Our focus was drawn to the contamination going on in Lake Victoria and the need to establish a quality laboratory to assess whether we are drinking arsenic, lithium, or whatever chemicals that are entering Lake Victoria, which will have adverse health effects in our lives in the near future. The observations under this sector include:Mainstreaming climate change and implementation of the Climate Change Act, 2021.We recommend that the Government provides Shs 10.9 billion to the climate change department under the ministry to enable implementation of the Climate Change Act. On carbon trading mechanisms, our recommendations are that:(i) Government should implement a centralised platform for collecting and storing emissions data from regulated entities, ensuring accuracy, transparency, and accessibility of information. (ii) Government should provide training, technical assistance, and capacity-building programmes to empower regulators, market operators, and market participants with the skills and knowledge needed to navigate carbon markets effectively. (iii) Government should develop electronic trading platforms and market infrastructure to facilitate the buying, selling and trading of carbon credits. (iv) Government should allocate resources towards development of the carbon trading policy and regulations. The next is the need to support rural water project-source per village as directed by His Excellency the President. Our recommendation agrees with him that Government should provide Shs 50 billion to support improvement of water storage and network expansion countrywide. Strategic towns, water supply and sanitation projectKey towns where this project is being implemented include Kamuli Municipality, Kyenjojo - Katooke, Buikwe, Dokolo, Kyenjojo Town Council and Katooke Town Council. Our recommendation is that Governments should provide Shs 12 billion as counterpart financing. Mr Speaker, you talked about this earlier on required for this project. Failure to provide this funding will result into penalties on the side of Government. Inadequate budgetary allocation to Service Coverage Acceleration Project (SCAP 100- Umbrellas)[Dr Otaala]12569THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024This is a project where water is taken to key growth centres across the country.Our recommendation is that Government should provide Shs 25 billion for SCAP 100 -umbrellas, which has impact in provision of improved water supply services to urban poor population countrywide. Water for production project phase IIThat is mainly in Karamoja. Our recommendation is that the Government should provide Shs 40 billion for the water for production project Phase 11 in a phased manner over a three-year period, starting with Shs 15 billion in the next financial year. Inner Murchison Bay Clean-Up ProjectThis is the project that I alluded to that will establish a laboratory to study the quality of water. The committee recommends that Shs 5 billion be reallocated to Inner Murchison Bay Clean-up Project from Integrated Water Source Management and Development Project under the Ministry of Water and Environment.The Government should provide an additional Shs 17.5 billion for the Inner Murchison Bay Clean-up Project. I have already underscored the importance of establishing the right quality of water for us to drink as Kampalans, but also as the rest of the citizens. Water source measures implemented in priority catchment areas as named therein. The committee recommends that Shs 20 billion be provided for implementation of catchment management plans. Restoration of the environment through tree plantingMr Speaker, your colleague led us through this recently, and it is only perfect that we follow suit.  Also, it takes us a mile when seedlings are provided to each and every Member of Parliament to take to their constituency. 1. The committee recommends that Shs 2 billion, be reallocated to investing in forests and protected areas for climate-smart development projects from Project 1638 – Retooling of Ministry of Water and Environment. The reallocation funds will be used to provide tree seedlings. 2.  The Government should provide an additional Shs 13 billion for the restoration of the environment through tree planting. 3. In the future all MDAs should have a component of tree planting in their budgets.  National Water and Sewerage CorporationMr Speaker, the problems under National Water are basically due to the Government not meeting its obligation on counterpart funding for all the projects. Some of them are even completed, but the Government has not met its part of the bargain. This money is now attracting interest. I believe that with your earlier guidance, that is what should be done. The committee recommends as follows:1. The government provides additional Shs 95.4 billion to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation to clear outstanding financial obligations.  2. The government should provide Shs 47.5 billion for critical co-financing new obligations in the next financial year.  Prospective donor financing for projects under national water.The donors want to give us more money, but the Government is saying they are not ready. And we are saying, if someone is offering us, are we going to overshoot our ceiling on borrowing? These people are ready with the money. Therefore, we believe that in a situation where we have been trying to borrow elsewhere and we cannot get if someone is offering us money for a critical sector like water, we need to get that money. 12570SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTherefore, the committee recommends that the Government adjusts upwards the external financing ceiling for National Water and Sewerage Corporation donor-funded projects to Shs 596.9 billion to match the volume of work expected to be executed during the Financial Year 2024/2025 as per the approved work plan of the agency. Outstanding water bills in Government institutions  The government uses water from national water, various ministries and agencies, but payment is a problem. And the outstanding arrear is Shs 85.9 billion. We recommend that the Government should clear the outstanding arrears of 85.9 billion to National Water and Sewerage Corporation bills.  National Forestry AuthorityWe want to focus on conserving our forest reserves by resurveying them and planting boundary marks. Our committee recommends that the Government provides Shs 1.56 billion for re-surveying and demarcation of forest boundaries and Shs 3.1 billion for the protection of forests from encroachment.  Inadequate budget for the provision of tree seedlingsOur recommendation is that the Government should provide an additional Shs 5 billion to provide tree seedlings under NFA. National Environment Management Authority Wage bill for planned recruitments under the new NEMA-approved structure. By the way, this is one of the agencies that was recommended by Cabinet for – no, not for rationalisation, to be strengthened in terms of its staffing, but also to be able to do its mandate across the whole country. It is doing a good job, by the way.  The committee recommends that the Government allocates an additional Shs 5.93 billion to enable NEMA to recruit more staff as per the approved structure.  Reduction in wage allocation for NEMA   The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development reinstate NEMA’s wage back to Shs 12.6 billion. Procurement of an environmental information and licensing system.  The committee recommends that the Government provide Shs 10.65 billion to NEMA for procurement of the environmental information and licensing system.Insufficient funds for the purchase of an environmental monitoring fleetNEMA has just a few vehicles to take it across the whole country.  Our recommendation is that the Government provides Shs 10.74 billion to NEMA for the purchase of vehicles for environmental monitoring.  Establishment of NEMA regional officesOur recommendation is that the Government provides Shs 24 billion to strengthen and equip regional offices.Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA)There is also underfunding, and the underfunding is in the following areas; 1. Procurement of a supercomputer that requires Shs 10 billion. That supercomputer would enable them to more reliably predict weather and give more accurate information. They need Shs 10 billion for that. 2. Dissemination of weather forecast – they need Shs 1 billion.3. Revamping and operationalising the upper air station at Entebbe in order for aircraft to land safely – they need Shs Shs 0.25 billion.4. Revamping and operationalising the lower level wind alert system at Entebbe – they need Shs 1.8 billion.[Dr Otaala]12571THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 20245. Construction of two weather observing stations at Mbarara and Kisoro airfields – Shs 4.2 billion.6. Procurement of 100 rainfall stations and 76 automatic weather stations – Shs 2 billion.  7. Implementation of weather forecast systems for inland water lakes – Shs 2 billion.8. Establishment of two air pollution monitoring stations – Shs 1.55 billion.  In total, UNMA needs Shs 22.8 billion and our committee recommends that the Government should provide Shs 22.8 billion under UNMA for the unfunded priorities.  Mr Speaker, the committee is cognisant of the fact that natural resources and the environment are critical to achieving increased household incomes and improvement of the quality of life of the population. Indeed, NDP III’s objectives are based on the country’s comparative advantage that lies in its abundant natural resources which ought to be exploited while conserving the environment. However, the committee noted that during the presentation of the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2024/2025, MDAs under the Natural Resources and Environment Committee continue to attract very limited funding and huge budget cuts. Key areas that have been affected by the budget cuts yet require additional funding include rural electrification and the provision of tree seedlings, among others. Insufficient financing for MDAs under the committee has made it extremely difficult for them to attain their targets which are anchored in the NDP III.  Therefore, the Government should devote additional resources to these MDAs to enhance natural resources, the environment, climate change, land and water management, to sustainably increase household incomes and quality of life. Mr Speaker, in light of the above, it is the prayer of the committee, that this House adopts this report, and approves the budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 as proposed. I beg to move. (Applause)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Otaala, my very good friend. Well done. Honourable colleagues, as I open the debate, honourable chairperson, you know the practice. When you propose cuts in a certain sector or agency, yet that agency has items which were unfunded, the money you have cut from that agency is what you give to those unfunded priorities in case you recommend them. I have seen that you cut the money for the Petroleum Authority of Uganda, and put it under other agencies, and then you said that the Government should look for money to fund unfunded priorities under the Petroleum Authority of Uganda (PAU). That is irregular. You need to go back – unless you take lightly the unfunded priorities under PAU. Number two, I hope you remember that we are starting to produce oil. We need a very strong regulator. I hope you remember that the pipeline is moving and the kind of work the regulator is handling. We have international oil companies which are well funded. I hope you took that into consideration. Honourable colleagues, I would like to put a question to you to reflect on. We give money for water to districts. What does that money do in your districts? In mine, I do not know anything. I am just giving an example of mine; the water we get is under the National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC), under the umbrella. For the open sources, where they say that people should contribute, they have been taken over by these agencies. That is for you to think about. However, there are things we agreed upon, earlier, in the various debates we had. On utilities - I think we had resolved it - agencies budget money for utilities, but they do not pay. They know that if you cut off water in Mulago National Referral Hospital, there will 12572SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSbe a public outcry, and they will order NWSC to reconnect water, but we budget for that money and allocate it. They know that NWSC personnel cannot enter barracks to cut off  water. Who will clear them, with their gadgets to cut off water in the barracks? We agreed, several times here that finance ministry should deduct that money at source, and send it directly to NWSC and Umeme, so that that money is used to provide services upcountry. Committee chairperson, this is something you should bring out clearly because we have over-pronounced ourselves on it. We found out that agencies were under-budgeting for these utilities because they knew, for example, that no one would come and cut off Parliament. We need to look at it seriously. I felt that I should highlight these issues as we go on to debate. I will start with the Members who have not yet submitted anything; Hon. Mamawi, Hon. Ababiku, Doctor, Hon. Rauben Arinaitwe, Hon. Edakasi - but no members of the committee - the two doctors here, Hon. Sowedi, Hajj Siraji, and the Woman MP for Amudat. In fact, I am going to start with the Woman MP for Amudat, then I will come to you, honourable colleagues. 9.12MS BETTY CHELAIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Thank you, committee chairperson for the presentation you have just given us. Mr Speaker, my concern goes to the water for production, phase two. They have requested for Shs 40 billion for that work, but this one is targeting Karamoja. In Karamoja, when you get the Minister of Water and Environment and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, these people are like - I do not know whether they are co-wives. My request is for them to streamline their work. Let them tell us who is in charge of bringing water to this place. This is because I can cite that co-wives fight for things you do not know. Those ones who are single, sorry, you need to read books. Mr Speaker, for example, in a place called Nakonyen in Amudat, the Ministry of Water and Environment dug a water dam and later, the ministry for agriculture came in. So, we do not know who is who. I am not refusing the issue of the money; the money can go on ground, but let us know who is who in those departments. Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that is what programme-based budgeting was supposed to solve. I hope you harmonised - but co-wives no longer fight. I just wanted to put that straight. I went to a burial of a colleague in this Parliament, and Hon. Oboth was there. He introduced his two wives to the archbishop, and he looked for a tricky way of presenting it. He said, “Your Grace, you know that I am in a tricky situation. I am married to two wives and I want to introduce them to you. I love them to the extent that I cannot marry a third one.” (Laughter)  They are happy with each other. 9.15MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for a very good report. I have a big concern with the water for consumption in rural areas. The policy is clear; one source of clean water per village. I still have villages without clean source of water, and I have been in touch with the ministry. The ministry severally gave me feedback that they do not have money to ensure that the service providers do their work. This has lasted for almost one year. Mr Speaker, I propose that we prioritise those villages which still drink very dirty and contaminated water. Secondly, we still have urban centres like Adjumani, where water supply is inadequate. When we relate that to the guidelines and the standards expected, people take dirty water because of the nature of settlement. Therefore, I also pray that we prioritise urban centres where water is a big problem. [The Deputy Speaker]12573THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024I strongly support the Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA). We brought a report, which was approved here. Many –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Siraji. 9.17MR SIRAJI EZAMA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. My issue concerns environmental degradation. I support the report of the committee on revamping the environment. I come from a refugee-hosting district and our environment has been dilapidated. They cut all the trees down to use as fuel and in order to rehabilitate the environment, I wish that districts refugees should be given enough money. Another issue of power is also very critical. We have been appropriating money for rural electrification, but there are still areas in our constituencies where you cannot see electricity poles, yet year after year, money is being appropriated on this Floor of Parliament. We are going to be judged wrong when our people have not seen power because power is the real driver that will attract industries, investors and everything. 9.21DR NOAH MUSA (Independent, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the committee and the members for the report. My first concern is about the issue of the geothermal studies in Panyimur. I know that some of these studies normally take two or more years and I see a lot of resources have been allocated, in this single financial year we are planning for Shs 196 billion. My recommendation would be that we spread this out for two or three years, so that we give half of this money for studies and then we put the money in the areas which we need to use. In this country we produce enough power, but we are paying for dimmed power because we do not have the resources to evacuate this power. Instead of spreading these resources into studies the results we cannot get immediately, we should put them into developing the infrastructure to evacuate the power that we are producing right now. Under rural electrification, they have been able to identify a source of resources of about Shs 30 billion and they are proposing that Government should provide Shs 335 billion. I propose that this Shs 100 billion for geothermal studies be moved to that sector to see that all the constituencies are connected. As my colleague just said, in some constituents, there are areas that have not been surveyed, especially in Koboko North constituency which I represent. My area has not been surveyed for rural electrification. I want to thank the committee for this recommendation and strongly urge that there is need to look for more resources for rural electrification. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. What Hon. Noah is raising is very critical. I am very sure that the Committee on Budget, usually goes much deeper, but when we are allocating money, absorption should also be looked at.When you put money where it cannot be absorbed, then you are denying other critical items a resource. You are putting a redundant resource on the other side and denying critical items a resource. Absorbing nearly Shs 200 billion on a feasibility study, was that a proposal from the ministry to say, we need this for the feasibility study?  Hon. Rauben, Hon. Edakasi. 9.21MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE (Independent, Isingiro West County, Isingiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for the good report. I will start 12574SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSwith National Forestry Authority (NFA) on encroachment, where we are providing Shs 3.1 billion. Unless NFA harmonises with the Ministry of Lands, this encroachment might not stop.Of recent, I saw on TV the Minister of State for Lands, Hon. Sam Mayanja, accompanied by the MP of Bbaale, Hon. Tebandeke, ordering NFA staff to get out of Bbaale Central Forest Reserve in Kayunga. When I inquired, I found out that in that forest reserve in Bbaale, there are some land titles owned by one of our flagship projects in this country, Kira Motors and Kayunga sugar. I wonder how a minister could break the law by obstructing an authorised officer from carrying out their official duties. I also found that he was contravening Section 32 of the National Tree Planting Act and Section 89 of the National Tree Planting Act, the Land Act, Section 44, and even- THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we should have given you an opportunity so that you read for him the law -(Laughter) - conclude. He is an expert in forestry issues. MR RAUBEN ARINAITWE: The Constitution, Article 237(b) and his reasoning was that he does not see a forest, yet a forest and a forest reserve are different. A forest is a land with vegetation mostly comprised of trees. Forest reserve is land set aside for forestry development. I wondered and they told me that the minister is a lawyer moreover from Makerere University -(Laughter)-  Mr Speaker, if we do not harmonise with Ministry of Lands, most of the encroachment is caused by illegal land titles, which are created by the Ministry of Lands. I want the Minister of Environment, to assure us whether our forest in Kayunga, especially Bbaale, Wamale and Kiula forests are still safe.9.25MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start with the issue of water per village. I thank the committee for all the outstanding areas they provided on the report. However, there are still very large villages that even require two or three water sources. I appreciate the recommendation of the committee that we provide funding. The other is that there are traditional water sources that came from the Ministry of National Water. For instance, in Soroti, the water that was provided for Soroti from Awoja supplies all the way up to Kaberamaido. It is the same source now supplying the city that has grown, Kalaki and Kaberamaido and several town councils. This was done many years ago. The ministry should be thinking of pulling water from Lake Kyoga where the population has grown; like in Kaberamaido now, when the pipes work, that is when we have water, but when they break down anywhere along that road, there will be no water in the town council. The other is the issue of compensation for land, so that, we can have energy running, especially for those projects that we are funding over loans and we have already received the money on a loan. If we do not prioritise compensating the land, it means that we delay the projects and then our interest goes high, but also the projects get delayed. I have a project right now in Kaberamaido that was done by the World Bank, 8 kilometres, but because of just one compensation-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, Hon. Edakasi. MR EDAKASI: I would say that it would be important for us not to leave the money for compensation on unfunded priorities, especially where we are trying to fund the line based on a loan. Finally – (Member timed out.)  [Mr Arinaitwe]12575THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : On those projects, honourable member, we pronounced earlier on and it was a commitment brought here by the finance ministry: every loan comes with a certificate of confirmation of counterpart financing. Otherwise, this money we are charged interest on are undisbursed money and that is why we made it a key requirement. Where the finance ministry does not provide it, we shall appropriate it. We should make that one very clear so that these projects can get off the pipeline. Hon. Dr Bhoka?9.28DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi ): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to debate the report by the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. I have two observations and observation number one is that last year, we appropriated resources for extending electricity to districts, subcounties and communities that had not accessed energy. We are in quarter four of the financial year and moving to a new financial year, but nothing has happened. What is the fate of that project? A case in point is a district like Buvuma. Number two, we do appreciate that we have a lot of mineral potentials across all regions of this country. What is the ministry doing to see to it that capacity is built in these regions, in terms of both hardware and software, for the regions to be key stakeholders in the mineral sector? Lastly, we do and have just been experiencing the climate change effects recently. The departments for natural resources and environments in the district local governments play a key role in environmental conservation. Nonetheless, as Parliament, when we are appropriating, we seem not to be considering putting sufficient and necessary resources in terms of staff, equipment, logistics and budget to support the environmental officers. What is the ministry’s plan to strengthen the capacities of the district environmental and natural resources department? I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Thank you. Dr Ruyonga?9.30DR JOSEPH RUYONGA (NRM, Hoima West Division, Hoima City ): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank – (Break in recording.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : IT, please, the microphones are getting off all the time. Dr Ruyonga, you can use the microphone of the ministers; I have promoted you for now. Cross over here. I did not know that the front bench was that sweet. (Laughter)DR RUYONGA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this chance to come and speak from here – and for promoting me. I think I was put on the waiting list. You never know, I might also become a minister. (Laughter)  I appreciate Hon. Otaala for the good presentation; the committee has done a commendable job. I think that for each of us here, in our constituencies, people are complaining about power. So, allocating Shs 345 billion, I think, will be able to take us a long way. We have areas in our constituencies, like in Hoima City, where people have never seen an electric pole. We are here skilling the youth – they have electric sewing machines as well as carpentry and welding machines and so forth. I request that this one should be a priority. On national water, there are some cities that are growing very fast and Hoima City is one of them. The consumption of water is very high. Industries, schools and hotels are coming up and they are going to build a national stadium, but without water, they cannot become operational. I stand to be corrected: by law, you cannot sink a pit latrine and borehole in a city centre. So, I request that cities also be considered. I saw the Shs 25 billion for the urban areas. Does it include the new cities? What is happening in 12576SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSthese cities is that because of congestion and the sinking of boreholes and pit latrines, we are drinking contaminated water and, at the end of the day, we end up in hospitals. On hospitals, why can’t we make it a policy that for every project in the hospital, we design a water harvesting system? In one downpour, you can be able to collect about 500,000 litres. If you have about 50 10,000-litre tanks, you will get 500,000 litres of water. We can be able to save that money to build hospitals, pay salaries to the workers and even buy more drugs. So, as Parliament, let us try to see that for every new building, especially for institutions like hospitals, we make sure that they design a water harvesting system. We can be able to save this money that is going to National Water and Sewerage Corporation. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, National Water and Sewerage Corporation had designed a programme for new cities – a big project. I hope you will update us on that. 9.34MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora County North, Kasese):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two issues and one is on rural electrification. I agree with the committee, and I thank the committee chairperson and members for allocating Shs 335 billion to rural electrification. In addition, they are suggesting a reallocation of Shs 30 billion, for which I thank them. Mr Speaker, if we want to promote other government programmes, such as the PDM and small-scale industries in rural areas as well as the issues of environmental conservation, then, rural electrification is the answer. I am happy that the committee has earmarked this. Members should approve this so that our rural areas can have electricity. The next issue is about rural water supply. In Uganda, particularly in rural areas, we still have villages where people bathe in turns. A family will sit down and say “since this child bathed yesterday, today, the child will not bathe”. The ministry requires Shs 1.5 trillion annually and, here, we are allocating only Shs 50 billion. If it was possible, we would increase from Shs 50 billion to around Shs 100 billion so that our rural areas, particularly the voters, can appreciate the Government by having water near their homes. The women in rural areas –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I did not pick Hon. Gilbert –  I will see how it turns out. 9.36MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report.The committee, under water and environment, has been asking for Shs 2 billion to invest in forest protection and conservation. In Uganda, I have seen two things. On one side, you see people advocating for environmental protection, but on the other side, you will find other people also advocating for environmental destruction. I do not know why the ministry is asking for money. Mr Speaker, before some of us joined Parliament, we saw scenarios where ministers were named in connection with some forests. Now, we do not see this happening in this country. We need to know whether they lost interest or are not in Government. They need to tell us because as we give you money, we need to see your impact.We are aware that every year, we vote for money for these ministries. If you travel from my district Adjumani to Kampala, which is over 400 kilometres, you find roadblocks along the way, but forest products pass right through and reach Kampala. What is the problem? Why are you asking for conservation when you do not look at destruction? If you come from an area where there are forests, you have a big problem, especially when you are looking at controlling the effect [Dr Ruyonga]12577THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024of destruction. As a country, where are we going? If the Government has lost interest in environmental protection, they need to tell us. I want to be very clear and without fear that the people of Adjumani say that the Government must tell them that if they have lost interest, they should also allow them to go and carry out destruction of the environment, especially in Zoka Forest. How do you expect someone from Kampala to go and carry out destruction in my area, while I am watching and telling the Government that “please, come and protect us”, but you are not doing it?Mr Speaker – (Member timed out.)9.39MR PATRICK OCAN (UPC, Apac Municipality, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I appreciate the committee for this elaborate report. However, there are several urban centres that have emerged over the years in the country. We have got many municipalities and cities with a growing population. I am speaking particularly for Apac Municipality, which has about 70,000 people, where clean water access stands at 18 per cent.The law does not allow sinking of new boreholes within municipalities and cities, yet the National Water and Sewerage Corporation, which is the only option for clean water, lacks capacity to meet the growing demand for water. Mr Speaker, it is a priority that we should emphasise on to boost the capacity of National Water and Sewerage Corporation to supply urban centres. We are in dire need. I went to the National Water and Sewerage Corporation and the Ministry of Water and Environment and placed a request for water in the municipality, but up to now, we have not gotten any substantial report regarding the request.  Mr Speaker, Apac is one of the largest rural municipalities in the whole country. It is the biggest in size yet electricity coverage is only at 12 per cent. Sometime last year, when we appropriated money for rural electrification, I happened to meet the minister himself, who is also here today, and I was blessed that he gave me a list of all the districts with the gazetted new connections per district. There was a promise that I think around November, there was going to be implementation to that effect, but up to now, we have not seen this come to light. I propose that the Shs 335 billion –  (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just conclude.MR PATRICK OCAN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I propose that the Shs 335 billion allocated to rural electrification be brought to light. We should be given the allocation per district. How many new connections shall we have for Apac? How many new connections will there be for Nakapiripirit? How many new connections will be for Kabale, so that we can make a follow-up? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ocan, this information has been brought here several times. We required the minister to give the details and he tabled it here. So, please, always check the records. I do not want us to continue telling ministers to re-table them. It does not look good. That information was already given here.9.41MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the minister. Umeme is being planned for buyout. We know there are concessions which were given in other areas like WENRECO in West Nile. What is the plan for buying them out because that would assure the population of reliable power?Two, we have the Tree Fund, which is a statutory requirement under the National Forestry and Tree Planting Act, 2003. Minister of Water and Environment, why are we not operationalising it or what is the status? 12578SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSThree, the President signed a declaration to end deforestation by 2030. We know that a number of rural households in Uganda depend on wood fuel for their energy and effort has been made to remove part of their money which would have allowed them to get either Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LGP) stoves or other energy-saving stoves. I would like to appreciate how the committee intends to reconcile this contradiction. We want to conserve the environment, yet we are taking money which should have helped a number of households that depend on energy-saving stoves. How do you think your suggestion will help us achieve that?Lastly, I would like to know if this money proposed for rural electrification is part of the money we borrowed because under the Energy Access Scalar Project, we borrowed $600 million –  (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude, Hon. Oguzu Lee. I think it is $638 million.MR OGUZU: Exactly. That loan is supposed to help us address the challenges of rural electrification, which many honourable colleagues have alluded to, yet we are here asking for more money. I would like to know whether this is part of that money or this is additional, so that we can rationalise this budget, which is a key appeal from the finance ministry that we should be able to justify every spending we propose. I see there is waste in the ICT systems being proposed here –  (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. DP Whip, Hon. Peter Okot and then I go to the youth representative.9.44MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Omoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the ministry because many times, it carries out a lot of mineral surveys, but does very little in making the population know where the minerals have been discovered and where else they are still going to carry out surveys. A lot of things have been done. At times, you mean well in what you do, but because you do not reach out to the population, you are many times misunderstood. Mr Speaker, we from Acholi Subregion have complained a number of times that the biggest deposit of oil is on the other side of Nwoya, but a lot of development has taken place on this side of Bunyoro. We were bitter, but during an interface with the Board members of Uganda National Oil Company, one member explained that the reason development did not take place on the other side of Acholi is because the oil deposit is in the national park, and they could not disturb the ecosystem. However, they kept quiet with the information. If such vital information had gone out to the population, such bitterness would not have been there.So, it is important that as you move forward in carrying out a number of surveys and the discoveries that you get, reach out to the population, so that people get to know and you are not misunderstood. Mr Speaker, on water – (Member timed out)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Rugumayo, Hon. Okot and Hon. Nakut.9.46MR EDSON RUGUMAYO (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Uganda will only conserve her vegetation if we establish an alternative cheaper source of energy, other than biomass and electricity. And for that reason, I commend the committee for an elaborate report, but also for making an effort that this time they made sure Shs 15 billion is allocated to the Atomic Energy Council to develop nuclear energy in Uganda. Mr Speaker, sometimes the way my government operates perplexes me. Around 2020, just after [Mr Oguzu]12579THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024the Russia-Africa Summit, Uganda and Rwanda both signed Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with Russia to develop their nuclear energies, but you get surprised that today, there are several students of Rwanda in Russia, studying nuclear engineering, yet Uganda is just taking baby steps to develop this very grand project. I commend the committee for ensuring that this time they re-allocate from whatever sources available and provide money to the Atomic Energy Council to make sure this project commences. My other issue is about a policy and I would love your indulgence, maybe in future, this House could debate the policy that our government is taking towards establishing and managing the state interests in our minerals. We need to  - I know, Mr Speaker, you have been a member of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources for a long time and would indulge and use your expertise. I would love us to interview- (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude. MR RUGUMAYO: The sustainability plan of the Government establishing wholly-owned companies to manage its interests. We should think of a better approach that is more sustainable and involves other investors and also allows the government to benefit from mobilising expertise from other private investors. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Boniface Okot- 9.49MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join the rest of the Members to appreciate the committee for the elaborate report. One of the things I have learned from this Parliament is that the budgeting process is very difficult because you find a situation where a lot of allocations are made, but the fundamental question remains, where does the revenue come from? The sector that we are looking at now ideally provides a very good answer because the lifeline and one of the low-hanging fruits for us to get revenue for our budget is certainly our immense - (Member timed out.)- natural resources. I have noticed that every time this Parliament has requested to understand our mineral profile as a country and to know the revenue that we get from our minerals; we have hardly got detailed responses. I pray for a day when this House receives very transparently and in an accountable way what we have as our mineral profile for us to properly plan and budget for our country. Secondly, in the wake of climate change,  you will notice that our energy mix is largely dependent on hydropower; more than 80 per cent and in the wake of climate change, this presents a very big problem. I support the proposal that we must utilise our uranium to be able to provide nuclear power because just like Hon. Edson Rugumayo has mentioned, our country needs to put enough effort into ensuring that the energy mix is not solely dependent on hydropower that is unpredictable. Finally, this House regularly has two dilemmas. One is the coexistence of human beings and the wetlands  and secondly, the coexistence of human beings and the forests. I have noticed that this issue- (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Boniface Okot, I am sure now we are relying on you. The minister in charge of minerals is a youth; your colleague. I hope now for her, she can disclose. Committee chairperson, in the 10th Parliament, we passed a loan for a geo-aerial survey of Karamoja; € 20 million to Xcalibur Geophysics Spain, a Spanish company. It was an interesting loan because it was more or less interest-free. 12580SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSHonourable minister, since we passed a loan that did a survey and you completed the work, then you should also report the results of the survey from those who passed the loan that funded. I hope on such, which was publicly funded, after seeing the results we shall put out a transparent auction to say that in Uganda we did a survey and discovered that we have these minerals; we need bidders. Come out and bid; we have these deposits of gold. I hope it is not also secretly shared out and classified, yet you went here asking for money in public. I hope we are not allocating to a few who are lucky. Hon. Faith Nakut- and that one is very serious. We need a report on that issue. 9.54MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, first, I thank you and this House on the other matter of security for Karamoja. One thing the committee did not tell you is that to quench the other insecurity that started in 2018, it cost this government more than Shs 200 billion therefore Shs 27 billion compared to Shs 200 billion of stopping something is way too high. I thank you with all my heart on behalf of the people. On the matter of water, I have only two issues to raise. I commend the committee and the ministry for providing for water for production in this budget, the Shs 15 billion recommended by the committee, I appreciate. It is only my appeal that part of this money is used for desilting the existing dams rather than only creating new ones. If we create new dams with this money, we will do two to three dams only, but if we de-silt, we will do a lot more and save the water crisis. You will save our livestock farmers, the hurdle of moving to nearby districts to look for water during the dry season. That is my appeal on water for production, but I appreciate it. Secondly, we have some parishes, especially in my district and parts of Karamoja, where the water table is terrible so drilling a borehole cannot help the people completely, yet the districts are used to boreholes only. Those people do not have access to water for domestic use. Any attempt to bring water from a nearby source; piped water, exceeds the existing budget that the district local government receives. Therefore, they cannot be served –(Member timed out.) Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is my appeal that places that are water stress in Uganda, where boreholes cannot do much be mapped so that the ministry can take water to there so that the people can be served like other citizens. Finally, it has appeared as a habit; it is now common practice that the ministries do not budget for recurrent items; that have contractual obligations. I was not surprised to see in the report of the committee chairperson that there was money not budgeted for salaries. Salaries, whether it is a contractual obligation, you already know that people should be paid. There is no reason this cannot appear in the estimate. It cuts across all sectors that multi-year projects that are not complete – under this Ministry of Water and Environment, some projects have remained stagnant. We do halfway and abandon. Next year, we do new projects. I think that we should learn to complete and start new projects. I submit. 9.57MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. My colleague, earlier on, thanked you very much for agreeing to finance security in Karamoja. On my part, I thank the committee for prioritising the provision of resources for rural electrification. Tonight, I will retire a very happy man, that I see light at the end of the tunnel, and that the public facilities in my constituency, as well as [The Deputy Speaker]12581THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024the rural growth centres will have light come next financial year. The report recommends provision of resources to ensure that electricity is distributed across the country. To me, this shows that Parliament is in agreement with the Executive because the Executive in its prioritisation, identified electricity as one of the ATMs, which is the growth drivers. Electricity, as we all know, provides a critical component in the delivery of services. As such, as long as we recognise that and provide money for rural electrification, our growth opportunities will be enhanced. Therefore, I concur with the recommendations and call upon colleagues that we support this report in totality. Thank you. 9.59MR SANON BWIIRE (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro):  Mr Speaker, in February this year, we had a conference in Jinja where the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and Hon. Lt Gen. Kavuma presided over. He was the convener on behalf of Operation Wealth Creation. The issue was about the wetlands, whereby all Basoga who were growing rice were told to vacate the practice of growing rice. A directive was read to us verbatim and the President said that he was going to compensate people to vacate areas where they are growing rice. When the budget was read to us, I have not seen any single item that has been allocated for compensation of people. As we speak, 62 per cent of the rural population in Busoga, depends on rice growing. If they are not compensated, yet they are meant to live, how are they going to survive? Can the minister clarify on that? Secondly, in Kaliro District, they have already started sending away people from their land. I would like to interest the minister; people are coming in a pretext of vacating from wetlands, but I think they are land grabbers. You cannot tell a person that please vacate from this land. Rice cannot grow in an area where –(Member timed out.)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, conclude.MR BWIIRE: Mr Speaker, where  they grow maize, I do not think that place is a wetland. Note this very clearly, where they grow maize, that is not a wetland, but they are demarcating up to where they can grow maize. People are on the run; they cannot sleep, eat or bath. I do not know what we are going to do, to protect people and the environment. Can – (Member timed out.)   THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Okiror and then Hon. Dorcas Acen. 10.02MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): I sincerely thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. When you look around the House now, I am the only Member of Parliament from Teso who is here as a Backbencher. Particularly, I thank the committee for the effort that has been put in and the various cross-cutting recommendations that have been made. However, I have a very critical issue on the component of water. I come from Katakwi and it is on record that the north-eastern and northern part of this country is water-stressed. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  So, it has no water? MR OKIROR:  Absolutely. The issue is that we have very terrible –(Laughter)-  I am referring to “God supplied water”. There are two categories of water. There is this water for domestic use. I come from Usuk County in Katakwi where there are particular villages, like if you go to a village in the border area like Amedera village in Okule Parish, there are several villages even in  Ongongoja Subcounty, where you try to look for a place to drill a borehole and they tell you that there is a rock down, you cannot drill a borehole. I am happy with this recommendation that the ministry requires Shs 1.5 trillion, but suggests that at least there should be a supply of Shs 50 billion given to them. However, it is saying that 12582SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSthey are using several strategies. Mr Speaker, there is only one strategy, and not so many are deployed. Where they do not expect to drill a borehole, you should have an alternative strategy, but they abandoned the place. In Katakwi and that area, we do not have National Water and Sewerage Corporation. Over time, they have told us that they are going to do a feasibility study on Lake Bisina. Partly the insecurity that we have in Karamoja and the neighbouring areas, is due to lack of water; we are water-stressed. Our neighbours come looking for water. We want an update from the ministry on when they will be able to connect Katakwi to National Water and Sewerage Corporation. Thank you. 10.04MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for the very good report. While we think about the effects of climate change and we are crying about the issue of water, I think it would be good for us to also address our minds to the causes and mitigate the risk. I support the committee’s recommendation, especially on planting trees and also urging all the MDAs, to be able to include the component of tree planting in their subsequent plans. I think that is key. As a country, we know that recently we have gone through erratic weather patterns as a result of climate change even within the neighbouring countries. For example, South Sudan had to close schools for a period of about two weeks and learning was not happening. As a country, if we do not wake up to that reality, we also risk getting to a point where places like Karamoja, northern region where I come from and West Nile which has recently been experiencing very high temperatures, it will escalate if we do not plant more trees. Thank you. 10.06MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the chairman for the good work. When planning, it is paramount to allocate resources to areas that touch the lives of the community directly like rural electrification, water and other areas. I do not know what they are doing exactly-for example, the weather forecast department. When we were young, the weather forecast department used to be very active and used to have people with knowledge on weather. However, for the last 30 years, that department seems to be completely dead. Instead of allocating about Shs 22 billion to that sector, it is paramount that we reallocate those resources to rural electrification so that we see the impact of that money. I do not know what the committee chairperson is talking about, but it is not worth budgeting for the weather forecast department because it is not functional and it is not all that good to keep wasting Government resources. I would like to appreciate the Minister of Water and Environment on the issue of water. In my constituency, I see that Government is trying to drill deep wells in most of the trading centres within my area. I pray that when they are charging bills… (Member timed out)  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Gilbert, switch on. MR OLANYA:  When they are charging for water, it should be affordable to the local community. In other areas, National Water and Sewerage Corporation installed water taps, but the community failed to access the water supply because the bill was quite high. Finally, right now, people in cities, municipalities and big centres are paying for water and sewage services. However, in most homes, we do not have sewage services and the bills are being charged for the two, water and sewerage supply. The minister should explain because it is not good to keep on charging very highly and the consumers shall be wasting a lot of resources. Thank you.[Mr Okiror]12583THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 202410.09MS ROSE OBIGAH  (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I applaud the committee in the same vein. In the recent report we had as Committee on Presidential Affairs, it was reported that Lake Victoria now has maggots. The state has gone from bad to worse and that there is a lot of encroachment on our wetlands that should have sieved the Lake Victoria water. Therefore, saying that you are going to have a very good laboratory, honestly, will help Ugandans. I actually harvest 20,000 litres of water for my home use because of the maggots that are being preached in Lake Victoria. You have really made us proud if we are able to have this laboratory done. Honestly, tree planting should be the heartbeat of all that is in climate change. I want to thank you for having sent me to the Dubai conference. I have come with a total mind-set change –(Applause) - I am raising, this time, at least no less than 2.5 million seedlings. I have 30 workers. However, many members of Parliament are willing to plant at least 500 to 1,000 seedlings and maintain them to grow?Yet we are over 500 MPs, if we planted 1,000 seedlings per MP, it would be over 500,000 seedlings and we would have changed our environment. Global warming is no longer “global warming”. It is now “global boiling”. For Uganda, it should start with us and end with others.Lastly, the issue… (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Obigah Rose, the issue you have talked about of water in Lake Victoria being dirty, I have visited National Water and Sewerage Corporation, Katosi Plant, personally. The plant we have there has the capacity to treat any kind of water. When you go and look at what has been treated out of that water - it is really bad. However, that water is safe. Bill Gates, I think it is around four or five years ago got faeces in one of the projects he was doing, not sewage – processed, got a glass of water out of it and drank.  (Laughter)All these people you are seeing on the lake running around- you are drinking water from the lake or ocean, what do you think you are drinking? It is processed stuff – (Laughter)  - what is very important is that it passes the test of safety. I am sure now that we have laboratories and National Water is open. Honourable colleagues, if you want to visit Katosi or Ggaba, go there and see. Now we have enough technology as a country. I do not want people to be scared of what we are taking - Hon. Kabanda and then Hon. Tonny, we are concluding. 10.13MR DA VID KABANDA  (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for concluding with me – (Laughter)- I want to start with what Hon. Okiror submitted. In the 10th Parliament, I need to remember very well whether you were the Deputy Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources, but what I know is that –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER ; I was an influential member. MR KABANDA:  At that time before Rural Electrification Authority (REA) was merged with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, they had a programme called TBEA. This programme aimed at taking power to the people up to the subcounty level and it helped very many. Out of the subcounties that I have, it was only one, Lubimbiri that was left out. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It was a last mile connection by TBEA. MR KABANDA:  Honourable committee chairperson, if you managed, in the 10th Parliament to make sure that at least every parish of this country gets electricity, what mechanisms have they put in place apart from 12584SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSsaying, “We want Shs 1.5 trillion to supply water through several strategies?” Why can’t you come up with one strategy and say we want to give power to all villages in Uganda through either solar power system, rather than giving us boreholes because these boreholes… (Member timed out)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Switch on and conclude.MR KABANDA:  Thank you. The problem still comes back to us, the members of Parliament. We appropriate and give them money for repairing and rehabilitating these boreholes, but when you go to the villages, our voters start again crying to us that; “Our borehole is down, they have not repaired it.” You end up repairing the boreholes at your cost yet you appropriated money that goes to the district, but it does nothing. Also, I am requesting the minister to clarify on - I do not know whether it is a company called “Jica.” When they give us boreholes, we give them money for repairing them. However, again Jica goes down, connives with people in the district to put in place cards called “Suunda.”  You give a borehole to the locals, allocate money for rehabilitation, but JICA connives with people at the district and install a machine, so that for you to get water from that borehole, you have to pay. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Wow! That is a very unique case. We had the same problem in Isingiro in the 10th Parliament. When we went as a committee – Hon. Nambeshe, I think I was with you – we found a litre of water on a government project being sold at Shs 500. However, people were happy because earlier on, they were getting it at about Shs 2,000. Before we left, we agreed that National Water and Sewerage Corporation takes over – because there are projects which they give to committees at village level and the committees start determining their own rates. National Water and Sewerage Corporation took over and the problem was solved. Therefore, honourable minister, interest yourself in that programme, which Hon. Kabanda has talked about. 10.17MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me start by thanking the chairperson and his committee. The pattern of settlement in some areas, for example, in northern Uganda, is so sparse that it may take a long time for piped water to reach everybody in the villages. So, the construction of boreholes will still continue in some parts of the country. Now, my concern is that the population is growing and trading centres are expanding. Therefore, the policy of having one borehole per village is not tenable. We need to shift the policy to have at least two or three boreholes per village, to support the growing population. Also the motorisation of water and having mini-piped water within the villages or trading centres would help us to ease the problem of water for people to get clean and safe water. When there are good deep wells, water in the rural centres could be motorised using solar, which is cheaper, for them to get affordable water.Mr Speaker, that brings me to the issue of climate change. I would like that as the Government considers and encourages tree planting, more of fruit trees should also be included – trees like jacaranda, oranges, cashew nuts and avocado. Within a short time, you will be able to pick and sell the fruits and, at the same time, the trees will provide support to the environment in terms of fighting climate change. Otherwise, the campaign to plant more trees will be in vain. Even the boreholes, without these trees, will be affected by weather. Finally, on rural electrification, I have seen the call for more money to provide last mile connectivity, but Shs 8.9 billion is not provided. We are happy that the ministry has provided [Mr Kabanda]12585THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024connection to almost all districts, as per the loan, but they do not have money to connect to the last person. So, we are going to continue having the white elephant, where the lines are there, but we cannot connect it to the people. I am happy that the committee has recommended reallocation. So, I want to be sure if this reallocation of Shs 30 billion from the project of liquefied petroleum gas infrastructure intervention and Shs 10 billion from energy and mineral acquisition is available. That would go a long way in supporting the rural electrification sector. However, as stated, we should have money because we already have the loan acquired. Counterpart funding and money for last mile connectivity is very vital for this project to be successful. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  LoP? 10.20THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr John Baptist Nambeshe):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report on climate change. However, even what they have allocated is not, in my own assessment, enough. This is because mother planet Earth is in a serious fever. With the advent of reconditioned cars – and Africa, Uganda inclusive, has become a dumping ground for all manner of gadgets that emit greenhouse gases – we need to have massive planting of trees. So, the plan should be even bigger than what I see. Mr Speaker, Hon. Okiror comes from the plains of Teso Subregion, and he has expressed the concern of water stress, which is equally in mountainous areas such as Bududa. We can take the case of people who are on mountainous terrains, where you cannot drill boreholes and they have to walk for hours downhill, to collect water. The focus has shifted to gravity flow schemes. That is why in Bukedea, they are a beneficiary of a gravity flow scheme, courtesy of Mount Elgon. So, if serious focus would shift to gravity flow water, these plains would not be crying of water stress. I share your concern – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Nambeshe, I request you be merciful to our microphones. The way you punched them –(Laughter)  We might need to do weekly repairs. MR NAMBESHE:  Most obliged, Mr Speaker, Sir. I was perturbed by the Panyimur and the Kibiro – the allocation of Shs 196 billion for a study: that is broad daylight robbery. I would like to thank the doctor for quickly pointing at that. If we are working on austerity measures, these are some of the areas which should be nipped in the bud.Mr Speaker, you were speaking with disappointment and distress on the surveys. We approved those funds for Karamoja in the 10th Parliament. However, from the look of things in Uganda now, it is not possible to access some of these mineral sites. Even for this committee, I highly doubt whether they were even able to go to the Albertine Graben to see - it is another specialised hospital in Lubowa. (Laughter)This should be a serious concern for this House because these surveys have been done and the sites are available. Gold has now overtaken coffee as our biggest foreign exchange earner. However, we hold those that are transacting in it in suspicion because most of the details pertaining to this gold is not known – including evading taxes.  These are some of the concerns I share with you, Mr Speaker. I trust that with your intervention, things can change for the better. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable ministers, most of the statements were observations – because a policy statement is not like the other reports, where you have to go one by one. Just focus on issues to do with your budget. So, I will start with the minister for environment – or you can agree on whoever would want to come first. 12586SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTS10.26THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Sidronius Okaasai):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I wish to applaud the Floor for the concerns that they have raised. I would also like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for their observations on the budget. What the chairperson has highlighted in his submission is true. Those are areas which actually affect the last person - your voter. Minerals have got a very big potential to transform the economy of this country. However, for us to get the benefits of the mineral wealth that we have, we need to invest in them. Parliament passed a law where we want to institutionalise a company for minerals in this country. If we did that, which is similar to Uganda National Oil Company Limited (UNOC), then we would be able to get the best out of our mineral wealth. However, we need to focus on providing resources because for these minerals to get out of the ground, we need to invest and encourage the private sector to come in. So, we are looking for both public and private money to enable us to get what we have in the minerals. It is true the 10th Parliament appropriated money for the surveys and the last part of the country that was not surveyed initially has been covered now. However, it has not been covered to the extent that we shall be able to tell you the commercial values of the minerals that we have discovered.We still need to take surveyors to put a foot on the ground to tell us the commercial use of the minerals that have been discovered in this country. That is why you find, for example, when we identified areas for petroleum, now we are getting down to the ground to see whether we have commercially viable mineral discoveries or not.Information on minerals is actually available. Even on the survey which has been done currently, we have that information available in the cadastre. A cadastre is an ICT platform where we deposit that information. That information is the one enabling even the private sector to come to Uganda to prospect for minerals. So, for the benefit of the Members, that information is available however, if you want it, Mr Speaker, we can get the information and deposit it in the library.On the issue of minerals, I said a huge investment is required. I actually agree with you, Mr Speaker, that when we go to reallocation of the funds, we need resources in minerals. It would be better to reallocate within the mineral subsector to priority areas that we need to advise. I will discuss that one with the chairperson even when we get to the Budget Committee. On energy, it is true we need to invest in rural electrification. Many times I fear when Members come to talk about their need for electricity. I look at the resources that have been appropriated for rural electrification. While I try to share the little so we have equitably everywhere, we need additional resources. So the chairperson and the committee were spot on by asking for more resources for rural electrification. If we are to achieve this, Mr Speaker - I want to take you through the figures. When we say other sectors would actually transform our economy, it is not true, because it is the energy which is a driver of transformation and development. Mr Speaker, the global average consumption of electricity is about 3,204 kilowatts per capita. That is an average. When you look at developed economies, for example, UK is at 4,666 kilowatts per capita, Egypt is at 1,538 kilowatts per capita, South Africa is at 3,637 kilowatts, India is at 1,025 kilowatts. The average for Africa is 636 kilowatts, and Sub-Saharan Africa is at 550 kilowatts while Uganda is at a mere 215 and is prepared to be developed.12587THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024(i) African average is 636 kW(ii) Sub-Saharan Africa is at Mr Speaker, if we do not invest in energy, we lose the focus even on development. I would like to also point out that we are implementing an energy strategy for transition because we are careful on the environment. We have got to move out from fossil fuels, although we have petroleum, we should be moving out of it. We should move away from using biomass which is destroying our environment, including charcoal so we should be very careful. I was getting worried, but we shall discuss with the chairperson if we are pursuing a transition plan for energy. One of the safe sources of energy is liquid petroleum gas so there is need to be very careful about this. We shall also discuss moving money from liquid petroleum gas and converting it to electricity.I would, therefore, advocate for additional money to take the two fronts forward. We should be worrying more about our environment and climate change and whatever we are proposing as a ministry, we have that in mind. What I will be asking for is an affirmative action for the energy sector like we did for infrastructure, that is, the roads. This is what we need, if we are to achieve our target. Look at where we are; at a per capita of 215 v other countries which have developed. On petroleum, we need additional resources. We do not have a benefit of time. If we are to benefit from petroleum production, it must be now because within the energy sector, we are saying, “look, we have got to move out of fossil fuels”, but we need to get the money from petroleum and to do that, we need to invest heavily to speed up the extraction of fuel and put it into the market. If we delay –2025 - If we remove any money from the petroleum, especially the Petroleum Regulatory Authority, then we would be contradicting ourselves. Let us retain that money and reallocate it within the petroleum. What are our priorities? Can we put that money there for now to enable us to get the petrol out of the ground within the time that we have? There are questions that have been asked, but I will generally answer them. We are committed to providing electricity and this can only happen when you give me the funding that I require or else we shall be moving in circles, blaming me for not delivering and I will be blaming you for not supplying. The loan that you provided is spent. You all have allocations per district and when I look at what I have allocated - You all know it – when I tell you that for example Hon. Okiror’s district, I am giving you 20 Kilometres of extension, but he is demanding a lot more than that.Therefore, the resources that I am asking for are to increase the allocation that I have given you. Consider the project which you gave me, spent money. To give you what you desire I need additional resources. This time we are trying to equitably supply electricity to every district and therefore, it goes to every constituency.We have a plan. Initially, we wanted electricity to go to the district headquarters. I am comfortable except for one district headquarters. It is only Obongi that has not been given electricity at the district headquarters. It is the commitment of the ministry to provide electricity to Obongi District Headquarters.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, we cannot go into these details now. You see we are focusing on what is in the budget and you have given us sufficient answers.MR OKASAAI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is why I am only giving that as an indication of how we are going systematically down to the villages and parishes. The electricity we are planning is reaching the parishes in tandem with the Parish Development Model, but how we got there it is not going to be a parish headquarters because we do not have one. We shall have to go through schools, the water supply and the health centres. Once we go there then the parishes will have received electricity.12588SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSWhen we are considering electricity, we are considering the grid and also the solar energy mix as the committee chairperson identified. We are trying to provide and use all the potential sources of energy that we have as a country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable Minister of Water and Environment?10.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for your time and patience that we have burnt our candles for the nation.I would like to start by saying water is life and the environment is health. With that in mind, it means that this budgeting process touches all of us and once more, I thank you for the time you have put in.Mr Speaker, you alluded to the fact that funds are allocated to the various Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), yet one of my sectors, the National Water and Sewerage Corporation has outstanding bills that have not been paid.I would like to say, Mr Speaker, that when we are budgeting like this, I think the allocated funds to the different MDAs for paying the utilities should come in accountability. It should be of interest to note that if funds were allocated, for instance, for water, but the water bills were not paid, where did the money go? I leave that to the House to help us.Mr Speaker, Hon. Siraji alluded to the refugee hosting areas. I would like to let my colleagues know that there are a number of interventions coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister. As the Government, my ministry has partnered with the refugee hosting districts. We have incorporated the refugees in the tree planting which is going on because we have an open-door policy on refugees.Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Hon. Arinaitwe for the issue he raised. Unfortunately, you find government officials contradicting themselves. However, for information purposes, I would like to assure you that since then we have engaged ourselves with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. As you are aware, several illegal titles that were created are in the process of being cancelled and it takes a process which we set here.We have some incidences in Kayunga where we have been taken to court; Hon. Arinaitwe asked whether our forests are safe in Kayunga. We are in court defending what is in our mandate. In Bajjo, we have gone ahead to demarcate, put pillars and we are in the process of re-planting. As a ministry, we are trying to do what we can.However, we still have a challenge as a ministry. This House okayed the tree-fund which is supposed to help the ministry to do the tree planting and perhaps colleagues in this House could comfortably have seedlings to take to their constituencies. However, this has not yet been operationalised, but there is some engagement with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that we could use the budget we have within ourselves to cater for this. I thank the committee chairperson for having had a very passionate consideration and we have some allocation.Mr Speaker, Hon. Dr Didi also raised issues about our environmental officers who are in the district and are on the ground, but have little facilitation. I agree that we do not have much money that we have given them and we do not have many of them. You can imagine that we could have maybe one officer for the whole district. We have put them under Local Government. Supervising and coordinating them from the ministry is also becoming a challenge. If this House finds it fit, it would be prudent that they are brought back to the ministry for supervision and coordination for ease. As per now, they fall under the management and coordination in the function of the Local Government. That has created a gap between us.  [Mr Okasaai]12589THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 11 APRIL 2024It is quite important that we strengthen their capacity and increase their funding to enable them to do that. You may not be surprised to find that many times – sometimes, you find some of the officers turn a blind eye to what they are supposed to protect because of the situation they are operating in. Mr Speaker, Hon. Mamawi passionately talked about the Zoka Forest, among other issues. I would like to let you know, friends, that the Government is not just interested in protecting the environment, and particularly Zoka Forest, but Zoka Forest is in a contested area of Apaa, which is between Adjumani and Apaa. As a ministry, we have tried as directed by Cabinet to replant and protect it. However, the conflict therein, which is not yet solved, is a challenge. The honourable member should take note that we are doing everything possible to protect Zoka Forest. A report was already raised out of that.Hon. Oguzu raised an issue on how we can balance the issue of clean energy vis-a-vis our local people and the Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) or the clean energy we are promoting to our people. I would like to say that this is a global demand, because of the effects of climate change, each country has already spelled out national determined contributions, what a country can do to combat emissions. Globally, we are party and partners in this, and I am happy that we have also been going for these negotiations, that is globally demanded that each country puts in place measures that can calm down the emissions. Therefore, as a country, we know that many people might not be able to use the LPG. We, however, have other technologies that we are promoting, including the energy mix, which is catering for that. For instance, the energy saving stoves, which are in our villages, most of our people access them. We are also promoting solar cooking stoves which is also part of this. The LPG, because of the energy mix, we can have them in the urban centres. Recently, I sampled it in Kitgum Municipality with about 300 LPG and they are still demanding for it. We can keep on promoting it and then, we have separated interventions in different areas. It could not be the same. Otherwise, I appreciate the concerns. Mr Speaker, most of our colleagues have appreciated the effect of climate change and the need for the Government to step up interventions. My appeal is that we should provide more funds so that we can beef up this, because if we do not, we are heading for disaster. I thank the committee for analysing this and making all the possible provisions. Generally, many honourable colleagues have talked about the water sector, that its coverage is not enough in most areas. It is true, we cannot run away from that, but it is due to lack of funds. We should also appreciate, Mr Speaker, that as Government, we have tried to extend the water coverage across the country. We have also tried to restore the forest cover, but because of the funds and the human resource to use is limited. For instance, on the other side of the forest, we are trying to have more trained personnel so that they can respond. You also heard that NEMA who are supposed to be fire-fighters, they do not even have the means. The vehicles they have cannot enable them run up and down. I am happy that, that has been provided. Once it is approved, we are going to do our best. We have done what we can within the limited resources you have given us. However, we have recovered the forest cover, and then we have tried to extend the water coverage in the circumstances that the funding was still limited. The –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, we should conclude. I think we are done. MS BEACTRICE ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker . Honourable colleagues –  12590SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORTSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER : Do not reopen the matter. The Budget Committee will advise. Thank you.MS BEATRICE ANYWAR:  Mr Speaker, as guided, I would like to conclude by thanking you heartily for your time and patience, and the Members who have sat here because of this. (Applause)  I pray that you find it appropriate to pass this budget to enable the Government to do its part. For God and my Country. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, this is a very critical sector. Hon. Jonathan, I assign you to follow up on the issue of NEMA. Anything to do with the environment, if you do not conclude with NEMA, having the capacity to move around and regulate, we shall be just lamenting from sounds to fumes. I have my neighbour in Matugga, all the time they are burning tires. The locals were telling me that when they wake up in the morning, their mucus is black because the Chinese are burning tires. NEMA does not have the capacity in terms of running around all the time, yet complaints keep coming. Therefore, before we judge these people who are supposed to enforce the law, let us give them capacity. If we are to protect the environment, let us give them all the support they need.Honourable colleagues, I put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Environment and Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024/2025 be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The report is referred to the Budget Committee for further harmonisation, consolidation and management. Thank you, honourable colleagues. I am sorry for taking you this long, but I wanted you to debate. We would do one more, but the problem is that our Order Paper is dated; we might get into another day by the time we make the resolution. (Laughter)Honourable colleagues, I want to heartily thank you – this comfort of people wanting to have finished by 3.00 p.m. – we would rather remain, even if it is a few of us, and express these views and gather what is going on in the country. The resilience is really good. This should be happening during budgeting – we are going much deeper to get your views. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.(The House rose at 10.56 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 12 April 2024, at 10.00 a.m.); '.: Al'rft rl4?rrREPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE ANDINDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGETESTIMATES FOR THE MINISTRY OF TOURTSM, WILDLIFE ANDANTIQUITIES; AND THE MINISTRY OF TRADE, INDUSTRY ANDcooPERATMS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 20.24125.\{"t,PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAA@e*Ctn'{t-t'(Office of the Clerk to ParliameParliament of UgandaKAMPALA#f,April, 2o241M.......'.,,.LIST OF ABBREVIATIONSAIA- Appropriation in AidAU-African UnionCOMESA-Common Market for Eastern & Southern AfricaDCO-District Commercial OfficersEAC-East African CommunityElT-Electronic Funds TransferVFZA- Uganda Free zones AuthorityDP7Z - Export ProcessingZoneFY- Financial YearGDP-Gross Domestic ProductHtrIC- Human Wildlife ConflictsMDAs-Ministries, Departments & AgenciesMFPED - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic DevelopmentMTAC- Management Training and Advisory CentreMTEF-Medium Term Expenditure FrameworkMTIC- Ministry of Trade, Industry and CooperativesMTWA - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and AntiquitiesNBFP - National Budget Framework PaperNDP-National Development PlanNITA-U-National Information Technolory Authority -UgandaNPA - National Planning AuthorityPBO - Parliamentary Budget OfficePlAP-Programme Implementation Action PlanPFMA-hrblic Finance Management ActPPE-Personal Protective EquipmentSDGs - Sustainable Development GoalsUDC- Uganda Development CorporationUEPB - Uganda Export Promotions BoardUHTTI - Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training InstituteUNBS - Uganda National Bureau of StandardsUNRA - Uganda National Roads AuthorityUTB - Uganda Tourism BoardUWA - Uganda Wildlife AuthorityUWEC - Uganda Wildlife Conservation Education CentreUWRTI - Uganda Wildtife Research and TrainingInstitute,1- nirMthts6'wD2Itr)'1.O INTRODUCTIONDuring the proceedings of the House held on Friday, 15 March 2024, theMinisters of: Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; and Trade, Industry andCooperatives, among other Ministers tabled Ministerial Policy Statements forthe Financial Year 2024125 for the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife andAntiquities; and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives in accordancewith Rule 146(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the lltt Parliament of theRepublic of Uganda. The Rt. Hon. Speaker referred the Ministerial PolicyStatements so tabled, to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry forscrutiny in accordance with Rule 146(3) of the Rules of Procedure.The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry scrutinized the PolicyStatements for Financial Year 2024/25 in accordance with Article 155(a) ofthe Constitution of the Republic of Uganda (as amended); and pursuant toSection I2(Il of the hrblic Finance Management Act, 2015; and Rule 148(21of the Rules of Procedure of the 11tt' Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.2.O METHODOLOGYIn considering the Ministerial Policy Statements for the Ministry of Tourism,Wildlife and Antiquities; and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperativesfor the Financial Year 2024125, the Committee-(a) held meetings with the relevant Ministers and accounting officers ofGovernment Agencies under the Tourism Development Programme;and the Trade and Industry to consider Ministerial Policy Statementsof the following votes:(i) Vote O22 Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities (MTWA);(ii) Vote 1 17 UgandaTourism Board'l^ :); Irk*-\ --3C^sl&J>L+J=+(iii) Vote 015 Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (MTIC);(iv) Vote 154 Uganda National Bureau of standards (UNBS);(v) Vote 306 Uganda Export Promotions Board (UEPB);Besides the Ministry of Tourism and its Agencies, the Committee also heldmeetings with other MDAs that have been allocated funding within theTourism Development Programme namely;(i)(ii)Vote L22-Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)Vote O2O-Ministry of ICT and National Guidance (UBC)The Committee also considered Policy Statements for FY 2024 /25 for tlrefollowing Government Agencies that do not have vote status-(i) Uganda Wildtife Authority (UWA);(ii) Uganda Wildlife Education Center (UWEC);(iii) Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UHTTI), Jinja;(iv) Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute (UWRTI), Kasese;(v) Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority (UWRSA);(vi) Uganda Development Corporation (UDC); and(vii) Management Training and Advisory Centre (MTAC).(b) reviewed the following documents:(i) The Ministerial Poticy Statement for the Ministry of Tourism,Wildlife and Antiquities for the Financial Year 2O2a 125;(ii) The Ministerial Policy Statement for the Ministry of Trade,Industry and Cooperatives for the Financial Y 2a I 25;I(,- (^\2D\(-tIl'L-I4WFt'#iJr.-E!*(iii) The Approved National Budget Framework Paper and MediumTerm Expenditure Framework for the Financial Years 2024/25-2028 I 2e;(iv) The Report of the Budget Committee on the National BudgetFramework Paper for Financial Years 2O2a/25-2O28/29;(") The Annual Draft Budget Estimates for the Financial Year2024/25; and(vi) Recommendations of the Sectoral Committees on the AnnualBudget Estimates for the Financial Year 2023/24.3.O THE TOURISM DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMEThe Tourism Development Prograrnme comprises of the following votes; andaffiliate Government Agencies / Institutions :(a) Vote O22 Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities;(b) Vote 1 17 Uganda Tourism Board (UTB);(c) Uganda Wildtife Authority (UWA);(d) Uganda Wildlife Education Centre (UWEC);(e) Uganda Wildlife Research and Training Institute (UWRTI), Kasese; and(0 Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UHTTI), Jinja.3.1 Compliance of the Ministry of Tourism, lllildlife and Antiquitieswith the Gender and Equity.hrrsuant to Section 13(1 1)(e)(i) of the hrblic Finance Management Act, 2015,The provision requires the Minister responsible for Finance to consult withthe Equal Opportunities Commission, to issue a Certificate; (i) certifying thatthe budget is gender and equity responsive; and (ii) specifying the measurestaken to equalize opportunities for men, women, persons with disabitities andother maginalised groups. According to theficate issued by the Ministryil-'5vv&6Ad,Wof Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Tourism,Wildlife and Antiquities was rated to have scored 72.8o/o compared in theFinancial Year 2023 I 24.3.2 Tablel: Ovenriew of the Semi-Annual Budget Performance of theTourism Development Programme, FY 2o123124.Source: Semi-Annual Eudget perfotmonce FY 2023/24The Tourism Development Programme had a revised approved budget of UGX25I.82 billion out of which, UGX 126.9 billion was released by the first halfof the FY 2023/24 of which UGX 104.92 billion was spent. This registered arelease performance of 5lo/o, budget performance of 42.2oh and absorption of82.7o/o.3.3 Half Year Non Tax Revenue (NTRI Performance FV 2o.23124MTUIA AgenciesAll Government Agencies under the Tourism Development Programme,including: Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA), Uganda Wildlife EducationCentre (UWEC), Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UHTTI),Uganda Wildlife Research Training Institute (UWRTI), Uganda Museums andUganda Tourism Board (UTB) are expected to generate Non Ta:< Revenue(NTR) as per Part V of the Pr.rblic FinanceManagqment Act, 2015. TheC^tt'fO'6\ftExpenditure Approved Revised Released bvSpentbyohBudqeto/oBudgetVoReleasesCategory Budget Budget End Dec End DecReleased Spent SpentWage 8.262 8.262 4.118 3.265 49.8Oo/o 39.50% 79.30%Non-Wage L92.497 t93.72 98.7t2 86.79 5L.30o/o 45.L0% 87.90%GoU Devt 47.94 49.74 23.97L4.87t s0.00% 3L.OO% 62.00%Arrears 0.099 0.099 0.099 0100.00% 0.00% O.OOo/oTotal Budget 248.799 25t.82 126.9104.925 5L.OO% 42.20% 82.70%vJ\,4,<,;,Ministry and Agencies collected Non-Tax Revenues Eunounting to UGX 91.78billion against a consolidated annual target of UGX L18.77 billion in FY2023124 performing at 77o/o. Notable performance was registered by UWA,UWEC and the Uganda Museum that collected UGX 86.84 billion, UGX 3.54billion and UGX O.32 billion against the projections of UGX 111.40 billion,UGX 4.48 billion and UGX 0.18 billion respectively.This exceptional performance resulted from increased number of visitationsto the national parks, UWEC and the Uganda Museum. All other entitiessurpassed their targets during the period under review with exception ofUHTTI and UTB as presented in table below.Table 2: Non-Tax revenue (NTRI performance as at Half-year 2O23l2a#MDA TargetFY 2o2sl24(UGx btllionfActual as at Half-year(6 monthsf (UGXbitrionfperformance againstannual target1UWA 111.40 86.84 78o/o2UWEC 4.48 3.54 79o/o3UHTTI 2.22 o.77 35o/o4UWRTI 0.50 o.27 54o/o5MTWA-Museums0.18 o.32 179o/o6UTB 0.33 o.04 l3o/oGrand Totd 1L8.77 91.74 77o/o3.4 Assessment of the Tourism Development Programme KeyPerformance Indicators for the First Half fY 2023 l2+.Assessment of 2l Key Programme Performance lndicators revealed that theProgramme performed well in most of the indicator. Exceptional performancewas registered under the Accommodation Capacity, Domestic Tourism and. li iAMJ ("evN?W"m *_*elsJ+Direct Employment in the Tourism Value Chain. On the contrary, increasedHuman Wildlife conflicts was registered.Whereas the number of inbound visitor arrivals increased, the Programmedid not attract the target Number of International Tourist arrivals fromtargeted markets which include USA, Europe and China. See table beloutTable 3: Key Performance Indicators for the First Half Fy 2o123124.Indicator NDP IIITargetFY2O23l24ActualBy EndDec20.23Percentage Perf.No. of inbound visitor arrivals 1,877,22O 1,274,210680/oContribution of Tourism to GDP (%) 8.10% 6.700/o 83o/oAnnual Foreign exchange earnings (USD - Bn) t.774 1.025 58o/oContribution of tourism to total employment (%) 8.00o/o 5.7Oo/o 7lo/oNumber of people directly employed along the tourismvalue chain320,000 610,806 19lo/oIncidences of human Wildlife Conflicts (number) 1,160 7,795 672o/oNumber of visitors to Museums and cultural sites L67,82r 131,508 78o/oNumber of visitors to National Parks and UWEC 933,138 l,oo7,o78lOSo/oPopulation of Antelopes 168,184 175,590 lO4o/oPopulation of Elephants 7,588 7,975 105o/oPopulation of Lions 6s2 493 760/oPopulation of Mountain Gorillas 586 459 78o/oLevel of Compliance to Tourism Service Standards (Yoenterprises)55% 50.400/o 92o/oAccommodation Capacity (No. of rooms) t77,278 350,550 198o/oLength of stay/ overnights in all types ofaccommodation9.1 7.6 84o/oProportion of leisure to total tourists (%) 28o/o t5.700/o 560/oAverage annual Hotel occupancy rate (room occupancyrate, o/ol52.3Oo/o s0.30% 960/oAverage Inbound tourism revenues per tourist (USD) 1,431 1,418 99o/oNumber of direct flight routes to Europe and Asia t4 7 5Oo/oNumber of International Tourist arrivals from U.S.,& China28t,760 67,252 24o/oNo. of domestic visitors to Uganda's key touristdestinations895,289 1,1 15,169125o/oLevel of tourist satisfaction (o/o) 77o/o 79o/o IO3o/o*^-)$Vtr. r&[u-tr-stuI3.5 Half Year Budget Performance by Vote for tY 20123124 andProposed Budget Allocations for FY 2o124125.3.5.1Vote O22 Ministry of Tourism, lllildlife and Antiquities (MTUIA|Table 4: MTWA Semi Annual Budget Performance FY 2o123124 IUGX,BillionfSource.' Semi Annual Budget Performance Repoft FY 2O2O/24MTWA had a revised approved budget of UGX 223.37 billion out of whichUGX 1 10.98 billion (50.1%) was released and UGX 98.22 billion (44.3o/olwas spent by the end of the first half of FY 2023124.3.5.2Half Year Physical Performance of MTWA and its subventions FY20.23124.strategic objective 1: Promote domestic and inbound tourism(l) 3 local tourism awards, festivals and events supported (Ekkula awards,Miss Tourism 2023 and Uganda Travel Writers Competition 2023).(2) 4 Tourism Outreach programs with students (Tertiary, Secondary andPrimary) conducted in Kampala and Bunyoro Sub Region across 10schools(- )Tr'(nulvI\k9vahExpenditure Approved Revised ReleaeedbySpentbyo/oBudgeto/oBudgeto/oReleasesCategory Budget Budget End DecEnd DecReleased Spent SpentWage 3.797 3.797 1.898 L.265 50.00% 33.30% 66.600/oNon-trIage 169.833 169.83 85.066 82.O84 50.10% 48.300/o 96.50%GoU Derrt 47.84 49.64 23.92 t4.87L 50.00% 3l.IOYI 62.2Oo/oArrears o.o99 o.o99 o.o99 o 100.oo% o.oo% o.oo%TotalBudget22t.S6a 22s.s7 110.98 98.22 50.10% 44.3Oo/o 88.50%th/(3) Explore Bunyoro campaign carried out to showcase different touristattractions including Murchison falls national park, Bwendero farm,Itohya Forest, the escarpment, Bunyoro kingdom, Mparo tombs, amongothers.(4) Commenced branding of Entebbe International Airport with the"Explore Uganda, The Pearl of Africa" destination brand.(5) Maintained destination Uganda's presence and rolled out thedestination brand in three markets at two international platforms andthree expos i.e. Uganda Trade Hub launch in Serbia and the UgandaNorth American Association (UNAA) in USA, Magical Kenya, SwahiliInternational Tourism Expo, United States Tour Operators AssociationAnnual Conference and Market place in Los Angeles - USA; and IBTMBarcelona, Spain; and Uganda - Kenya Coast Tourism Conference andExcursions among others.(6) The tourism film "Rwenzori, Source of Life" secured third position at theprestigious film festival, International Committee of Tourism FilmFestivals (CIFFT) 2023, in Valencia, Spain and a gold award at the NewYork Film Festival.(7) Provided national branding for the 19th Summit of Non-AlignedMovement (NAM) Heads of State and Government and Group 77 andChina Summit in partnership with stakehotders.,' , \ll I \(--' -,eN- h*IsI10&It.,b.fl:l+(8) Hosted 20 Turkish Travel Agents to a tourism experience of the South-Western region of Uganda in partnership with Embassy of Uganda inTurkey.(9) Produced tourism content in partnership with China-based Ugandaninfluencer, Rose Mary Adikini, and South African content creator andinfluencer, Mihlali Ndamase, for increased destination visibility.(10) Jointly promoted domestic events such as Kagulu Hilt climb, KaramojaFestival, Empango celebrations, the Theluji festival in the Rwenzoriregion, the Rolex Festival, Kyakaigo Motor Rally in Fort Portal, GhettoKids Tour of Western Uganda, Elgon Marathon, Pian Upe activationwith Miss Uganda, Miss Tourism and Miss Deaf beauty pageants inpartnership with tourism stakeholders(ll) Produced and disseminated 2,000 promotional giveaways for brandvisibility(12) lO2rSOZ tourists visiting Museums and cultural heritage sites(13) Guided conservation education tours conducted for 4991572 visitors atUWEC against a target of 490,000.(14) 234,249 tourists were hosted in PAs against a target of 335,906.f,tr1(.6nn lw' \rP-,&11ryllir.J*HKStrategic Objective 2: Develop, conseree and diversify tourismproducts(l) Commenced construction works at the Ekyomugabe site of the KitagataHot Springs in Sheema District with fencing and levelling of parkinggrounds. Construction of the visitor information centre and craft shopsis on-going.(2) Kagulu Hill in Buyende District enhanced with climbing steps andsafet5l railings to enhance the visitor experience.(3) Construction of a modern pier at the Source of the Nile in Jinja City isongoing.(4) Osukuru and Tororo Rock Site: Designs and layout concepts developedand finalised.(5) Concluded nationwide religious tourism audit for religious tourismproduct development and promotion.(6) Invasive species management continued in PAs with 1,255ha (againstan annual target of 1295 ha) of invasive species cleared.(7) A total of 259.5km (against annual target of 3O5kms) of PA boundarymaintained{-__ffI,I(nvv|fr"(+ ffi,F(8) A total of 19ha (against annual target of 165 ha) of the degraded areain MENP restored.(9) lO2.7km of electric fence maintained in Protected Areas against a targetof 10lkms.(10) 15km of trails network was maintained and a cumulative distance ofedsting 50m rail network on top of falls were repaired in MurchisonFalls National Park.(ll) A total of 385 individual animals (60 species) maintained (against targetof 350 animals) at UWEC.(12) 15 cultural heritage sites of Wedelai, Patiko, Nyero, Kapir, Mukongoro,Dolwe, Barlonyo, Mugaba Palace, Kakoro, Mugaba, Fort Thurston, BigoByamugretr1rr, Kibiro, Mutanda caves and Komuge maintained andopened to tourists.(13) Uganda's interest secured during the UNESCO World HeritageCommittee, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (gth to 25tt September) where theKasubi site was removed the Danger List of World Heritage Sites.(14) Tourism Destination Plan for the North Western Tourism DevelopmentArea finalised to guidethe deve t of tourism in the sub-region.& ",TrtC$v13Wvl/;-turfl+Strategic Objective 3: Develop a pool of skilled personnel along thetourism value chain and ensure decent working conditions(l) Trained 171 tourist guides in national senrice standards for site guidesand owners(2) 103 new students enrolled at UWRTI.(3) Graduated 115 students at UWRTI.(4) 2 research studies undertaken on community based biodiversityconservation interventions and eradication of D.cineia from QENP.(5) 118 new students enrolled at UHTTI. Examinations were administeredto the 754 students at the Institute (200 from ILO & 554 continuingstudents)(6) 855 rangers passed out at Kaweweta basic mititary training school.Strategic objective 3: Enhance regulation, coordination andmanagement of the tourism(1) Capacity building of 50 youth in bird guiding and nature interpretationundertaken(2) 457 wildlife import/export permit applications processed(3) 158 Tour and travel companies registered, 23 inspected and IOTlicensed4,4,.:CNM"f,HNl/"t-- "-'""(4) 45 Tour Guides registered, 4 inspected and licensed(5) 57 accommodation facilities registered, 48 inspected, 4 licensed(6) Graded 34 accommodation facilities in Kampala, Wakiso, Mbale, FortPortal, Masaka and Mbarara.(7) Capacity building of 50 youth in bird guiding and nature interpretationundertaken(8) 212 wildlife import/export permit apptications processedTable 5: Budget allocation to MTWA and its Subventions FY 2O24l2SSource: MTWA Presentation on the MPS FYThe overall budget allocation for MTWA and its subventions is proposed toreduce by UGX 43.825 billion from UGX 221.568 billion that was approvedin FY 2023124 to UGX 174.743 billion that is for the FY 2024 125.(revlr,.,{iCategory Vote/MDABudgetCategotyApproved FY20.2'3124Proposed2024125Approved 2O2gl24vs Proposed20/24125MTIIIA Wage 3.797 3.611 -0.186Recurrent 22.758 22.445 -0.313Development 35.64 35.64 0Grants to LGs 0 1.9 1.9DomesticArrears 0.099 0 -0.099UIIIA Subventions r24.36 81.433 -42.927IIWEC Subventions 9.498 9.498 0Development t2.2 7 -5.2UHTTI Subventions 7.73L 7.73L 0UWRTI Subventions 5.485 5.485 0TOTAL 22t.5,6A 174.743 -46.A25+w15,h&It-Table 6: Five Year NTR Trend and Projection of MTUIA Agencies#MDAActual2OLelL9Actud2OL9l20Actud2O2Ol2tActual2O2Ll22Actual2022l2sProJcctloa2C241251UWA L24.3L3 100.399 28.809 82.t45 L28.975 182.3602UWEC 4.033 3.311 r.5762.r83 3.844 6.5753UHTTI 1.596 1.13 10.968 r.709 2.r39 5.7004UWRTI 0.31 10.328 0.500 0.328 0.308 0.5505MTWA-Museums o.L77 o.r72 o.o22 0.071 0.332 o.3426UTB 0.000 0.340 0.330 0.043 0.331 0.301Grand Total 130.430 105.681 32.2o,5 46.479135.929 195.828From the above table, NTR from the Tourism Development Program is on anupward trajectory indicating a steady recovery from the pandemic period. Forthe FY 2024/25, the program has projected to collect UGX 195.828 billion innon-tax revenue. Significant NTR collections will be realized from UWA,UWEC and UHTTI.3.5.3Key Planned Activities for Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife andAntiquities; and its Agencies FV 2O24l2SMinistry of Tourism, lllildlife and Antiquities (UGX 61.696 Billionf(1) MTWA wage for 166 staff, pensions and gratuity (UGX 4.7 billion)(2) Rent for office space and utilities (UGX 2.4 billion).(3) International tourism and heritage policy engagements conducted andmembership subscriptions made for uNWTo, uNESCo, IUGS, CITES,CMS, AEWAbillion).and AWHF (African World Heri ). (ucx 0.483(^wt15.d.+'.--- t.,t&k$l/,"z((4) Conditional grant transfers to 176 Local Governments includingdistricts, cities and municipalities to cover product identification,profiling and development, Tourism Enterprise Support, TourismPromotion and Marketing, Tourism Regulation and Quality Assurance.(UGX 1.9 billion)(5) 14 cultural heritage sites of Wedelai, Partiko, Nyero, Kapir, Mukongoro,Dolwe, Barlonyo, Mugaba Palace, Kakoro, Mugaba, Fort Thurston, BigoByamuryenyi, Kibiro, Mutanda caves and Komuge maintained andopened to tourists.(UGX O.576 billion)(6) 25 sites titled, Kibiro Dossier submitted to UNESCO, site digital models,marketing documentaries, videos and brochures developed and acomprehensive masterplan and sites management plans for BigoByamugenyr and related sites completed (ucx 0.869 billion)(7) IOOo/o of wildlife import/export permit applications processed withinone week of application. Wildlife conservation interventions andpartnerships coordinated through hosting at least 15 engagements.Uganda's interests effectively secured in global conservation agendathrough participation in engagements.(uGx 0.38 billion)(8) All Conservation Areas and Wildtife Use Right holders inspected (UGXO.22O billion)(9) Collections curated and maintenance of services to regional museums,Content creation/Research, Archiving and Audio visual curation,()NvI "r?'+t7lL'- .::-t's)+publicity and outreach programs on Museums conducted (UGX 0.43billion)(10) Policy formulation supported through finalisation of Sites andMonuments guidelines and regulations, revised Uganda Wildlife Policy,Uganda Wildlife (Farming and Ranching) Regulations, Uganda Wildlife(Pets or Ornaments) Regulations and Tourism Act (UGX O.754 bitlion)(11) Five (5) Museums and cultural heritage sites developed for culturaltourism and heritage conservation promotion namely KikorongoEquator monument (in Kasese District); Karamoja Museum andhandcraft center (in Moroto district); Napak open Air MuseumInterpretation centre; L2 mass graves rehabilitated in Luweero,Kabalega-Mwanga site in Dokolo district. Culturat heritage sitesbranded and marketed with production and dissemination of adocumentary and 10,000 brochures. Rock Art file completed andsubmitted to UNESCO for enlisting as world heritage site: Research andarchaeological excavations undertaken on all sites (UGX 8.2 billion)(12) 4,000 metres of metallic climbing ladders installed on Rwenzori Kitembeand Central circuit trails; 2 Helipads established; 4 Rwenzori touristcamps developed with cold proof accommodation facilities each withcapacity of 32 pax; The camps are John Matte, Bujuku, Kitandara andGuyeoman; 200 radio calls, 200 satellite phones acquired and fixed;and Capacity building conducted for stakeholders and trainingcommunity associations including 500 and guides (UGX 11.3\- , ;l7i18)a;i."tP=)YQFf0s{\(n{-billion).k(13) The Source of the Nile Modern Pier completed with facilities includinga suspended glass bridge, sanitary facilities, restaurant facilities,reception area, observatory deck and the docking decks among others,5 mega billboards for Source of the Nile installed and 1 km access roadfrom Clive road to the Source of the Nile constructed (UGX 12.77billion).(14) Mitigating Human-Wildlife Conflict Project: 2 ranger outpostsestablished and boundary pillars installed (UGX 1.133 billion)(15) Support senvices including Information and CommunicationTechnologr; Leadership and Management including the Board; HumanResources management; Apprenticeship program; Hlv /AIDSmainstreaming; Climate mitigation services; Audit and Risk; Financeand Accounting; Planning and Budgeting; Procurement and DisposalServices. (UGX 11.64 billion)(16) Retooling of Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities: 1 PABXTelephone Solution (HQs and Museums) procured and installed,Assorted ICT Equipment (20 Computers and accessories, Hearry DutyDocument Management Scanners and (5) Printers), SecurityInfrastructure (2 Walk through machines and 1 baggage scanner);officeequipment delivered to support activities to develop and conservetourism and heritage resources for enhancement of Uganda as acompetitive and preferred tourist destination. TourismManagement system (TIMS) operationalized (ucx 2.2 bilrior,L;\W19Ow\iTY+{tUganda lllildlife Authority (UGX 81.433 billionf(l) Staff costs including Wage, NSSF, Gratuity for 3,200 UWA staff (UGX62 billion).(2) Fixed Operating Expenses for 22 wildlife protected areas including: rent(UGX 0.8 billion); Utilities (UGX 2 billion); Office Cleaning; canteen andguest house expenses and Uniforms and protective gear (UGX 2 billion);Insurance (UGX 4.6 billion); Maintenance of Ferry, launches, boats,Machinery, buildings, vehicles, equipment; and food ration for rangers(3) A total of 462,564 tourists hosted in Wildlife Protected Areas.(4) Non-Ta< Revenue of UGX 182.36 billion collected by UWA.Uganda Wildlife Consenration Education Centre (UGX 16.498 billionf(l) Staff costs including Wage, NSSF, Gratuity for UWEC staff. (UGX 3.4billion)(2) 400 individual animals (constituting 60 species) maintained, fed,rehabilitated and veterinary services provided at UWEC. (UGX 4.3billion)(3) Wildlife animal rescue (at least 9Oo/o of alt20\'..= ..t ,-l ,'l6t'*ft--\ff.sanimal rescue cases)4H+t(4) A total of 450,000 visitors hosted at UWEC and taken through wildtifeconservation education and awareness. General guided conservationeducation tours conducted for 360,000 learners and 9O,OOO othervisitors at UWEC.(5) Seven (7) school Conservation Education programs conducted intertiary institutions and schools.(6) UWEC brand as a Conservation Education Centre and preferredtourism destination boosted(7) An assessment conducted for the development requirements for theBotanical gardens. (UGX 0.3 billion)(8) The Mbale satellite Conservation Education Centre developed (UGX 6billion)(9) Nonta< Revenue (ucx 6.52s bitlion) collected by uwEC.Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UGX ?.7}Lbillionf(1) Staff costs including Wage, NSSF, Gratuity for 1 1 1 UHTTI staff. (UGX4.3 billion)(2) Training assessment conducted for 1,000 students at UHTTI. -tJC,tua&$2LVi-, -.*At!,€+\(3) A total of 200 new students enrolled.(4) Conduct at least one academic trip/tour per program per semester andlOOo/o of students internally placed for practical training. 15thGraduation held at UHTTI.(5) Continuous Assessment for at least 95o/o of the students conducted,and deployed for internship. lOOo/o of all students on Ind.ustrial Trainingsupervised and supported.(6) Students'welfare managed: Procure food stuffs and feed an average of1,000 students per semester, Pay monthly rent for students'hostels,Facilitate students' extracurricular activities and competitions; provideuniforms to 200 new students. (UGX L.Z3 billion)(7) Administrative, and operational affairs efficiently managed: MaintainInstitute vehicles, Motor Cycle and generator, ICT equipment andsystems; Pay utility Bill (water, electricity and others); Security Costs;Provide staff meals; hrblic Relations, Marketing and sales.(8) Non Ta:< Revenue (ucx 5.7 biflion) coflected at UHTTI.Uganda lllildlife Research and Training Institute (UGX S.4gS billionf(l) Staff costs including Wage, NSSF, pratuity for UWRTI staff. (UGX 1.2billion). I(fr;*(^rw,lI22Ws FLaff+(2) A total of 24O students enrolled and trained at Uganda WildtifeResearch Training Institute (UWRTI) including l2O new students(UGx 0.7 billion).(3) Field Practical Training, 2 field attachment and internships conductedfor 24O students in different Wildlife -based orgarrizations.(4) Rea[-Life Projects and 4 Fietd based studies conducted for 24OStudents.(5) Training materials and tools provided including 10 snake tongs, 30sweeping net, 10 fabricated bodies, L2O overall uniform, 50 tallycounters, 10 timers, 5 GPS, 10 external backups, 1 carton of absorbentpapers, 2 advanced dissection kits (UGX 0.1 billion)(6) The National Wildlife Research Agenda implemented to guide wildlifeconservation and policy in Uganda: Maintena.nce of the e-wildtiferesearch journal and web hosting; dissemination of Research findings;Continuous research on invasive species; 4 Research advisorycommittee meetings; publication of Research profile; Implementation ofresearch protot5pes; UWRTI Annual Wildlife Research Symposium;Registration of intellectual property and patent rights; 4 Trainings of 30academic and research staff on research skitts. (UGX 0.7 biltion)(7) Develop and implement a poticy for quality assurance for teaching,learning and research; Develop the strategic plan (2o2s 9l30l;-tI .<rl ?(- l -t'(^uW&v23iI 26-*r-IDevelopment of risk management policy; Maintenance of ICTequipment (UGX 0.45 billion)(8) Specialized trainings for instructors in: Museum & Ta<idermyTechniques (1); Herbarium Curation & Techniques (1); GIS and RemoteSensing for wildlife tourism (l).(9) Enhance media engagement and graduation held.(10) Maintain Institute vehicles, Motor Cycle and generator, ICT equipmentand systems; Pay utility Bill (water, electricity and others); SecurityCosts; Provide staff meals; Governing Council. (UGX l.l2 billion)(11) Non Tar Revenue (ucx 0.49s bilrion) collected at UWRTI.3.5.4Vote 117: Uganda Tourism Board (UTBITable 7: urB semi Annual Budget performance Fy 2o2g t24 lvcxBillionfSource.. Semi-Anna al BudgetPerfonnance FY 2023/24The approved budget for UTB for FY 2023/24 was UGX 22.33 billion. By theend of the first half of Fy 2023/24, UGf15.53n (56.8%) had been,\Cn*'rt- t'-.'.'.-r'lj '-ttr;'\al,ff.,ffiExpenditure Approved Revised Released bySpent bvo/o Budget 7o Budset 7o ReleasesCategory Budget Budget End Dec End DecReleased Spent SpentWage 4.47 4.47 2.22 2.OO 49.700/o 44.800/o 90.lOo/oNon-Wage 22.77 22.77 13.26 4.33 58.30% t9.ooo/o 32.600/oGoU 0.10 0.10 0.05 0.oo 50.00% o.ooo/o o.ooo/oGoU Total 27.33 27.33 15.53 6.3356.80% 23.LOo/o 40.7Oo/o'Lt,N24ti*+-q+released and UGX 6.33 biltion (23.1o/ol spent. Absorption of the fundsreleased was rated at 4O.7Oo/o. The low absorption of funds during the halfyear was attributed to delayed recruitment of staff and the postponement ofthe Pearl of Africa Tourism Expo (POATE).urB Half Year Physical Performance during the Fy 20i23.124.UTB registered the following key achievements during the first half of the Fy2023/24: -(1) Grading of 34 accommodation facilities in Kampala, Wakiso, Mbale,Fort Portal, Masaka and Mbarara.(21 Registered 158 tour and travel companies; and 23 inspected and 107licensed;(3) Registered 57 accommodation facitities; 48 inspected and 4 licensed;(41 Trained 171 tourist guides in national service standards for site guidesand owners;(5) Trained District Tourism Officers in the West Nile Region inenforcement of Tourism Laws and Regulations and minimum tourismstandards in collaboration with GtZ lJganda.(6) Established skilling partnerships with CBI for enforcement of tourismsustainability practices across the value chain.(71 Showcased Destination Uganda's tourism offerings at 8 internationalplatforms i.e. U Hub Launch Serbia, Uganda and the25$\toCt^r>\AaAE-ItNorth American Association, usA, Magical Kenya, usroA 2023,IBTMworld 2023 Spain, 62"d ICCA congress, Thailand; Uganda-MombasaTourism Conference.(8) The Tourism Film 'Rwenzori, Source of Life' secured a gold award at theprestige New York Film Festival and third position at the Wortd's BestTourism Film Award, Valencia, Spain 2023;(9) Hosted 20 Turkish Travel Agents and 28 Kenyan travel trade partnerson familiarizatson tours in the South Western and North Westernregions of Uganda to enhance awareness of these offerings in targetedmarkets in partnership with Embassy of uganda in Turkey; andUganda Consulate in Mombasa respectivety.(10) Branded the Uganda Consulate in Arusha, Tarrzania, and commencedbranding of Entebbe International Airport with the 'Exptore Uganda,the Pearl of Africa' destination brand.(11) Produced and implemented Explore Bunyoro campaign in collaborationwith Tourism stakeholders.(l2l Established two new flight routes to Lagos, Nigeria and Mumbai, Indiain partnership with Uganda Airlines.(13) Jointly promoted domestic events such as Rwenzori Thelugi festival,Kagulu Hill, Karamoja Festival, Empango Cetebrations, the RolexFestival, Miss Tourism and Miss Deaf Beaut5r ts in partnershipwith tourism stakeholders6nv26ijs&Llrt^"lw( 14) Provided national branding for the 19th Summit of Non AlignedMovement (NAM) Heads of State and Government; and Group TZ and,China Summit in partnership with Ministry of Foreign Affairs, CivilAviation Authority and MTN Uganda.(15) Produced tourism content in partnership with China-based Ugandainfluencer, Mary Adikini, and South African content creator andinfluencer, Mihlali Ndamase, for increased destination visibility.(16) commemorated world Tourism Day in Hoima District;(l7l Produced and disseminated 2,500 promotional giveaways for brandvisibility during the 55ttr African Airlines Association General Assembly,Non Aligned Movement (NAM) and Group 77 and China Summits andTourism Expos i.e. IBTM Barcelona, ICCA Congress Thailand, USTOA2023 and Magical Kenya.(18) Placed bid for Uganda to host the International Society for MusicEducation Congress (ISME) in 2028 with an estimated impact of USD1.5 million.(19) Hosted nine incentive buyers from United Kingdom, the USA and Asia-Pacific for familiarization tour of Uganda's key tourism products andhospitality establishment to enhance awareness of theseofferings intargeted incentive markets.(t;-- .:'.)p-i -'rGw^ffi+Lk27.c\\t+(2Ol Trained 25 professional and trade associations in MICE promotion andincentive travel in destination MICE promotion and bid preparation inpartnership with society of Association Executive (AFSAE).(2ll Hosted international media fam tips in partnership with Zabrek and,UWA; UK, Australia, and USA, leading to a number of internationalpublications in major publications, radios and TV including NationalGeographic Travel Magazine, Travel Africa Magazine, the Sunday AgePublication in Australia, BBC TV, National Geo TV and At Jazeera. Thisincreased the destination visibility.(22l. Ran the Explore Uganda video on the flights of: Uganda Airlines andBrussels Airline.(23) Participated in the scouting of the Hidden Uganda Film Project that willfacilitate more content development.(24l. commenced refurbishment of the sipi Falts Tourism site;(25) Conducted nationwide religious tourism audit for religious tourismproduct development and promotion.(26l. Conducted midterm review of the UTB Strategic plan for improvedperformance management and alignment to NDP 3 midterm reviewrecommendations.(271 Recruited and oriented 16 new staff to support execution of UTBmandate.'.]-.:;-; I'Y Cilr\a-+&tJ-,k28 (I(28l. Produced and disseminated tourism articles across mainstream mediachannels on key tourism products.Table 8: Vote l17z UTB Proposed Budget Allocation and Variancebetween Approved and proposed Budget (UGX Billions)BudsetF'tt 20/23124Approved Spent by EndFtt 2024125Budget Variance BetrrecnCategoryBudget (UGXbillionlDec (UGXbtllionfEstlnates(UGX billionlApprovcd andProposed BudgetLUGX billionlWage 4.47 2.OO 4.76 0.30Non-Wage 22.77 4.33 22.77 0.00GoU Devt 0.10 0.00 0.10 o.o0GoU Total 27.33 6.33 27.63 o.30The budget for Uganda Tourism Board is proposed to increase by UGX O.3Obillion. This is on account of the proposed increment in Wage to cater for theplanned recruitment five staff in UTB.urB Planned Activities for w 2o24l2s (ucx 22.622 billionf(l) Brand campaigns produced and advertised in the domestic, regionaland international markets (UGX 1.55 bittion)(2) Brand select tourism sites and touch points i.e. Uganda's MissionsAbroad, Entebbe International Airport, Brand Monument, etc. (UGXO.7 18 billion)(3) 9tt' Edition of Pearl of Africa Tourism Expo held (UGX 3 billion)('i 'i \LwMLk,$^00- 29\(4) Branded promotional materials produced and distributed tostakeholders (UGX 0.435 billion)(5) Cluster support provided through marketing promotions andadvertisement at special National events i.e. World Tourism Day, Worldwildlife D"y, International Museum d"y, Mart5rrs D"y, etc.(UGX o.l4gbillion)(6) International media houses engaged in production of positive mediastories for improved destination image (ucx 1.2 biflion)(7) Destination Uganda represented at 4 expos in the African andEuropean markets (UGX 0.932 biflion)(8) Uganda's position as a MICE destination strengthened through: Bidsprepared in partnership with stakeholders; MICE advertisingundertaken in international media; Incentive buyer inspection visitscoordinated; Capacity building programmes undertaken for privatesector associations and public bodies in business tourism promotion(UGx 0.758 billion)(9) Product Development and Investment Promotion undertaken: Citytourism product profiled for Arua, Gulu and Mbale; Product signageestablished for Uganda Mart5rr's Trait and cultural sites across thecountry; Tourism Business Service Directories developed (UGX 0.631ih&billion)L*CnYv'fl-30(10) Tourism research undertaken: Collaborative tourism research studiesfor medical and education tourism product segments; and Census ofaccommodation facilities conducted for Kampala, Entebbe and Jinja(UGx 0.6 billion)(11) Registration, Inspection and Licensing of tourism businessesundertaken: 2OO accommodation facilities inspected; 2OO tour andtravel operators inspected; 100 restaurants registered and inspected;Other 2OO tourism businesses licensed and licensed (UGX 0.698 billion)(12) Skilling along the tourism value chain conducted: 2OO tourism actorstrained in tourism regulatory framework and service standards; Jointenforcement of tourism regulations conducted (UGX O.3S billion)(13) Accommodation facilities classified and graded: 100 accommodationfacilities inventoried; 100 accommodation facilities graded (UGX O.glSbillion)(14) Tourism investment projects developed and promoted (UGX 0.223billion)(15) Fixed administration costs paid i.e. rent,maintenance, etc. (UGX 4.086 billion)NSSF, assett-- -\'if' 'A,.d..is&L^C,wu 31(16) Wage (UGx 4.762 billion)(17) ICT and office equipment (UGX 0.1 billion)(18) Support services including Information and Communication Technologr;Leadership and Management including the Board; Human Resourcesmanagement; Audit and Risk; Finance and Accounting; Planning andBudgeting; Procurement and Disposal Services4.O OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS4.1 Ministry of Tourism, wildlife and Antiquities (MTtlIAf .The Committee observed that Section 83 of the Wildlife Act, 2olg requires UWAto establish the Wildlife Compensation Scheme which consists a 2%o lerr5r onnonta>r revenue collections made by UWA to settle human wildlife conflictcompensation claims. The Committee has since established that the 2o/o lettycannot adequately cater for compensations for the increasing number of humanwildlife conflicts including destruction of property and lives.Recommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquitiesshould, by a statutory instrument, amend the UWA (Compensation Scheme)Regulations,2022 No.65, to increase the percentage levy from 2o/o to at least Syoon nontax revenues collected by UWA for purposes of strengthening the WildlifeCompensation Scheme. This is because the circumst€rnces of human-witdlifeconflicts have increased and harmony of the same is paramount. ,:_ r..,(1 i.rW6$"rfi-ih(32at's*)f4.2 Uganda lllildlife Authority flruA]The Committee established that the NDPIII targets to keep Human Wild lifeconflict within 1 , 160 incidences cumulatively. However, the conflicts haveinstead increased by 796 incidences from 6,999 reported in FY 2022/23 toZ,TgSincidences reported by the end of the first half of FY 2023 /24. Increased Humanwildlife conflict has had a negative impact on conservation education andawareness since it breeds unfriendty relationship between Wildlife and Humanbeings.The Committee was informed by UWA of USD 1.34 million off budget support thatUWA is to receive from the World Bank to procure an electric fence that is to beerected on an 8Okm long boundar5r distance as mechanism of reducing human-wildlife conflict around Murchison Falls National Park. The Committee wasfurther informed by UWA of an additional budget allocation of UGX 5.04 billionfrom Government of Uganda to procure an electric fence to fence off some partsof Murchison Falls National Park that could potentially breed human-wildlifeconflicts.The Committee observed that whereas electric fencing required colossal sums ofmoney and other resources, this should not lead to budget duplication.The Committee observed that there were variations in budget lines fromallocations made by Government of Uganda, and the off budget support from theWorld Bank, both targeting addressing human-witdlife conflict in the s€une area;Murchison Falls National park.The Committee further observed that the off budget of USD 1.34 million from the \'Tworld Bank was not included in the Ministerial poliStatement of MTWA for Fyl/-\,Qttri-'-$-i$4r-2024/25 as external finance for partiamentary appropriation. This poses risks ofpotential duplication of budgets.(af Raise budget ceiling for IIItrAThe Committee observed that over time UWA has demonstrated capacity to collectits projected nontax revenue. In the FY 2022123, uwA collected ucx. t28.g75billion and made a surplus of UGX.34 biltion currently saved on its Wildlife Fund. Inthe FY 2024125, UWA has been allocated UGX 81.433 billion as proposed in thisMinisterial Policy Statement, yet it has projected to collect UGX. 182.A6 billion inaddition to NTR surplus saved from FY 2022/23. with ucx g1.43 billion, uwAwill only cover wage-related expenses for its 3,200 staff. uwA spends ucx 62.2billion on wage, gratuity, NSSF and medical. The outstanding balance wilt coverpart of the fixed operating costs.The Committee notes that whereas UWA spends at Source in line with the UgandaWildlife Act 20 19, its expenditure must be within the appropriated ceiling.Recommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that MTWA should incorporate all expected externalfinance in its annual budget proposals for consideration and final appropriationby Parliament.The Committee further recommends that Government should raise budget ceilingfor UWA to UGX 167 -36 billion to allow for utitization of funds internally generatedby UWA and access to funds already saved as surplus on the Wildtife Fund.| -----(-- ,.'i!'rNtuCtn*P34tr\l-1.(-'II(bl Redistribution of rrwA Non Tax Revenue surplusThe Committee observed that UWA nonta>< revenue realized. UGX 34 bi[ionsurplus which was saved on the Wildlife Fund. The Committee is cognizant of thefact that Tourism Development Agencies have a symbiotic relationship with UWAand there is need to support other entities within the Program that have criticalunfunded priorities.Recommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that UGX 15 billion should be internally reallocatedfrom Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) to cater for unfunded priorities at UWEC,UWRTI and urB as per the Reallocation Tabte 9 & lo.4.3 Uganda lllildlife Education Centre (tItlIECfThe Committee noted that UWEC presented a proposal to increase thepopulation of lions in National Game Parks through breeding. Consequenfly, abudgetary proposal of UGx 7 billion for In-situ Lion breeding with a target outputof only 16 lions to be bred in a year was presented. The Committee howeverobserved that whereas the proposal is quite innovative, the proposed return-on-investment was low.The Committee further noted that both UWA and UWEC submitted budgets forEnvironmental Impact Assessment (EIA) that cost ucx 2go million and ucx500 million respectively, for lion breeding. The Committee however observedthat it was UWEC alone that had the mandate of breeding lions within thevicinities managed by UWA... ,"7-iIhkGmfl-35Recommendations of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that UWEC should review its feasibility study andconduct benchmarks on the return-on-investment on in-situ lion breeding andpresent it for reconsideration during the next budget cycle for FY 2O2S/26.Additionally, the Committee recommends that UWEC and UWA shoutdharmonise their mandates regarding lion breeding in National game parks andprotected areas.4-4 uganda Hotel and Tourism Training rnstitute (uHHTIfThe Committee obserwed that UHTTI made a total collection of UGX 2.g billion asnonta< revenue and retained the same on its Revenue Account. The Committeefurther obserued that UHTTI has been spending funds at source contrary toSection 29 of the Pr.rblic Finance Management Act, 2015. During the meeting ofthe Committee held on Thursday, 21 March 2024, the Principal UHTTI informedthe Committee that UHTTI received authorization from the permanent Secretar5rand Secretary to the Treasury PSST) to spend funds at source. He tabted a letterdated 13th Janu ary 2023 authored by the Permanent Secre tary, MTWA requestingthe PSST for supplementar5r budget of UGX 3.8 biltion for Emergency Relocationof UHTTI to rented premises; and Establishment of Students' Accommodationfacilities. The Committee however, did not receive evidence of an instrument fromthe PSST authorizing the principal UHTTI to spend at source.The committee observed that UHTTI illegalty held funds on its Revenue Accountbeyond one financial year without remitting the same to the Consotidated Fund.The Committee was pri'uy to information that Management abused its authorityby allowing insider borrowing of money that culminatedof uGX 472 milhon for the period July 2o22to ivtarctr zoGrn&in a total loanportfoliol' .-r\\l-'- j 't l'e\&k&3624..--rwr+The Committee further observed that UHTTI was engaged in insider borrowingwithout authorization from any lawful authority. It is trait law that the mandateof borrowing and lending money is a preserve of Government. Articte 159 of the1995 Constitution provides that the power to borrow and lend money is for theGovernment. Further Section 36 of the PFM A,2015 provides for authority to raiseloans. It specifically provides that-"Subject to the Constitution, the authoitg to raise bg loan and. to rssue guaranteesfor and on behalf of Gouerrtment shall uest solelg in the Mini.ster and. no otherperson, publb corporation, state enterpri.se or local council shall, without the priorapproual of the Minbter, rai.se ang loan, issue anA guarantee or take ang otheraction uhich maA in ang uaA either d.trecttg or indirectlg result in a tiabilitg beingincured by the Gouernment.,,Further, the Committee is alive to the provisions of Section 45 of the pFMA, 201Swhich require an accounting officer to control the regularity and proper use ofmoney appropriated to a vote. These provisions of the law are instructive andcoached in specific terms for the adherence and implementation by an accountingofficer. This larity and attitude in the management of public funds isunderwhelming. Therefore, the Committee finds the insider borrowing withinUHTTI, absurd.Recommendations of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that UHTTI should desist from the absurd, irregularand illegal act of insider borrowing as it contravenes Articte lS9 of theConstitution of the Republic of Uganda (as amended); Section 36 and 45 of thePFMA,2015..,'i I.lG,t'-37b/-rhsThe Committee further recommends that the Directorate of Pr.rblic Prosecutionsshould investigate the actions of the Board of Directors, and the principat ofUHTTI for actions of insider borrowing from the Revenue Account of the Institute.4.5 uganda ulildlife Research rraining Institute [mrRTIlThe Committee observed that the performance of UWRTI since its inceptionin terms of publication of witdlife research findings fell below average; andneither does it depict the name of the Institute nor justify the annualbudgetary allocations made. The Committee was informed by the Ministerthat the poor performance of UWRTI could be attributed to low staffing levelsin the Research Division of UWRTI due to limited budget altocation to theInstitute. The Committee was further informed that the Institute has gonethrough restructuring exercise by the Ministry of R.rblic service which willposition it as a Center of Excettence in Wildlife Research. However, this wiltrequire additional UGX.8 billion to run the Research Institute.Recommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that Government should provide additional UGX.gbillion to implement the newly approved structure of the Uganda Wildlife ResearchInstitute in addition to other capital expenditure of the Institute.4.6 Uganda Tourism Board (UTBIThe Committee observed that NDPIII targeted to cumulatively attract 21L,T6OInternational Tourist arrivals from u.s., Europe & china but only 67,2s2arrivalswere registered by the end of the first half of Fy 2023/24. The committee wasinformed that U.S., Europe & China were key target source for leisure tourist whostay longer than business tourists. However, statistics show that internationalarrivals from the aforementioned areas have contin to drop. The committeet't:-.*38I\.;1k\was informed that UTB requires UGX.4 billion to engage international andnational media houses in production of positive tourism stories to improvedestination perception in light of recent controversies that shade the destinationin a bad light. However, this has remained unfunded.Recommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that Government should provide UGX.4 billion toUTB to engage international and national media houses in production of positivemedia stories for improved destination image.5.O Proposed Reallocations under the Tourism Development programme forthe FY 2o124125.The Committee identified UGX 22.40,5 billion from within the TourismDevelopment Programme and reallocated it to key priority areas within theProgramme. The Table below shows identified resources.Table 9: source of funds identified for reallocationSource of Funds to be reallocated to other Priorities within theTourism Development programme (UGX, billionfRec.Dev'tDomestic Tourismfrom MTWAfunding transferred o.295ps, Meetings and Seminars:Reduce UGX 2.133 biltion allocated toSeminars by UGX 0.5 billion to reallocate toother Priorities.22l002-Worksho0.5Reduce UGX 1.944 billion allocatedAdvertisement by UGX O.S billlon22lOO1 Advertising and hrblic Relations-reallocate to otherPrioritiestoto0.5o22Ministry ofTourism,Wildlife andAntiquitiesvel inland- Reduce UGX 4.?blllion allocated to Travel inland by UGX 0.65227OO1 Tra 0.65r---{.sW,ki1 ,39I#billlon toallocation.keepit within previous yearTo redistribute UWA surplus revenueworth UGX 15 billion out of UGX 84billion realized in FY 2022/23 for thebenefit of various Agencies within theTourism Development Prograrnme15.0UWA- EIAs (Lion Breeding) No need at themoment since no funds have beenallocated for lion breedio.280UWA- Conduct reconnaissance activitiesfor lion breeding. No need at the momentsince no funds have been allocated for lionbreedingo.o47UWEC-Mbale Regional Zoo Reduceallocation of UGX 7 billion to UGX sbillion.2.OMTWA - Mitigating Human WildlifeConflict and constmction of rangeraccommodation blocks transferred fromMTWA to avoid clash in mandate withUWA.1.133Total20.405Proposed Committee Re-NlocationsThe Committee observed that the Tourism Development Programme entities aregrossly underfunded. The Committee was presented with several unfundedpriorities. However, the foltowing are considered very critical and should beprovided for within the financial year 2024/25 through reallocation as foltows;k- "fr'l'/4,I,116tvv\J}f-404o^$'Table 1O: Destination of identilied ResourcesReallocated Funds within Tourism Identified Priorities and ofDevelopment ProgramRecurrent Dev'tprr€nt of Kalangala TourismCircuit including docking facilities,information center, Speke Monumentand Parking Space.Develo3.OUWEC - Revamping theGardens-UGX2biltionBotanical 2.OWelfare and Operations- UGX 2.0 billion.UWEC Animal 2.Orgional Satellite Zoo in Mbarara Re4.0, Kasese to fund Constmction ofGirls Student HostelUWRTI4.Oadditional wage for the neworganizational structure. The currentwage bill is insufficient to implementthe broadened mandate of UWRTI afterresTo provide1.0o22 Ministry ofWildlife,Tourism andAntiquitiesand Guruguru Hot springsment Action plan. The two sitesare now at the Development phase,feasibility recommended ResettlementAmururesettleof PAPs and Com1.5of 1SKm of electric fencefrom Kyambura, Omukiboodi toOmukakoni, Bunyarugutu, RubiriziConstructionElizabeth NationalPark District0.90tt7 UgandaTourism Board(urB)ganda: This Film Project willfacilitate more content developmentabout Uganda Tourism DestinationHidden U 0.5Vote 534UgandaConsulate inKenya,Mombasar hosting of Uganda -Kenya Coast Tourism Conference inThis is to cater fo 1.5-A-- ,i^{\\tt--ifTt,\-4tr N,*t)t4 tiKampala, November, 2024 (UGX 3.8billion is required)Total 7.5 t2.96.0 TRADE AND INDUSTRY SECTOR.6.1 Compliance of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives with theSection 13(1lf(ef(if of the PFMA,2O1Sh.rrsuant to Section 13(1l)(e)(i) of the Pr.rblic Finance Management Act, 2015, Theprovision requires the Minister responsibte for Finance to consult with the EqualOpportunities Commission, to issue a Certificate; (i) certifying that the budget isgender and equit5r responsive; and (ii) specifying the measures taken to equalizeopportunities for men, women, persons with disabitities and other maginalisedgroups. According to the certificate issued by the Ministry of Finance, planningand Economic Development, Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives wasrated by Equal Opportunities Commission to have scored 6S.Zyo compared in theFinancial Year 2023 I 24.6-2 Yote o15 Ministry of rrade Industry and cooperatives (MTICITable 11: MTIC Semi Annual Budget performance rr 2o2g124 lucxBillioSource..MoFPED Semt Annual Perfortnance FY 2O2 O/24lr-"\t{Expenditure Approved Revised Released bySpent bvo/o Budgeto/oBudgeto/oReleasesCategory Budget Budgct End Dec End DecReleased Spent SpenttrIqge 3.248 3.248 1.624 1.403 50.00% 43.200/o 86.4Oo/oNon-Wage 103.856 r55.589 90.2s9 86.625 86.900/o 83.4Oo/o 96.OOo/oGoU Dev't 10.826 10.826 5.445 5.065 50.30% 46.gOo/o 93.OOo/oGoU Total 1t7.93 169.663 97.328 93.093 82.5Oo/o 78.9Oo/o 95.600/oArrears 0.335 o.335 0.335 0100.10% 0.00% O.OOo/oTotal Budset rta.264 169.998 97.663 93.O93 82.600/o 78.?Oo/o 95.30%il-'42tThe Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives had an approved budget of UGX118.264 billion. The Ministry received supplementar5r budget of UGX 51.73billion hence the approved revised budget was UGX 169.99 billion. Out of thetotal revised budget, UGX 97.066 billion was released and UGX 93.09 billion wasspent. Budget release, Expenditure and Absorption performe d, at 82.600/o, T8.TOo/oand 95.307o respectively.Half Year Physical Performance for Ministry of Trad,e, Industry andCooperatives FY 2023 l2+.(1) 9 Value Addition Equipment for 11 enterprises across the country procured,Delivered and Installed.(21 Stakeholder consultations on re-establishment of the cooperative bank.(3) 1,065 cooperatives registered; 6 cooperatives inspected; 190 Cooperativessuperuised.(41 70 youth cooperative members trained and 20 Cooperatives leaders trainedon governance, financial management and gender-based planning.(5) 11 industrial field monitoring and technical guidance visits undertaken inthe districts of Kampala, Njeru, Jinja, Buhweju and Nakaseke.(6) Commissioned Mpondwe Market as well as the one stop border at Mpondwe.(71 International Trade Missions conducted.(8) Joint stake engagements with the Key MDAs on Preferential Markets e.g.China, DRC and South Sudan andr'i- --.it.TM(^Wh43.::trfrl/,rI(9) Concluded round one of the various trade protocols under AfCFTA andCOMESA including RoO, Trade in goods, Trade in services, Investments.(10) Published and printed 650 Copies of the draft Competition Bill and submittedthem to Parliament(11) Finalized the draft Consumer Protection Bill in engagements with the FirstParliamentary Counsel.(12) Finalized proposals for introduction of Tobacco Cess and access ofcompetition merger fees competition commission NTR from coMESA inConsultation with MoFpED and MoJCA.(13) A draft Trade Licensing Rates and Grades for the new Cities were developedin consultation with key stakeholders.(14) Finalization of the development of the Grain Trade policy Implementationstrategr and the National MSMEs Implementation stratery(15) Mobilized 180 MSME in Mbale, Gulu, Arua, Hoima, Mbarara and Kampala toparticipate in the stakeholder consultations for the formulation of brandingand packaging strategr.(161 522 MSMES Mobitized, vetted, registered and participated in the 22na EACExhibition in Uganda to show case their innovations and discuss businesswith their counterparts from other countries from 8th to 18th December2022.(l7l 245 MSMEs trained on making Business Plans, Financial Literacy, ResourceMobilization, Business Negotiations and Record the following Districts.A{V!*a.F,Cl;tM',i'['rIsingiro, Kagadi, Nakaseseke, Nakasongola, Arua, obongi, Kitgum, Lamwo,Kamuli, Iganga, Agago, pader, Amum, and adjumani.(18) 1,800 MSMEs mobilized and sensitized on the importance of formatizing andregistration of businesses. Amuru and Adjumani.( 19) 1 ,550 MSMEs mobilized and sensitized on the importance of productcertification, audits, good manufacturing practices and good hygienepractices for enterprises in Agago and pader.(20) Final draft guidelines for development, management and operation ofIndustrial Parks developed.(21) Draft regulations for scrap metal trade developed.(22) Draft amendment to Licensing Act Regulations devetoped.(23) Development of guidelines for the Eco-certification of industries tabled.(24) Production and trade in the pineappte sub-sector profileTable 12: MTIC Proposed Budget allocation FY 2o24l25 and Variancesbetween Approved and proposed (UGX, Billion|Source.. Semi- Annual BudgePerformancev{,Budget CategoryFY 20/23124Budget AppBudgetSpent byEnd DecFY2024l25BudgetEstimatesVarianceBetweenApprovedandProposedWage3.248 1.403 2.894 -0.354Non-lllage155.589 86.625 LOL.2r9 -54.37GoU Dev't1O.826 5.065 I 1.16 0.334Arrears0.335 0 0 -0.335Total Budget 169.998 93.093 t15.273 -54.725W-{*-fr45Report FY 2023/24 &( eTrlIn FY 2024125, the Ministry has been allocated UGX 2.9 billion for financing itsWage and UGX.101.21 billion for non-wage recurrent expenditures. The Budgetfor Development Domestic stands at UGX 11.16 billion. The total budget hasdropped by UGX 54.725 billion from UGX. t6g.gg billion to UGX ,,tS.2Zbillion. The reduction is targely attributed to one-off supplementary budgets toUWRSA (UGX 2 billion), MTAC (UGX 3 billion) and UDC (UGx SO.4 biltion).6.3 Key Planned Activities for Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives Fy202412s.(al ManufacturingprogrammeIndustry and. Technologg(1) Amendment of the Sugar Act and facititation of National Sugar StakehotderCouncil activities.(21 Implementation of climate change measures for mitigation and adaptationof greenhouse gas emissions in the Industrial processes and products usesector.(3) Implementation of the NIP through development of development of the CTAstrategr, Industrial database etc.(41 Industrial monitoring and technical field visits conducted in 100 industriesacross Uganda.(5) Implementation of the NIP through development of development of the CTAstrategr, Industrial database etc.(6) Industrial monitoring and technical field visits conducted in 100 industriesacross Uganda.t l-'vh_fu,nF46iT'.14+@-;(71 2 factories operationalized; Luwero Fruit factory and Cassava processingFactory(8) IPPU GHG Mitigation and adaptation measures implemented.Cooperatiae Deaelopment(1) 40 Emyooga SACCOS supervised &monitored with focus on women, youth& PWDs throughout the country.(21 480 Parish Development Model (PDM) Savings and Credit Cooperativessupervised & monitored with focus on climate change and gender.(3) 1000 New Cooperatives registered.(41 20 Inspections and investigations of Cooperatives carried. out.(5) 8 Cooperative annual audits conducted.(6) 8 Annual/Special General Meetings conducted in Eastern, Northern,Western and Central regions.(7) 4 Cooperative arbitration /conflict resolution sessions conducted, one perregion.(8) 4 Capacity buitding sessions in governance and financial management inCooperatives conducted.(9) 4 Youth leadership training sessions conducted.F r'-D-A^;a(*aN(N47r:JInternal Trade(1) Consumer Protection Regulations developed. Anti-competitive businesspractices, abuse of monopoly power and iltegal mergers and acquisitionsdetected and addressed.(2) Enhanced capacity of selected MTIC staff in imptementation of Competitionand Consumer Protection Law.(3) Advice, recommendations and decisions made by the Committee onCompetition and Consumer protection matters.(41 Awareness creation and advocacy materials on competition and consumerprotection matters designed, printed, translated and disseminated.(5) Tobacco (control & Marketing) Act, 1967 reviewed.(6) Quarterly Tobacco Committee meetings held.(71 Consumer Protection Law developed.(8) Mergers and Acquisition applications processed and determined(9) National BUBU Expo held(bl Agro Industrialisation programme.(1) Stakeholder consultation meetings on the establishment of the Cooperativebank held.(2) Resources managed effectively to ensure sustainabitity of UWRSA anddevelop innovative fundingl(}Ta?(3) Administration to manage resources effectively to ensure sustainability ofUWRSA and develop innovative funding mechanism.(4) Development of a reliable agriculture National Market Information Systemthat empowers trading decisions promoted.(cl Private Sector Development programeExtemal trade(1) Stakeholder Sensitisation meetings conducted for 50 men, 50 women, and50 youth.(21 Donor round table meetings to attract funding for 50 men and 50 women ingreen growth businesses organized.(3) Five bilateral (Kenya, south Africa, DRC, Algeria and Ghana andmultilateral meetings at the WTO, AfCFTA and COMESA to increase marketaccess for locally produced ugandan goods conducted.(4) MDAs mapped to areas of harmonisation for the trade sector for men andwomen(5) Four regional meetings to popularise Uganda's negotiated protocols with thedifferent stakeholders conducted.(6) Three consultative meetings with stakeholders to get Uganda's position indifferent protocols negotiated,1r-.:-11I'C'V)Ml\+ kN49t,\Bzsiness Deuelopment and. Qualitg Assurance(1) National business development services guideline developed for 200 men,women, and youth & mainstreamed in the BFP in Central, Northern, WestNile & Eastern Regions.(2) 220 MSMEs of men, youth and women entrepreneurs trained on makingBusiness Plans, Financial Literacy, Resource Mobilization, and RecordKeeping. Kiruhura, Rwampara, Kabale,Rubanda, Mitooma, pallisa, Serere,Oyam, Kalaki and Otuke.(3) 60 youths, women, and entrepreneurs prepared to attend trade exhibition inSouth Sudan Capital, Juba.(41 160 MSMEs of men, women, youths PWDs mobitized and sensitized on theimportance of product certification, aud.its, food fortification, and GHp forenterprises in Kotido, Napak DLG, Abim, Amudat, Zombo, Arua, Madi-Oko1oSerere & Kole.(5) T\ryo (21 Business tinkages established between MSMEs and large-scaleenterprises for men, women and PWDs. in Soroti City, Amuria, Katakwi,Kumi, Busia, Tororo and Butaleja for men, women and pwDs.(6) 850 MSMEs profiled per region of the country and MSMEs databasepopulated for 212 youths 212 women, 25Omen and 176 pWDs. in Central,Northern and Western Regions.Process ing and. Marketing(1) A detailed study and assessment on various stages of the textile value chainin Uganda from yarn production to manufacturing conducted.(tu,T+n {>,.:'._J!!}.$F(\-.(2) Popularizing of PDM Marketing strategr and branding and packagingstrategies.in the country includes Karamoja and west Nile.(3) Acquiring and scaring up of the use of international recognised bar GIS barcode for promotion of Ugandan products in the market and support L2OMSMEs to formalise their business in south western, Rwenzori, West Nile,and Sebei sub region.(4) Conduct awareness creation in Credit rating mechanisms in Mbale, Soroti,Lira and Gulu to 100 MSMEs in manufacturing sector.(5) Conduct awareness creation in Credit rating mechanisms in Mbale, Soroti,Lira and Gulu to 1oo MSMEs in manufacturing sector.(6) Facilitate, support, Sensitization 120 MSMEs, Youths, women, pLWHA andPWD to formalise their businesses. in West Nile, Rwemzori and BusogaRegion.(71 Conduct 3 stakeholder (Academia, SMEs, Policy makers and tegislators)workshop on Circularity and Circular economy (Resource efficiency, cleanerproduction and industrial in symbiosis in central region.(8) Facilitating, the preparations, Mobilization, training, vetting of 250 MSMEsincluding women and youth, through and guiding them in packagingbranding, and requirements to participate in the regional, international anddomestic trade fairs and expos.(9) Training of 100 processors in Leather-and agro processors Mukono andJinja, Greater Bushenyi, Mbarara, and formation of clusters in each districtItr- 1-.fth51&Fruits - Greater Bushenyi & Greater Mbarara-Grain Milling: -Masindi, Kibale,Kiryandotrgo, Mubende and Nwoya.(10) Profiling of 120 MSMEs (60Males and 60 Female) per region of the countryand populating the MSMEs database from agro processing, leather and metalfabrication from central Region and Bunyoro region.(11) Facilitate MSMEs to participate in the International in MSMEs day(dl Regional Balanced Development(1) 8 cooperatives identified and proliled in Karamoja, Teso, Bugisu, Bukedi,Busoga, Bunyoro, West Nile and Acholi.(2) 4 beneficiary Cooperatives in the RDP regions sensitized on possiblefi nancing institutions.Retooling Project.(1) Support construction of MTAC centre at Mbale(21 Procure Motorcycles for all commercial Officers to supervise pDM and twovehicles for coordination6.4 vote 136 uganda Export promotions Board (uEBpfTable 13: UEPB Semi Annual Budget Performance Fy 2o2al24 (UGx BillionfSource.. SemiAnnual Budget Performatrce FY 2O2s/24rld-WvI,'\L.ng"fsNExpenditurc Approved RevisedReleasedbySpentbyo/oBudgeto/oBudseto/oReleasesCategory Budget Budget End DecEndDec Relcased Spent SpentWage 2.561 2.56r 1.281 0.66s0.00% 25.800/o 51.50%Non-Wage 5.588 5.588 2.578 1.898 46.lOo/o 34.OOo/o 73.600/oGoU Dev't 0.037 0.037 0.019 o.0r 5l.4Oo/o 27.OOo/o 52.600/olqtaf Budget 8.187 8.187 3.878 2.568 4?.400/o 3L.4Oo/o 66.2Oo/ot+"52+'- l. i_ (UEPB had an approved budget of UGX 8.18 billion out of which UGX 3.8 billionwas released, and UGX 2.568 billion spent, glving a semi-annual budgetperformance of 47 .4oyo, and absorption rated at 66.20%o. T16e poor absorption offunds was attributed to faiture to utilize the wage component due stoppage inrecruitment across government MDA's pending conclusion of the rationalizationprocess.6.5 UEPB semi Annual physical performance Fv 2o2gl24Uganda Export Promotions reported the foltowing key achievements for the periodunder review;(1) Subscribed to one market information source to provide EpZ operators withup-to-date market information and intelligence (buyers, trends, requirementsetc.) on target andf or high opportunity markets.(21 Collaborated with IJFZA and EPZ operators to promote EpZ products inidentified high opportunity markets and tinkDPZoperators to foreign buyers.(3) Strengthen information management and negotiation for greater access totargeted markets.(4) In collaboration with UNBS, trained and supported MSMEs (manufacturersand processors) on compliance to quality and standards for the targetmarkets.(5) Developed comprehensive (tourism, trade and investment) country profileand other country branding items/tools for use in international tradepromotion events.(6) Assessed the export readiness operators in collaboration with UFZA.L('tus53At,,,\(7) Participated in a diaspora meeting in preparation for the Expo 2O2S in JapanDeveloped comprehensive (tourism, trade and investment) country profileand other country branding items/tools for use in international tradepromotion events.Table 14: UEPB Proposed Budget FY 20i24125 and Variances betweenApproved and Proposed (UGX BillionfBudgetFSt 2023124ApprovedFy 2O24l2SBudgetVariance Between andCategory Budget EstimatesWage 2.56t 1.559-1.002Non-Wage s.588 5.888 0.3GoU Dev't 0.037 0.0370GoU Total 8.187 7.4A4-o.703Overall, the budget for UEPB is proposed to reduce by UGX O.ZO3 billion. Thereduction has been effected on the wage component to clear unutilized wageduring the FY 2023/24. However, slight increment of UGX 0.3 bilion is proposedon the nonwage component.6.6 UEPB Planned activities for Fy 2O24l2SWith the above proposed budget, Uganda Export Promotions Board plans toimplement the fotlowing key activities.(1) Export readiness assessment of up to fifty (50) potential exporters uithfocuson Export Processing Zones @n) operators(21 One (1) Export Orientation kshop - for assessment companiesconducted(ltoNNu,A+*54-S!l+,.1;- ..rflT \(3) Three (3) Expert training sessions - tailored. to id.entified. capacttg gaps -conducted.(4) Coordinating country participation and/or facilitating the private sector toparticipate in three (3) strategic international trade events - CIIE 2024 inShanghai; BIOFACH, World Sea Food Expo and at least two (2) diasporaconventions.(5) Subscription to two (2) market information sources - one (1) internationalmarket information service - news, trends, prices etc. and one (1) ontinebuyer-seller linkage platform.(6) Three (3) regional (upcountry) Export Information Dissemination campaigns.The campaign includes an information dissemination workshop, radiointerview and export information clinics.(71 Profiling of Producers (farmers) of key export products - particularlyhorticultural products One (1) outward sales mission to one (1)EAC/COMESA partner market Annual training of Foreign Service Officers(FSOs) on export promotion - in collaboration with MoFA and other MDAs(8) In collaboration with the private sector, coord.inate efforts to establishpresence at the DMCC (for tea) and at the Water Front Market (for fruits,vegetables, and fish) in Dubai - UAE.(9) Coordinate Uganda's participation in the Expo 2O2S Osaka - from 13*, Aprilto 13th October 2025. This includes: Preparations for Uganda's participationin the Expo (July 2024 - Mar 2025l - including participation in planningmeetings (IPMs); production of information and tionallil* lh&tt-,N55[.Jsmaterials;fir-acquisition and transportation of exhibits to Japan; and. setup of the ugand.aPauilion(10) Coordinating Uganda's participation in Expo 2025 Osaka (Mar 25 - Oct 25)which will include tJganda National Dag at Expo 2025 Osaka on 6th October2025 and at least trtto (2) [Jganda - Japan Tourism, Trad.e and. InuestmentForums.(11) Hold/coordinate the quarterly National Export Coordination Committeemeetings.(12) Hold quarterly press brielings on status of the Export sectors(13) Participate in strategic partner trade promotion events and activities (localand in target markets) For FY2O24/25 these include: Markup project of theInternational Trade Center, GROW Project of the World Bank implementedby PSFU - uganda INVITE project of the wortd Bank.6.7 Yote 154 uganda National Bureau of standards (uNBslTable 16: UNBS Semi Annual Budget Performance Fy 2D2gl24 (UGx Billionfoverall, the approved budget for UNBS was uGX 60.o42 billion out of which ucx30.252 billion (5o.4o%) was released; and ucx 26.63 billion(44.4o/ol was spent;\L* {t_\l\liExpenditure Approved RevieedReleaaedbySpentbyo/o Budgcto/oBudgeto/o ReleasegCategory Budget Budgct End DecEnd DecReleased Spent SpentWage 25.856 25.856 12.928 12.O92 50.00% 46.800/o 93.500/oNon-Wage 27.535 27.535 13.998 12.57 50.80% 45.70yo 89.800/oGoU Dev't 6.651 6.651 3.326 1.969 50.00% 29.600/o 59.2Oo/oTotal Budset 60.o42 6(,.o42 go.2s2 26.631 5O.4oo/o 44.4oo/o 88.OO%+tv55,,-=&\J'+f;r!hence absorption of the budget released rated at 88o/o. The tow absorption wason account of failure to utilize Development budget by the first half of FY 2023124.By the end of half year FY 2023124, UNBS had cottected nontax revenue of UGX39.768 Billion 156.70/ol to the Consolidated Fund against a target of UGX 70billion. In FY 2024 /25 UNBS has projected to collect UGX IOO billion.Table 17: UNBS Half Year Physical Performance and Achievements for Fy 212gl24Ftrnctlon OutputIndlcatorsAanrralTargetIIalfYcarTargctActualAchlevedBy HaIfYearo/oAchlcvedBy HdfYearStandardsdevelopmentNumber ofStandardsDeveloped andadopted 600 300 142 47o/oProduct/SystemsCertificationNumber ofproduct/ systemscertificationPermits issued 6,000 3,000 2,319 77.30/oMarketSurweillanceInspectionsNumber of Marketand factoryoutlets Inspected. 9,000 4,500 1,649 36.6%Inspectionand clearanceof lmportsNumber ofimportedconsignments192,500 96,250 LO3,g42 LO8.2o/oLaboratoryAnalysis andTesting ofNumber ofProduct Samplestested 28,900 14,4OO 14,o24 97.4o/oVerification ofequipmentused in tradeNumber ofEquipmentverified 1,600,000 800,000 564,305 70.5o/oCalibration oflndustrialEquipmentNumber ofEquipmentcalibrated 6,600 3,300 2,354 7I.3yoSource.. t IVBSPresentation on MPS FY 2024/25From the table above UNBS performance averagely rated, atT2o/o by half year Fy2023124' It is important to note that most of the indicators and activities gearedtowards quality assurance and protection p,^e below average consumerb,,1...,. J-'-.-TT Ifi \/+H-frbF#FThese include; product and certification Permits, Equipment verified, Equipmentcalibrated while Market Surveillance Inspection, which is at the core of consumerprotection, registered the worst performance at 360/o.TablelS: UNBS Proposed Budget allocation FY 2O24l2S and Variancesbetween Approved and proposed (UGX, Bnt2023124 2024l25Variance BetweenApproved andBudget Approved Budget ProposedCategory Budget EstimatesWage 25.856 25.856 oNon-Wage 27.53s 27.23s -0.3GoU 6.651 5.051 -1.6Total Budget 60.o42 5,8.142 -1.9The proposed budget for UNBS is UGX 58. I42 billion which is a reduction of UGX1.9 billion approved in the FY 2023/24. The wage component is expected toremain constant, while nonwage and development budget are proposed to reduceby UGX 0.3 billion and UGX 1.6 billion respectively.6.8 UNBS Planned Activities for the Fy 2O241ZSUNBS plans to carry out the fotlowing activities during the Fy 2024 /25: -(1)(2t(3)(41(s)(6)(71(8)To issue 6,000 product certification permits;To verify 1,600,000 equipment;To inspect 192,500 imported consignments;To engage 500,000 stakeholders;To develop 600 standards;To inspect 9,000 market and factory outlets;To test 28,800 product samples; andTo calibrate 6,600 equipment.fi;, ",7?ICnU*s-1RffiM586.9 Proposed Reallocations for Trade and Industry Fy 2o2412s.The Committee identified UGX 35.?25 billion from within the Trade and Industryand reallocated it within the sector key priority areas. The table below showsidentified resources.Table 19: source of funds identified for rea[ocationo15Department oflnternal Trade-MTTC\VOTE Source ofResourcegActivity and Justification Rec.Dev'tMlnistry ofTrade,Industry andCooperativesContribution to Autonomous tnstitutions:Uganda Warehouse Receipts Authority is aregulator (Allocation of funds to refurbishPrivate sector Warehouse and Procurement ofWeighing systems is outside the Authorit5r,smandate as has been continuouslyrecommended by Parliament)3.342Item:227OOl Reduce Travel inland by UGX1.762 billion to keep it within the previousallocation of UGX 2.98 billion.Travel inland- r.762Item: 225lOL Consultancy Services- thereperformance reports for UGX L.4 billionallocated to Consultancy serrices for the Fy2O23/2a; and no Justification for currentallocation of UGX 1.026billion.was no1.026ltem: 22lOO2 s, Meetings and SeminarsAllocation to Workshop and seminar hasincreased by UGX 1.25 billion. Reallocationof UGX 1.25 billion will keep the budgetwithin previous year allocation of UGX 1.46billion.Workshop r.25Item: 282302Transfers to Non-GovernmentUganda Cooperative AllianceThere is no legal framework in place tosupport Cooperation between Government ofUganda and UCA a private entity.Organizations:(UCA) Limited.3.0ness creation and advocacy onconsumer protection mattersAware 0.10capacity of members on consumerprotection mattersEnhance o.20r lobby groups mobilized andtrained on advocacy of consumer rightsConsume 0.15("*qv59sk+,,>t'l l,IIness created among stakeholders andgeneral public on consumer protectionmatters:There is no legal framework regulatingconsumer protection in Uganda. Capacitybuilding, sensitization and advocacy onprotection of consumer rights and obligationsshould commence when the law is in place.Aware 0.25MTTCRetoolingProjectFour vehicles including minivanSecond Budget Call Circular issuedstopped procurement of vehiclesprocure.by PS/STo.799Item: 2251OLtancy Services: therejustification for consultancies under theMTIC. Second Budget call circular by PS/STstopped consultancies that can be done bystaJf.ConsuI nowas r.026Item: 225203 asibility Studies for Capital. Appraisa-l and Fe 0.40of funded UDC Projects.All the following are new projects, and theCommittee is of the considered opinion thatwe appropriate less of what has beenproposed by the MTIC; and based oninadequate funds available and conflictingdemands.ReprloritizationLuwerobalanceFruit factory UGX 6qqf UGX 5 billionl..03 billion (leavlng avaCassa' Proce Acholibur ssing UGX03 Factorybillion aofbalance 5UGXNational Marketing Company UGX 8.3 billiona balance of UGX 5etV, UGXChem 2 Sanga 22billion a(leavingofbalance 5.OUGX19.55154Item 225,2o1UNBS Consultancy Serwices-CapiSerrrices. There was notal Consultancyjustification forconsultancies under the MTIC2.OItcm: 312229 Other ICT Equipment:billion. UGX 3.9 billionreduced by UGX 1.0had been allocated toICT related in UNBS ln1.0Aa,;lntHhb,P60t4:Trr-+l-- -fi'-,(leaving billionlFY 2022/23 as opposed to the currentproposed UGX 4.9 billion.Totals 34.051.799The Committee scrutinized the funded and unfunded priorities for entities underits jurisdiction and was able to identify resources for reallocation to priority areas.The table below shows Identified Priorities and amounts reallocated.Table 2O: Destination of ldentified ResourcesIdentified Priorities and ofReallocated Funds For Ministry of Trade,Industty and CooperativesRecurrent Dev'tReprloritlzation of UDC proJectsDelight Fruit Factory (Nwoya) 5.0East Africa Medical Vitals 5.0sing Factory (Bundiburyo) Cocoa Proces 5.0Wazuri Medicare Limited 3.0o15 Ministry ofTrade,Industry andCooperativesAbubaker Technical Serwices & Generaloftion Supplies additional Acquisi EquityUDC5.0136 Uganda E:rportPromotionsBoard(UEBPfUganda's participation inExpo 2025, Osaka. The Government ofUganda has been invited and has confirmedparticipation in the next World Exposition,Expo 2025 Osaka, that will take place inOsaka, Japan from 13th April to 13thOctober, 2025. Preparations for this eventhave already commenced.Coordinating4.8154 UNBS Phased salary enhancemenas per the appeal by Uganda Scientists,Researchers and Allied Workers, Union(usRAwu)t for UNBS staJf 4.549ai= '.. ,lzrW.I^L*61lr*Procurement of land in Western andNorthern Uganda for the constmction ofUNBS Regional Laboratory in Mbarara (UGX2 billion) and Gulu (UGX 2 billion)4.OTotal31.72 4.O5.106.11obsenrations and Recommendations on Trade and Industryvote o15: Ministry of rrade, Industry and cooperatives (MTIclThe Committee is concerned that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperativeswas supposed to have operationalizedlaws such as the Accreditation Services Act,2O2I and the Sugar Act, 2O2O. However, none of the two have beenoperationalized. These laws require operational stmctures. However, rostructures have been proposed in the current rationalization of GovernmentAgencies, €lrl implication that they might remain on the shelves yet they areimportant to the economy.Recommendations of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that MTIC should have in place stmctures tooperationalise laws in the Trade Sector that were passed by parliament.6.12 subvention to uganda cooperative Alliance LimitedThe committee observed that in the FY 2023 /24 MTlcwas allocated ucx 3 billionto Uganda Cooperative Alliance Limited (UCAL) without a legat framework orcooperation agreement and Memorandum of Understanding to formalize theirrelationship.The Committee further observed that MTIC did not have in its possession aninstnrmentlegalizing its relationship with ucAL since ucAL is a limited company,\ - ifr't/",l1h"NI62 .fu,-,YRecommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommend that the Ministry of Trade, Ind.ustry and Cooperatives,and the Attorney General should draft the legal framework to regulate thiscooperation. In the circumstances, the Committee declines to approve the UGX 3billion allocated for the FY 2024 /25 to the UCAL through the MTIC until theworking relationship is properly formalized.6.13Vote 136: Uganda E:rport promotions Board (UEpBlLimited Budget and poor releases to Uganda Export promotion BoardThe Committee observed that the Uganda Export Promotion Board is mandatedto develop and Promote Uganda Export on the International Market. However,little attention has been given to this institution. It lacks the Board in addition tolimited budget resources that are not always fulty released to it. For instance, inthe FY 2022/23, Uganda Export Promotions Board. received onty UGX.4.46 biltion(53%) of UGX.8.42 billion its total Annual budget and was the least funded entityof government. UEPB is mandated by an Act of Parliament to facilitate thedevelopment and growth of export trade in Uganda. The NDPIII highlights exportpromotion and import substitution as one of country's key developmentstrategies. However, the importance of UEPB in promoting exports has notattracted the requisite budget allocation. Additionalty poor release of funds hasundermined its performance. UEPB has unfund.ed priorities worth UGX.2O.66billion.( ; [,r -lrt-MktvWf53(lRecommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that Government should expedite the appointmentof the Board of Directors of UEPB, and allocate additional budget of UGX 20.66biltion to UEBP to develop exports and discover new markets for Uganda in viewof the worsening balance-of-trade position, and the suspension of Uganda fromAGOA.6.14 Vote 154: Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBSIThe Committee reviewed performance statistics for UNBS (see table 77) andobserved that UNBS averagely rated at72o/o by half year FY 2023124. Most of theindicators and activities geared towards quality assura.nce and consumerprotection performed below average. These include; product and certificationPermits, Equipment verified, Equipment calibrated while Market SurveillanceInspection, which is at the core of consumer protection, registered the worstperformance at 360/o. See table 17.Recommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that Government should open UNBS regionalcentres and laboratories to bring services closer to the population, and to reducecosts of doing business, which would subsequently enhance the entity'sperformance.The Committee further recommends that Government should allocate adequatefunds for salary enhancement for scientists as per the Presidential Directive. Thiswould enhance their performance.(\,.'''i'tti I(,*VItbWM&64 ff"*6.15 Uganda Development Corporation (UDC)The Committee observed that UDC operates as a subvention under Ministry of Trade,Industry and Cooperatives. Under the subvention, funds are released to MTIC which inturn transfers the funds to UDC for its operations and investment. The Committeenoted. that UDC accounts for over 600/o of the budget appropriated to the MTIC.Under the current arrangement UDC is not able to monitor how much is released byMinistry of Finance, planning and Economic Development for its operations and monitorand control the fund.s. The Committee is cognizant of the fact that in some instances,UDC has to operate under the market situation and this may be affected by the lengthyfinancial release procedures and especially while operating as a subvention.The Committee further observed that as Government of Uganda's investment arm,UDC being was supposed to ensure that Government's shareholding portfolios inbusiness ventures generated return on investments. However, the Committeenoted that despite recurring investments in businesses such as CommonwealthResort, Munyonyo, Soroti Frrrit Factory, Mutuma Tea Factory, Mpanga TeaFactory, Atiak Sugar Factory, among others, UDC has continued to post losses.The Committee further notes that there was no guarantee that allocations to UDCwould transform or generate return of investments. This is evident, because atthe request of the Committee for UDC to share any success stories/profrt-makingventures since their inception, none was provided.Recommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and EconomicDevelopment should allocate a vote to UDC as a semi-autonomous government entity.This will enhance accountability, transparency and effectiveness in management ofpublic resources in all operation of UDC as an lnvestment government.fu,(:It.|6{'v 9/$.W,Lk^65,6.16 Management Training and Advisory centre (MTACIThe following are key outputs and activities that MTAC intends to carry out duringthe FY 2O2al25:(1) To complete construction of Ntungalno MTAC Centre.(21 To commence construction works at Mbale MTAC Centre'(3) To train 1,500 participants in Job creation Awareness andEntrepreneurshiP DeveloPment.Obsenrations of the Committee:The Committee observed that in addition to spending money at source which iscontrary to Section 29 of the hrblic Finance Management Act, 2015, MTACmade substantial transactions on the revenue account which was suspicious,irregular and illegal. Further, the Committee was alive to the Second BudgetCall Circular of 2022 authored by the PSST to all accounting officers remindingthem of their obligations under the PFMA 2015 to desist from spending atsource. MTAC decided to ignore such guidance.Section 45 of the pFM A 2O15 requires that an accounting officer shall controlthe regularity and proper use of money appropriated to the vote, be responsiblefor authorizingany commitment made by a vote, and control the resourcesreceived,, held or disposed of by or on account of a vote.ln-,,II&)C{\\&-,i'n-- ''.t *fi ' ;k?q'66La7.O GENERAL OBSERVATIONS AT{D RECOMMENDATIONS OF THECOMMITTEE.7.1 Expenditure at source outside Parliamentary AppropriationThe Committee obserwed that a number of entities under Ministry of Trade,Industry and cooperatives and Ministry of Tourism, Wild life and Antiquitiesspend their NTR at source in contravention of PFM A,2O15. These entities includeMTAC, UNBS and UHTTI. The Committee noted with concern that easyaccessibility to these funds have led to financial irregularities in theseinstitutions. For instance, UNBS cottected UGX 64.7 billion in NTR out of whichonly UGX 52.53 billion was transferred to the Consolidated Fund and the balanceof UGX 12.14 billion was spent at source.2.2 Procurement of Private Consultancy Senrices for Civil Works.The Committee observed that the deliberate disregard of the mandate of MoWT byMDAs and prefer private consultants was a delibetating mavel; and raisedconcerns as to reasons MDAs chose consultants as against MoWT for civil worksis costly, irregular, dubious, suspicious and encumbers service delivery.Under the Uganda Public Service Standing Orders, the procurement, utilisationand disposal of goods and services in the hrblic Service (n-a) Standing Orders ison works, instructs the responsible officer to consult the Ministry responsible forworks before engaging in any works or related activities.Further Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued aProcurement Policy Book 2022,authority in executing civil works.to wit the MoWT was listed as a competentWC^vtu.#pjf+ k-->.'i:r -r +Hr,67)lDRecommendation of the CommitteeThe Committee recommends that the PSST should immediately exercisedisciptinary action on all accounting officers who fail to comply with the hrblicFinance Management Act 2015 on management, and remittance of nontaxrevenue to the Consolidated Fund.8.O PROPOSED BUDGET ALLOCATIONS FOR FY 20/24125.Rt. Hon. Speaker and Members, the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industryrecommends that Parliament adopts this Report, and approves budgetaryallocation for FY 2024 /25 as indicated in the table below:t,6$\vll4tLb' -".,.'.':741//,++< 682Development RecurrentVoteMinistry/ Agency1O,361,000,000 104,1 13,000,000015Ministry of Trade, Industryand Co-Operatives37,000,000 L2,284,175,0001369,051,000,000 55,640,000,000154Uganda National Bureau ofStandards (UNBQI-54,540,000,000 118,703,000,000o22Ministry of Tourism, Wildlifeand Antiquities100,000,000 28,O28,O00,000tt7Uganda Tourism Board(urB)1,500,000,000534Uganda Consulate in KenYa,MombasaTotalr14474000000r22lt750006469t00000017324300000028t280000001500o00000CrttVhI5]:h.ilt=)59f$ExportBoard\.'at'\.\**.t.JPAR I,I \ ]IENT O}' TIGANDAREPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURTSNI, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THEMINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS ,.\ND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR MINISTRYOF TOURTSM, WILDLIFE AND ,,\NTIQUITIES; AND MINISTRY OF TRADE,INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES rr )R THE I,'INANCIAL YEAR 2024t2s.MemberHon. Mwine Mpaka, ChairpersorrHon. Lamwaka Catherine, Vice ('1,:'irpersorrHon. Afidra Ronald OlemaHon. Aleper Margaret AachillaHon. Apio Eunice Otuko 1Dr.;Hon. Atukwasa RitaHon. Awich JaneHon. Awor Betty EngolaHon. Bright Tom AmootiHon. Businge HarrietHon. Byakatonda Abdulhu (Dr.)Hon. Edakasi AlfredHon. Gafabusa RichardHon. Gaffa MbwatekamwaHon. Isabirye David AgaHon. Kaala Kevin Ojinga/No nature12345*4^678910t11,2 t13CAt4U1516r7Hon. Kamugo Pamelat,;?,ltr >fl..lf;1819202l22232425262t2829303132333435363738Hon. Kato MohammedHon. Kayemba Geofrey SsoloHon. Kemirembe Pauline KHon. Kinobere Herbert TomHon. Kirabo AgnesHon. Kirumira HassanHon. Koluo Joseph AndrewHon. Lukyamuzi David Kalwanl,rHon. Lutaaya GeoffreyHon. Melsa Avako Naima C,-, Wt^EHon. Mushemeza ElijahHon. Mwijukye FrancisHon. Namukuta BrendaHon. Nayebale SylviaHon. Okello Geoffrey CharlesHon. Olobo JamesHon. Osoru MourineHon. Ssentaayi MuhammaclHon. Ssimbwa FredHon. Wakayima H. MusokcHon. Were Godfrey Oderurlt^t)6-tPARLIAMENT OF UGANDA-t APii 202,rREPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENTIIRONMENT AND NATT'RALRESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS ANDBUDGET ESTInIATES FOR FY 2O24|2O2S1l-lAPRIL, 2024t-OFFICE OF THE CLERK TO PARLIAMENT,PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA,KAMPALA.Iri1a6Table of Contents1.O2.OINTRODUCTION.....METHODOLOGY....a-k_44557775.1 Compliance of Ministerial Policy Statements with PFMA5.1.1Gender and Equity Compliance Assessment...6.0 VOTE O17: MINISTRYOF ENERGY At{D MINERAL DEVELOPMENT6.1 Proposed MEMD Budget FY 2024125..............6.2 Half Year Budget Performance for MEMD-FY 2023124.7.O VOTE 139: PEf,ROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGAI{DA (PAU)7.L Proposed PAU Budget FY 2o.24126.7.2 Half year Budget Performance- FY 2023124 ..........117.3 OBSERVATIONS AND RDCOMMENDATIONS UNDER TNERGY AT{D MINERALDEVELOPMENT SECTOR ....3.O STRUCTI'RE OF THE REPORT4.O AGGREGATE PROGRAMME BT'DGEtr ALLOCATIONS FY 20241255.OENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMINT SECTOR........9.O IITATER AITD ENI/IRONMENT SEICTOR................9.1.1 Compliance of Ministerial Policy Statements with PFMA9.L.2 Gender and Equity Compliance Assessment.................9.2 VOTE O19: MINISTRYOF WATER At{D ENVIRONMENT (MwE1..........9.2.2 MWE Budget Projections..............9.2.3 MWE Half Year Budget Performance FY 20231249.3 VOTEISO.NATIONAL ETfI/IRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY9.3.1Budget ProJections fY 2024 I 252......9.3.2 Half Year Budget Performance ...........9.4 VOTE 157- NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORTTY (NFAI.9.5 VOTE 1O9.UGAI{DA NATIONAL MEIEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY(UNMAl9.6 OBSERVATIONS AND RBCOMMENDATIONS UNDER WATER 4ND.....ENI/IRONMENT SECTOR.NATIONAL WATER AI{D SIU'ERAGE (Nwscl10.o coNclusroN.........8.........8.........9....... 10....... 10(NEMAI..t223232324242526262727282829293643q\-/?ivb./Zr-'IList ofACPIS Anti-Corruption for Peaceful and Inclusive SocietiesBCC Budget Call CircularsBFP Budget Framework PaperEACOP East African Crude Oil PipelineECP Electricity Connection PolicyEPC Engineering, Procurement and ConstructionGEF Global Environment FacilityMEMD Ministryof Enerry and Mineral DevelopmentMOFPED Ministryof Finance Planning and Economic DevelopmentMTEF Medium Term Expenditure FrameworkMWE Ministryof Water and EnvironmentNBFP National Budget Framework PaperNDP IIINational Development PlanNEMA National Environment Management AuthorityNFA National Forestry AuthorityNational Water and Sewerage Cooperation NWSCPAU Petroleum Authority of UgandaPDM Parish Development ModelPFMA Public Finance Management ActSHA Share Holders AgreementTTA Transport Tariff AgreementUECCC Uganda Enerry Capitalization Credit CompanyUNDP United Nations Development ProgramUNEP United Nations Environment ProgramUNMA Uganda National Metrological AuthorityUNOC Uganda National Oil Company4---E;\3wI1.O INTRODUCTIONRt. Hon Speaker and Hon. Members,In accordance with Article 155 (a) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda,Section 12 of the Public Finance Management Act, (as amended) and Rule I49 ofthe Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the Ministerial Policy Statements for theFinancial Year 2024125 were presented to Parliament and referred to the respectiveCommittees for scrutiny.In light of the above, I now present for your consideration and adoption the Reportof the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources regarding the PolicyStatements and Budgetary provisions for the FY 2024125 covering the followingVotes:o Vote 017: Ministry of Energr and Mineral Development (MEMD)o Vote 139: Petroleum Authority of Uganda (PAU)o Vote 019: Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE)o Vote 15O: National Environment Management Authority (NEMA)o Vote 157: National Forestry Authority (NFA)o Vote 1O9: Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA)o Subventions:o National Water and Sewerage Cooperation (NWSC)o Atomic Energr Councilo Uganda Electricity Credit Capitalization Companyo Electricity Disputes Tribunal2.O METHODOLOGYIn considering the Ministerial Policy Statements, the Committee invited and heldmeetings with the representatives of the afore-mentioned votes and reviewed thefollowing documents;a) The Ministerial Policy Statements forVotes for FY 2024125 as capturedin (1) above;\u!w,-_ t',:tCit,b) Parliamentary Budget Office Analysis of Ministerial Policy statements for theVotes under the Committee;c) Budget estimates for FY 2024125 and, the Medium-term ExpenditureFramework;d) Alternative Policy Statements;e) Budget Framework Paper Reports;0 First and Second Budget Call Circulars (BCCs).3.O STRUCTURE OF THE REPORTThe Report highlights the following aspects per vote:. Aggregate Programme Budget Allocations;. Compliance of Ministerial Policy Statements to PFMA requirements;o Proposed Budget Allocations by Vote for FY 2O2a 125;. Half Year Budget Performance for FY 2023124;o Observationsand Recommendations4.O AGGREGATE PROGRAMME BUDGET ALLOCATIONS FY 2O24I2SResource allocations has been premised on the twenty (20) developmentprogrammes identifred in NDP III (See table 1). This was done to reduce 'silo'approach to implementation of government programs.Financial priority has been given to Development Plan Implementation Programme(44o/ol, Human Capital Development (16.20/ol, Governance & Security programme(12.4o/ol, and the Integrated Transport Infrastructure & Services programme(10.3%) which will be taking huge shares of the national budget (table 1).Mineral Development with only O.lo/o of the proposed National Budget remainsamong the least funded programmes despite being prioritized as one of the keygrowth areas for industrialization in the NDP III. Other programmes with decimalshares include: Innovation, Technologr Development & Tran (0.3%),ufacturing (O.4o/ol and Tourism Develo\d.r-nt (0.3a5,''ilIOther programs related to the mandate of the Committee will have following budgetshares: Agro-Industrialization (2.7o/ol, Sustainable Development of PetroleumResources (1.8olo), Natural Resources, Environment, Climate Change, Land &Water Management (0.6%) and Sustainable Energr Development (2o/ol.Table 1: Program allocations in Billion Shillings (NBFP vs Draft Estimates vsNDP IIISource: Based on Budget Estimates FY 2024 125AV.tProposed BudgetPROGRAMMEApprovedBudget IY23124 N 24125NDP IIIestimates IY24125UGX BFPBudgetEstimateso/oshareUGXIAgro-Indu*rlel&etlon 1,813.9O 1,644.00 l$21.74 2.7o/o1,5t82flncrel Dcvclopmcat 4?.3 01.6 31.s5 o.t% 6993Suatdneblc Dcvclopnoat ofPctrolcun RclourcoaM? 1,065.60 I,O59.18 1.8%9l44Manufacturing 218.8 105.6 260.98 O.4o/o 7735Tourism Development 248.7 248.7 20s.62 O.3o/o 7626Iletunl Rceourccr, Eav't, CllnetcChenrc. Iand & Vatcr Uct426.6 4t9.7 3?7.6 O.60/o 1,6457Private Sector Development 1,9 1 l. 101,878.30 1,916.11 3.2o/o 737IEustrlaeblc Eacrgl Dcvclopnrent lr342.7O 1,325.50 1,21,..62 2.Oo/o1,2459Integrated Transport InfrastructureAnd Services4,491.30 s,882.80 6,164.01 10.3% 6,31610Sustainable Urbanization andHousins524.5 77.3 78.03 o.Lo/o 82411Digital Transformation 191 .8 173.9 202.66 O.3o/o 380t2Ilunln Capltal Dcvclopneat 9,58O.2O 9,326.9O 9,695.23L6.2%6,0,6213lnnovation, Technolory Developmen t& Transfer256.7 198.3 178.18 O.3o/o 791t4Public Sector Transformation 228.5 227.2 228.77 O.4o/o2,3r3l5Community Mobilization AndMindset Chanee35.1 35.1 40.70 O.lo/o 99416Governance And Security 7,675.80 7,433.90 7,45r.27 12.4Yo 7,773t7Regional Balanced Development 1,041.30 1,O38.90 1,388.OO 2.3Vo 3,27618Development Plan Implementation 18,863.80 22,096.30 26,459.9r 44.2o/o 1,O7319Administration Of Justice 432.4 432.4 400.06 o.7yo20Legislation, Oversight AndRepresentation945.8 945.8 942.76 l.60/o59,913.83 lOOo/o38,165 5.0'729.22 54,587.8()\ta5.O ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT SECTORThe Sector has two Votes; Ministry of Energr and Mineral Development (Vote Ol7l,and Petroleum Authority of Uganda (Vote 139). These Votes contribute to thefollowing NDP III programs;i. Sustainable Energr Developmentii. Mineral Developmentiii. RegionalBalancedDevelopmentiv. Sustainable Development of Petroleum Resources5.1 Compliance of Ministerial Policy Statements with PFMAA compliance assessment of the policy statements of MEMD and PAU was done inaccordance with the requirements of the PFMA as shown in the table 2 below. TheCommittee established that the Votes complied with the requirements as per thePFMA.Table 2: Compliance of Ministerial Policy Statements with PFMA, FY2o/2425Source: Compliance based on MPS FY 24125.1 Gender and Equity Compliance AssessmentThe Gender and Equity Compliance Certificate assesses the extent to which theMinisterial are gender and equity responsive. The belowIMEMD MPS PAU MPS PFMA requirementProvided IThe achievements of the vote for the previousfinancial yearProvidedProvided Provided 2Certificate of gender and equity3Recruitment plan Provided ProvidedProvided 4Procurement plan ProvidedProvided Provided 5Motor vehicle utilization report6Asset register Provided ProvidedProvided 7Cash flow proiections ProvidedA statement of the actions taken by the vote toimplement the recommendations of Parliament inrespect to the report of the Auditor General of thepreceding financial vear.Provided Provided 8Provided Provided 9The annual and three months work plans andoutcomes, the objectives, outputs, targets andperformance indicators of the work plans andoutcomes4licy7tspecifies the gender and equity compliance score for MEMD and PAU. The scoresprovide the extent to which the Votes have specified measures to equalizeopportunities for men, women, persons with disabilities and other marginalizedgroups and regions. For the FY 20241 25, the scores were 670/o and 7Oo/o for MEMDand PAU respectively.Table 3: Gender and Com ScoreSource: Certificate for gender and equity compliance F\ 24 1256.0 VOTE OL7: MINISTRYOF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENTMandate of the Ministty:The Mandate of the Ministry of Energr and Mineral Development is to "Establish,Promote the Development, Strategically Manage and Safeguard the Rational,Sustainable Exploitation, Utilization of Energr and Mineral Resources for Socialand Economic Development".Vote Strategic Objectives:i) To meet enerry needs of Uganda's population for social and economicdevelopment in an environmentally sustainable manner;ii) To develop the mineral sector for it to contribute significantly to sustainablenational economic and social growth;iii) To use the country's oil and gas resources to contribute to early achievementof poverty eradication and create lasting value to society.6.1 Proposed MEMD Budget FY 2o124125The Ministry's budget is projected to increase by 33% next financial year from UGX1,485.63 billion to UGX I,976.06 billion (see table 4). However, this MPS projectionis less than the UGX 2,092.73 billion that was proposed in the BFP. The MPSnt is rpainlyon account of additional externalJx.fu-.-*-aEntity FA 22123 FA 23124 Fv 24126 CommentMEMD 64o/o 73o/o 67o/o Slieht declinePAU 58% 43Yo TOYo Improvement_":jF=ryF\r 23124 Ft 24125Approved Shs BnBFP Shs BnMPS Shs BnDraft Estimateso/o changeWage 19.32 19.32 L6.71 16.7t -l4o/oNon-Wage 73.56 93.56 93.8 93.80 28o/oDom Dev 396.74 402.7 402.7 402.70 2YoExt Financing 989.63 1,577.15 t462.47 1,462.47 48o/"Arrears 6.381 0.38 0.38 -94YoTotal 1,485.63 2,O92.73 L,976.06 L,9?6.06 33o/oTable 4: MEMD Estimates billionSource: PBO computations based on MPS for FI 24/25Program Allocations: The budget allocations to Mineral Development, SustainableEnerry Development and Regional Balanced Development Programs are projectedto decrease by 33o/o, lo/o and 5O7o respectively (see table 5). On the other hand,allocation to Sustainable Petroleum Development is projected to increasesignificantly by 6300/o largely on account of the Midstream PetroleumInfrastructure Project II. The project will have a total allocation of UGX 668.2 Bnof which UGX 51.5 Bn is GOU while UGX 616.7 billion is external financing.External financing has been allocated in anticipation of commencement of refineryEngineering, Procurement and Construction (EPC) activities.Table 5:t Nlocation MEMD BillionSource: PBO computations based on MPS for FY 24 1256.2 Half Year Budget Performance for MEMD-FY 2o123124The approved budget for MEMD was UGX 1,485.936 billion for FY 23124. This wasrevised to UGX 1,603.936 billion on account of supplementary expenditure (seetable 6). By half year,3Oo/o of the revised budget had been released and 680/o of therelease had been spent. Low releases were largely attributed to external financingshortfalls whereby some payments couldnot be effected due to wayleavestion issues.4;"I-""--*'''Fv 241257o chanqe ProgranF',tt 23124Approved, Shs BnBFP,Shs BaMPS, Shs Bn-33o/o Mineral Development 47.33 31.5 31.65Sustainable Petroleum Development 101.12 740.2r 738.42 63OY"-9o/o Sustainable Enerry Development 1,330.81 1320.86 1206.3-5lYo Regional Balanced Development 0.30 0.15 0.1534o/o Total 1,479.56 2092.?2 L976.52ud--Table 6: Half Year Budget Performance for the MEMD, FY 2o123124 (Shs.Aporoved Budset Revised Budeet Relcased by End Q2Spent by End Q2o/o BudgetReleascdWase t9.32 19.32 9.66 6.85 5Oo/oNon-Wase 73.86 73.86 4r.87 31. 19 57o/oGoU Devt. 396.74 5t4.74 29r.68 2t2.t5 57o/oExt Fin 989.63 989.63 130.59 74.57 l3o/oGoU Total 489.93 607.93 343.2r 250.19 560/oArrears 6.38 6.38 6.38 t.79 lOOo/oTotal Budect r.485.94 1,603.94 480.lE 326.55 3Oo/oSource: PBO computations based on Data from MEMD7.O VOTE 139: PETROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGANDA (PAUIMandate of PAUThe mandate of the PAU is to monitor and regulate the exploration, development,and production, together with the refining, gas conversion, transportation, andstorage of petroleum in Uganda.Vote Strategic Objectives:i. Ensure efficient exploration, development, production and utilization of thecountry's oil and gas resources and petroleum data management.ii. Strengthen policy, legal and regulatory frameworks as well as institutionalcapacity for the Oil and Gas industry.iii. Enhance the opportunities of nationals and national enterprises toparticipate in oil and gas activities.iv. Promote private investment in the Oil and Gas industry.v. Enhance Quality Health, Safety, Security, Social and Environment.7.1 Proposed PAU Budget FY 2o124125Petroleum Authority of Uganda's budget is projected to decrease slightly by lo/ofrom UGX. 89.52 billion this financial year to UGX. 88.7 billion in FY 24 125 (seetable 7l.It should be observed that the MPS indicates a wage budget reduction ofUGX 4.219 billion compared to this financial year. tf the wage provision is notstated to UGX 28.7 PAU will not be able to s for 22 staff ino/o Releases7 lo/o74o/o73o/o57o/o73o/o28o/o680/o10)t&)f-^,\\t,i'apost (as of March 2024 payroll) and for the 13 staff under the ongoing recruitmentprocess.Table 7: PAU MTEF Estimate billionSource: PBO computations based on MPS for FY 2024 1257.2 Half year Budget Performance- FY 2o123124Cumulatively, the Authority received UGX. 35.773 billion (4O.O%l of the approvedbudget UGX. 89.556 billion for FY 202312024 by half year. Out of this release,UGX14.359 billion was for Wage, UGXL6.92 billion was for Non-Wage andUGX4.494 billion was for Development (see table 8).In regard to absorption performance, UGX 27.49 billion was spent by the end ofquarter 2 accounting for a 76.80/o absorption rate. The unspent balance of UGX.8.283 billion (23.2o/ol was meant for Wage and gratuity payments for positions thatwere under recruitment, training of PAU Staff, Procurement of ICT Equipment, andfurniture under the Retooling and the National Petroleum Data RepositoryInfrastructure (NPDRI) projects.w 23124 r.rr 24126Approved BFPMPSDraftEstlrnates7o changeWage 28.72 28.72 24.50 24.5 -l5o/oNon-Wage 34.01 37.49 37.49 37.49 lOYoDom Dev 26.79 26.79 26.79 26.79 oohTotal 89.s2 93.OO 88.78 88.78 -lo/oTable 8: Half Year Performance for PAUFV 20.2324s based on data from PAUi!CategoryApprovedBudgetRevlsedBudgetReleasedby end ofQ2Spent byend of Q2o/o ofBudgetReleasedo/o ofReleasesSpentWage 28.7t8 28.718 14.359 13.411 SOYo 93o/oNon-Wage 34.014 34.Ot4 16.92 tt.94r 50% 7lo/oDevt. GOU 26.792 26.792 4.494 2.138 lTVo 48o/oArrears 0.032 o.o32 o o OYo OYoGraad Total 89.556 89.556 35.773 2?.49 4Oo/o 77o/o.U11a7.3 OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER ENERGY ANDMINERAL DEVELOPMENT SECTOR(al Wage Shortfall under Ministry of Energy and Mineral DevelopmentThe Committee noted that MEMD's wage provision in the MPS has reduced by UGX2.61 billion from UGX 19.3 billion in FY 2023124 to UGX 16.7 billion for FY2024125 yet the Ministry's staffing levels have not changed.The Committee was informed that if the wage provision is not reinstated to UGX19.3 billion, the Ministry will not be able to pay salaries for staff in post.Recommendation. The Committee recommends that additional UG]K 2.6L billion isprovided to reinstate the urage ceiling back to UGX. 19.3 billion.MINERAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM(bl Persistent Underfunding of Mineral Development ProgrammeThe Committee observed that; although the Mineral Development Program isprioritized under NDP III as one of the key growth areas for industrializationthrough value addition, there is no corresponding financing in the budget toachieve this aspiration. Uganda has significant deposits of commerciallyrecoverable quantities of precious minerals like gold which are not yet exploited, orindeed are being exploited without the knowledge of Government.The Mining and Minerals Policy for Uganda,2018; the Mining and Minerals Act,2022; the Mining and Minerals (Licensing) Regulations, 2023 and strengthenedinstitutional frameworks have the potential to offer a conducive mineral investmentclimate in Uganda.Despite this opportunit5r, the Ministry's budget for this program is projected toreduce from Shs 47 Bn in FY 2023124 to Shs 31.6 Bn in FY 24125. This falls fartoo short of the projected funding for the programme as recommended by NDP III,which be UGX. 699 for the FY-4-N-z(J_.-t-24125 should"ffi(,t,L-2(at2I\It is important to note that Mineral Development programme contributed 760/o ofthe non- tax revenue for the MEMD in the FY 2022123 and has potential togenerate revenue of approximately UGX 25OBn annually.Specifically; the Mineral Development program requires additional UGX 474 billionin FY 2024 125 for the following critical items summarized in the table below.Table 9: key priority areas and their funding gaps under the MineralDevelopment Programme in UGX BillionRecommendationThe Committee strongly recommends that Government provides UGX474 billion for various intenrentions the Mineral ntwProgram..-'r,t!... \-- i,SNFunding Priority GaP Justilication / Implications1Investments forthe NationalMining Company130 This company is critical in the Value additionand commercializatron of the country's mineralwealth. The required capital ization inve stmen tis UGXSOObn with an annual investment ofUGXl00Bn and operational costs of UGX3Obn.2Mineral Laboratory r48.2 Accreditation of the mineral laboratory andcertification of critical selected minerals. Thisrequires UGX 150bn over three-year period.This will give confidence to potential investorsin the mineral value. In addition, our countryminerals will be identified internationally.3Feasibility studiesat Kibiro andPanyimurgeothermalprospects.196 The feasibility study shall include:Drilling of eight (8) wells (four (4) deepexploration and four (4) injection wells),installation of pumps and well testing at Kibiroand Panyimur.Installation of a SMW pilot power plant andfacility for direct uses of geothermal heat inindustry, agriculture and tourism in oneselected prospect.Total 474\/i---t13aThe MOWT, MEMD should harmonise action plans on weighing andmeasuring of goods in transit so as to avoid duplication of projects andfor overall resource optimization.The MEMD should enter into MoUs with MoWT and UNRA to facilitatethe use of the existing weigh bridges.abf Establishment of the National Mining CompanySection 2l of the Mining and Minerals Act, 2022 establishes the Uganda NationalMining Company, which is wholly owned by the State to manage Uganda'scommercial holding and participating interests of the State in mineral agreements.Consequently, the MEMD through the Companies Act has incorporated theNational Mining Company.The Mining and Minerals Act further provides that the Minister on behalf of theMining Company may enter into joint agreements with private companies forexploration and large or medium scale mining operations. With the improvementof the legal and regulatory regime, two large scale mining licenses have beensigned. It is therefore imperative that the Company is capitalized to participate insome of these critical mining operations so as to support the Country'sdevelopment agenda.Recommendation:o Government should provide UGX 13O biUion for investment of theNational Mining Company for the IY2O24|25o Government should in the medium term plan for capitalization of theNational Mining Company to a tune of UGX SOObn."(l4\,cf Feasibility Studies at Kibiro and Panyimur Geothermal ProspectsVision 2O4O envisages increasing electricity generation capacity to 52, 481MWagainst a consumption of 3,668kWh/capita. [n order to achieve this, theCommittee notes that the sector has to diversify power generation and promoterenewable ener5/ projects.The Committee recognizes the potential benefits of geothermal enerry in providinga clean, reliable and secure source of energr, but also the challenges and barriersin upstream exploration and development. Such challenges include expensive testdrillings to confirm presence of sufficient geological resource. Thisnotwithstanding, the country's geothermal ener5/ potential is projected at1500MW. The Committee envisages that feasibility studies at Kibiro and Panyimurwill unblock investment in geothermal ener5/ as a possible enerry source tocontribute to the country's enerry mix.Recommendation:Government should provide UGX 196 billion for feasibility studies atKibiro and Panyimur for the FY2O24|2SSUSTNNABLE ENERGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAIU(cl Underfunding of Atomic Energy RegulationThe Committee was informed that the country is in the process of expandingnuclear ener$/ uses beyond the current medical, telecommunications, securit5l andtrade applications to include more complex applications of; electricity generation,education, training, radio isotope production among others.The Atomic Energr Council which regulates peaceful usage of ionizing radiationnow required to strengthen its capacity to manage regulation of nuclear reactors,nuclear power plants, nuclear fuels (Uranium), disposal of nuclear waste amongothers. Failure to strengthen nuclear regulation wiaffect the passing of theaI-J--,-:::-. 15required clearances by the lnternational Atomic Energr Agency and other partnersin the nuclear programme.The Committee was informed that the AEC has a budget provision of only UGX 5billion, but requires Shs 95bn in FY 2024125.The Committee recommends that:o UGX 15 Bn be re-allocatcd to AEC from the following sourcea within theMEMD MTEF: UGX 1O billion from Project L79a Midstream PetroleumInfrastructure Development Project Phase II and UGX 5 billion fromProject 1611: Petroleum Exploration and Promotion of Frontier Basinsr.(df Government's preparedness to take over from UMEME in 2ol25The Committee notes that Cabinet approved a roadmap for the power sectorreforms in the country. Among the key reforms was the take-over of the UMEMEconcession at the expiry of the concession agreement in March, 2025.The Committee was informed that in preparation for the Umeme Ltd takeover byUEDCL in 2025 as the 2O-year concessions is coming to an end, modalities havebeen worked out to manage the Electricity Distribution segment for a seamlessasset retransfer process and continuity of supply. There are mainly two financingrequirements and these are; the required buyout amount payable to Umeme beforeexit and the investment needs per annum by UEDCL after the asset retransfer in2025 and beyond.1. The Umeme buyout amount is currently estimated at USD 225.75m and thisneeds to urgently be mobilized. However, the MTEF for the SustainableEnergr Program as provided by MOFPED does not cater for this amount; and2. Also, UEDCL requires to urgently invest in the distribution network anestimated cost of USD 7OM per annum fornext 5 years.lI See Annex 1 for reallocations<*r6The Committee was informed that in order to secure funding for Umeme buyoutand investment in the distribution network, UEDCL, working with the ElectricityRegulatory Authority and the Ministry of Energr & Mineral Development havemodelled the financing needs for the two elements into the end-user tariff andrealized that, the buy-out amount and the annual investment needed by UEDCLcan ably be accommodated by the end-user tariff without having a negative impact,il UEDCL is given an opportunify as a Government institution to source for loanswithin the GOU structures where the Ministry of Finance Planning & EconomicDevelopment will be the lead negotiator and a guarantor.The costs arising from financing the above items (1) and (2) is recoverable throughthe tariff, in accordance with Electricity (lnvestment Approval andVerification), Regulations, 2O2O, following Cost-Benefit Analysis and approval byERA;If this financing is not provided before the end of the concession, there is a risk ofborrowing expensively in order to get required financing to meet the expiry timeand or additional costs will be incurred by government to UMEME as penalty forfailure to meet the terms of the agreement within the time period.Recommendationo The Committee recommends that Government gives UEDCL Access tofinancing through the Ministry of Finance planning and EconomicDevelopment by borrowing to develop the electricity infrastructure andraise financing for the Umeme buyout.. The Auditor General needs to quickly establish the exact amountrequired for the buyout of Umeme.(el Funding shortfall for land compensation for various energf sectorprojectsThe Committee observes that the Ministry of Energr and Mineral DevelopmentGX 18O billion fo ect affectedpersonsIh--J .:'\-/ls-l-iIt7for; the 345km Karuma Lira-Soroti-Mbale-Tororo 400kv Transmission line andNtinda substation to Namanve underground cable infrastructure project, residualcompensation works for Karuma and Isimba HPPs, Itanda and Kalagala Specialconservation area, and other projects in mining, energ/ and oil and gas.Development of these projects requires the right of way or project sites to be clearedfrom any encumbrances for continuity of works as per the law. Failure to securethis funding will lead to delays in implementing the above projects/initiatives,loans penalties, cost overruns of construction as well as increase in thecompensation costs as some of these lines pass through developed and or fast-growing towns and cities. Therefore, Government should provide additionalresources for land acquisition so that projects are implemented in a timely manner.Recommendationo The Committee recommends that Government provides UGX 18Obillion to MEMD for land compensation.(f) Underfunding of Rural Electrification ProjectsThe Committee was informed that although rural electrification is intended toincrease electricity access across the entire country, the ongoing ruralelectrification programs require UGX 498 billion but only UGX 133 billion has beenprovided in the MTEF leaving a funding gap of UGX 365 billion. These funds arerequired to meet already committed contracts and as such must be paid. Theseinclude;Grid extension of 29lots under GOU-UGX 258.5lBNCounterpart financing obligations for donor projects UREAP, TBEA,ERTTTI, GETFIT-UGX72. O6BNObligations that survived donor funding -ERTIII, TBEA - UGX 158.95bnVarious lasfmile s UGX 8.97BNl.ii.111.iv.cK;-- ,u_&J18Furthermore, the Committee is alive to the fact that the country is transitioning tothe Parish Development Model and the attendant agricultural value chain, whichmeans electricity must be taken up to the parishes.The risks of failing to meet these obligations include; Litigation bycontractors/service providers, vandalization of incomplete infrastructure that wasestablished using borrowed funds, failure to achieve the access targets forelectricity, and stagnation of the Parish Development Model aspirations of valueaddition and wealth creation.The Committee recommends that:o UGX 3O Bn be re-allocated to Rural Electrification and ConnectivityProject from the following sources: UGX 1O billion from LiquefiedPetroleum Gas (LPGI Supply and Infrastructure Intenrention Project;UGX 10 billion from Energy and Minerals Land Acquisition andInfrastructure Studies Project and; UGX 10 billion from NationalPetroleum Data Repository Infrastructure Project under PAU.o The Committee recommends that Government provides additional UGX335 billion to MEMD for Rural Electrification Projects.SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OF PETROLEUM RESOURCES PROGRATYI(gl Gas pipeline Feasibility studyOut of a total requirement of UGX 15 billion, only UGX 6 billion has been providedfor the Gas Pipeline Feasibility study leaving a funding gap of UGX 9 billion.These funds are required as a contribution for undertaking a joint study on theNatural gas pipeline with the Government of the United Republic of Tanzania. Thisgas will support the country's iron ore-based value addition and the move towardsclean enerS/ access for all Ugandans.It should be observed that in the Vision 2O4O and National Development Plan (NDP)the Renewable Uganda tto ,I itIIIthe{F19achieve 80 percent transition to renewable ener$/ by 2OaO and 10O percent by2050. For hydropower, Uganda plans to produce 52,481 MW by 2O4O, for solar its5,000MW, geothermal 1,500 MW, biomass 1,700 MW and peat 80OMW. Therefore,Government should explore alternative renewable ener5/ sources if it's to achievethe above targets by 2O4O.Recommendationo The Committee recommends that Government provides Shs 9 billionto MEMD for Gas Pipeline Feasibility study.(hl Construction of offices in TangaThe Committee notes that as the oil development activity nears an end, there isneed to establish an office at the port of Tanga in order to facilitate operations ofoil trading by CNOOC, EACOP, Refinery holding company as well as the Ministryand PAU. The government of Tanzania already provided the [and.Out of a total requirement of UGX 25 billion for the construction of Tanga offices,nothing has been provided in the MTEF.Recommendationo The Committee recommends that Government provides Shs 25 billionto MEMD for the Construction of offices in Tanga.PETROLEUM AUTHORITY OF UGANDA(ifWage Shortfall under Petroleum Authority of UgandaThe Committee noted that PAU's wage provision in the MPS has reduced by UGX4.219 billion from UGX 28.7 billion in FY 2023124 to UGX 24.5 billion for FY2024125 yet the Authority's staffing levels haven't reduced but will insteadincrease after the new recruitment process for the FY 2023124.The Committee was informed that if the wage provision is not reinstated to UGXstaff in post (as of March 28.7 billion, PAU will not paysalaries for 22It20(payroll)be able to.. J."frT;li v', - \-F.r,Recommendationo The Committee recommends that additional UGX 4.219 billion isprovided to reinstate the wage ceiling back to UGX. 28.7 billion.[f Recruitment of additional Stalf under PAUThe Petroleum Authority of Uganda (PAU) is monitoring and regulating six keyprojects being implemented concurrently. These include the Tilenga, KingfisherDevelopment Area (KFDA), the East Africa Crude Oit Pipeline, and Kabale RefineryProject, Kanyrataba and Ngassa deep and shallow exploration contract areas.The Authority needs UGX 12.13 billion to recruit 49 additional staff (01 Manager,16 Senior Officers, 28 Officers, and 4 Technicians) next financial year to effectivelymonitor and regulate these projects, together with their associated social andeconomic aspects. The need for additional staff is because, in addition to theincreasing intensity of the activities, they are being implemented at the same timeand in different locations within Uganda, Tanzania and overseas.The absence of these additional staff during this period, when these key, large, andhigh-cost projects are being undertaken, will lead to less than-ideal technical andfinancial decisions being taken by the companies and Government, to thedetriment of the country.Recommendationo The Committee recommends that Government allocates additionalUGX. 12.13 billion to enable PAU recruitment additional staff.(kl Real-Time Monitoring Centre (RTMC|The RTMC which requires provision of UGX 5O.7 billion will be a system of physicalinfrastructure (including computers, computing systems, display systems,communication equipment, connectivity equipment) and software which will bebased at the PAU offices in Entebbe but digitally linked to all the oil and gasareas in the country.2L,.\,IiIIi --==1F+-'-*:--'-'..- T t *-bL\\tL'IThe purpose of the Real Time Monitoring Centre (RTMC) is to enable the efficientand continuous receipt, processing, interpretation retrievable and visualization ofdata and information from oil and gas operations/facilities in real time (or live).Recommendation. The Committee recommends that Government allocates additionalUGX. 5O.7 billion to enable PAU develop the RTMC.(lf Disaster Recovery SolutionThe PAU has put in place a Data Centre but does not have a Disaster Recovery(DR) solution in place. Given that the oil and gas operations in Uganda areincreasing and generating significantly large volumes of data, a Disaster Recoverysolution is urgently required so that should there be a failure at the primary site(current data centre), the ICT services for the country's oil and gas sector can runfrom the DR site which is planned to be hosted by NITA-U.Recommendation. The Committee recommends that Government allocates additionalUGX. 8.15 billion to enable PAU develop the DR.-----.2,:-aE-.\. ,! 1)Nli -f,{--.*..- l+1i-1.'..- -229.O TIIATER AND EN1IIRONMENT SECTORThe Sector has the following entities; Vote O19-Ministryof Water andEnvironment(MWE); Vote150-National Environment Management Authority(NEMA); Vote l57-National Forestry Authority (NFA), Vote l09-Uganda NationalMeteorological Authority (UNMA), and National Water and Sewerage Cooperation(Nwsc).9.1.1 Compliance of Ministerial Policy Statements with PFMAMinisterial Policy Statements should be in the format prescribed by the Ministerand must contain certain requirements in accordance with the PFMA. Acompliance assessment of the policy statements for Votes under Water andEnvironment sector was done in table below.PFMA requirement MWE NFA UNMA NEMAIThe achievements of the vote for theprevious financial vearProvided Provided Provided Provided2Certificate of qender and equity Provided Provided Provided ProvidedProvided 3Recruitment plan Provided Provided FrovidedProvided Provided 4Procurement plan Provided ProvidedProvided Provided Provided Provided 5Motor vehicle utilization reportProvided 6Asset register Provided Provided ProvidedProvided Provided Provided 7Cash flow proiections ProvidedProvided Provided Provided Provided 8A statement of the actions taken by thevote to implement therecommendations of Parliament inrespect to the report of the AuditorGeneral of the preceding financial year.Provided 9The annual and three months workplans and outcome, the objectives,outputs, targets and performanceindicators of the work plans andoutcomesProvided Provided ProvidedTable 7: of MPSs with FY 20/2425Source: Based on MPS Ft 2024 1259.1.2 Gender and Equity Compliance AssessmentThe gender and equity compliance certificate assesses the extent to which thebudget is gender and equity responsive. The assessment rates the extent to whichthe Ministries, Departments and ) implemen measures toF\-4Lf{:(23Iaddress and equalize opportunities for women, men, persons with disabilities andother marginalized groups. The table below specifies the gender and equitycompliance score for the votes.Table 1O: Gender and Com AssessmentSource: Certificate for gender and equity compliance 20241259.2 VOTE O19: MINISTRYOF UIATER AND ENVIRONMENT (MwElMandate: The Mandate of the Ministry includes initiating legislation, policyformulation, setting standards, inspections, monitoring, and coordination andback up technical support in relation to water and environment sub sectors.9.2.L Vote Strategic Objectives among others include:To increase provision of water for production through development of multi-purpose bulk water storage and supply systems with the involvement of allstakeholders as appropriate.To increase water supply coverage in rural areas while ensuring equitythrough providing at least each village with one safe and clean water sourceand where technically feasible piped water options (gravity flow systems,solar pumped boreholes and surface treated systems) will be considered.To promote improved sanitation services in rural and urban areas includingthe promotion of hand-washing with soap.9.2.2 MUIE Budget Projections11111Proposed Budget: The Ministry's budget is projected to increase slightly by 3%o toShs 1 ,178.9 bn in FY 2024125 compared to this financial year (See table I 1). Theincrement is on account of additions under non-wage (UGX 1.94 bn) and Externalfinancing (UGX 36.27bn1. Despite these additions, the nl,_l(lurLEntity FA 22123 FA 23124 FA 24125 CommentMUIE 82o/o 64o/o 64o/o ConstantNEMA 64Vo 57o/o 6OYo ImprovementNFA 62% 73Yo 75Vo ImprovementUNMA 6lo/o 6t% 620h lmprovementL!-MPSbudget,24is less by UGX 5.67 billion compared to the BFP provision. This reduction ispartially attributed to external financing. (See table 11).Table 11: MWE Estimates ShsSource: PBO computations based on MPS for F'I 2O24/25Program Allocations: Table 12 shows the proposed budget allocations byprograms contributed to by MWE in the NDP III. The budget for Agro-industrialization program is projected to increase by 34o/o while budgets for NaturalResources, Environment, Climate Change, Land and Water and Human CapitalDevelopment Programs will reduce by 7o/o and 67o respectively. Increments forAgro-industrialization are mainly on account of additional funding for Developmentof Solar Powered lrrigation and Water Supply Systems project were the budgetswill grow from Shs 47.7 bn this year to Shs 128.8 bn next financial year.FA 24125 FY 23124Approved budget BFP MPS Estlmateso/o chanqeWaqe 16.87 16.95 16.30 16.30 -3o/oNon-Wage 16.43 17.o2 18.37 18.37 l2o/oDom Deu 386.37 382.39 382.39 382.39 -lo/oErt Financinq 719.53 768.28 755.80 755.80 50hArrears 7.78 6.r2 6.t2 -2lo/oTotal 1.146.98 1.184.65 1.178.98 1.179.98 3o/oTable 12: MWE t AllocationFA 24125,Source: PBO computations based on MPS for FY 2024/259.2.3 MWE Half Year Budget Performance FY 2o123124MWE has a total approved budget of UGX I,L46.9 Billion in FY 23/24 of whichonly UGX 696.7 Billion (610/olwas released and UGX47o spent by 31st December3 (seetable3).o/o change34o/o-7o/o-60/o3o/o, r-\ilIFA 23124 ProgranApproved BFP MPSAgro-[nd ustrialization 26r.46 366.33 3s0.32206.O7 186.55 t92.54 Natural Resources, Environment, Climate Change, Land WaterHuman Capital Development 67t.65 63t.76 630.00Total 1,139.19 1,184.65 1,172.86LL}.I25dApprovedBudgetRevlsedBudgetReleased Spent % BudgetReleasedo/o ReleasesSpeatWage 16.865 16.865 8.432 6.529 5Oo/o 77o/"Non-lllage t6.425 t6.425 8.926 6.79s 54o/o 76%GoU Derzt 386.364 429.78 236.167 2r5.832 6llo 9lo/oExt Devt 719.53 7t9.53 435.437 279.954 600/o 64o/oArrears 7.781 7.78r 7.78r 7.335 IOOYI 94o/"Grand Total L,L46.97 1,190.38 696.74 516.45 6lo/o 74o/oTable 13: Half Year Performance FY 2ol2:,d24Source: PBO computations based on data from MWE fY 231249.3 VOTEISO.NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITY(NEMAIMandate: NEMA is responsible for the management of the environment bycoordinating, monitoring and supervising all activities in the field of environment.Vote Strategic Objectives among others include:i. Enhancement of environmental compliance and enforcement,ii. Environmental integration at national and local government level,iii. Increasing and enhancing access to environmental information, education,awareness and public participation.9.3.1 Budget Projections FY 2O24125tProposed Budget NEMA's budget is projected to decrease by 5% from Shs. 41.3billion this financial year to Shs 39.2 billion in FY 2024125 (See table below). Itshould be noted that there is a significant reduction in the wage yet the staffnumbers have remained the same.Table 14: NEMA ction Shs. Billionon MPS for FY 2024/2526(r<**--.-*-.:.Fv 24125 w 23124Approved BFP MPS Estinateso/o changeWage 12.652 12.6s2 s.96 5.96 -530hNon-Wage 19.388 2r.44 2r.44 2t.44Dom Dev 9.32 t2.32 tr.82 LL,82Ilo/o27o/oTotal 4t.36 46.4t2 39.22| 3e.2 -5o/oatzl) -tt t-/l-______:fr.r_ -_.{+:JFJ L{tJ9.3.2 Half Year Budget PerformanceNEMA received UGX. 21.99 Bn, which accounts for 53.3% of the total allocation.By December 2023, UGX. 8.052 Bn of the released funds had been utilized. Thelow absorption of funds was a result of ongoing recruitment processes, staffgratuity that is to be paid in quarter four, ongoing procurements, delayed invoicingfor workshop activities and other suppliers, NSSF and medical insurance fundswhich will all be spent in the second half of FY 2023124.Table 15: Half Year Performance for FY 202324Source: PBO computations based on halfyear budget perfreport9.4 VOTE 157- NATTONAL FORESTRY AUTHORTTY (NrAlProposed Budget FY 2O24l25: NFA's budget is projected to increase slightly fromShs 24.9 billion this FY to Shs 26.4 Billion next financial year (See table 16). Theproposed budget for NFA will be appropriated under Natural Resource,Environment, Climate Change, Land and Water Resources Management Programof the NDP III.Table 16: NFA Estimates Shs BillionSource: PBO computations based on MPS for FY 2O24 125OIf Budget Support: NFA will have a budget of UGX 55 billion from the Worldthrough a project called tected for Climate Invgsting in FIt€"I.-.i_-<.?Approved Revised Released bySpent by% Budget 7o ReleasesBudget Budget End Q2 End Q2Released SpentWage t2.652 t2.652 6.326 3.809 s0.oo% 60.2Oo/oNon-Wage 19.388 20.318 1 1.OO4 4.2r7 57.OOY" 38.30%GoU-Deve 9.32 9.32 4.66 o 50.oo% o.oov"Grand Total 41.36 42.29 21.99 8.()26 53.2Oo/o 36.5Oo/"Fv 24125 FV 23124Approved Budget BFP MPS Estlmates 7o changeWage 8.266 8.266 9.682 9.682 17.l!oNon-Wage t2.t28 t2.13 t2.t3 12.13 o.oo/oDom Dev 4.594 4.59 4.59 4.59 O.Oo/"Ext Financing o 55.05 oArrears 0.069 0.069Total 24.984 8().036 26.472 26.472 S.7o/o(<-----27Smart Development (IFPA-CD). NFA will implement the following componentsunder the project:a) Component 1 for improvement management of CFRs with a total budget ofUGX 30.694 billionb) Component 2 focusses on lnvestment to increase revenues and jobs fromCFRs with a total budget of 21.96 billion andc) Component 4 focusses on project management planning, reporting, andaccountability with a total budget of 2.39 billionHalf Year Budget Performance FY 2o123124By half year, the National Forestry Authority (NFA) had received 50.27o of theapproved annual budget i.e. UGX 12.536 billion out of the UGX 24.987 billion. Ofthis amount, UGX 9.820 billion or 78.3o/o of the funds disbursed was expended bythe end of December 2023 as in the table below.Table 17: Half Year Budget Performance for NFASource: PBO computations based on data NFA9.5 VOTE IO9.UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY(uNMAlProposed Budget: UNMA's budget is projected to increase slightly by lOo/o to Shs18.04 bn next financial year and this is majorly on account of wage. (See table 18).It,I\.:fu-;:t-.-.RevlsedBudgetReleasedby EndQ2Spentby EndQ2o/oBudgetReleasedo/oReleasesSpentApprovedBudget990h 8.266 8.266 4.133 4.096 5Oo/o Waget2.t28 t2.128 6.106 4.519 5Oo/o 74Yo Non-Wage50% 530h GoU development 4.594 4.594 2.297 1.2059.42 5Oo/o ?80/o Grand Total 24.947 24.987 12.536,-L;rJI28iFY 23124ApprovedWage 7.4tNon-Wage 8.42Fv 241250.61MPS8.429.013Estimates0.619.0138.42NBFP0.617.418.42Dom Dev 0.61TCYTAL L6.4 16.44 18.04Table 18: UNMA Estimates Shs. Billiono/o change22%OYoOo/o18.04 LOo/oSource: Based on MPS 24125Half Year Budget Performance: The appropriated budget for UNMA for the FY23124 amounts to UGX 16.4 bn. By half year, UGX 8.2 billion (5O% of approvedbudget) was released and 630/o of the release spent. Under performance forrecurrent budget largely due to earlier release of gratuity by MoFPED which is yetto be paid to staff in June as per the HR Manual. The development budgetperformance was affected by the yet to be concluded procurements.Table 19: Half Year Performance for UNMASource: PBO computations based on data from UNMA9.6 OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS UNDER UTATER ANDENVIRONMENT SECTOR(MINISTRYOF UIATER AND EN1TIRONMENT(af Mainstreaming Climate Change and implementation the ClimateChange Act,2O2LThe Committee was informed that in order to comply with the Climate Change Act,2O2I, the Ministry of Water and Environment needs to support all MDAs, localgovernments, and civil society organizations to continuously integrate andimplement climate change adaptation, mitigation and disaster risk reduction inand reporting in programmes, ects and activities. In29t'ry(Approved Released bySpent byo/o Budgeto/o ReleasesBudget End Q2 End Q2 Released SpentWage 7.4t3 3.707 3.433 s0.01% 92.6l!0Non-Wage 8.424 4.234 t.74 50.260/o 4l.lOo/o0.605 0.302 0.03 49.92o/o 9.93o/o GoU-DevelopmentGrand Total t6.442 4.243 s.203 50.13% 63.12o/o(. -t-- .-.i II --''->rI h.-. .) )addition, there is need to formulate regulations, guidelines and plans to implementthe National Climate Change Act, 2O2I.The Committee observes that climate models and projections show that climatechange will continue to affect the livelihoods of communities leading to loss of lifeand forced migration among others in the hotspot areas of Elgon sub region, thecattle corridor of Uganda and the hilly and mountainous areas of South-westernUganda.The Committee was informed that mainstreaming climate change andimplementation of the Climate Change Act, 2021 has a funding shortfall of Shs10.9 billion.Recommendation:. Government should provide UGX.lO.9 billion to the Climate ChangeDepartment under the Ministry to enable implementation of theClimate Change Act.(bf Carbon trading mechanismsUganda is one of the carbon market frontrunners in Africa, with a total of over 33million carbon credits issued in Uganda from the Clean Development Mechanism(CDM) and Voluntary Carbon Market (VCM) standards. Accordingly, carbontrading has the potential to generate revenue for sustainable developmentinitiatives while encouraging businesses to use greener practices and technologies.At the moment, however, finding buyers of carbon credits is hard since there is noclear policy on carbon markets. Yet, the trade in carbon credits between companiescan promote emission reductions and investments in carbon offset projects.Carbon trading initiatives have the potential to promote sustainable landmanagement practices and environmental conservation in Uganda. By promotingprogrammes such as afforestation, reforestation, and sustainable agriculture,carbon trading can aid in the conservation of biodiversity, the protection oftem , and the tation and land tion. In30(.lt,tr.--Ll\of defoaddition to helping preserve Uganda's distinctive natural heritage, carbon tradinginitiatives if implemented will support the local populace that depends on naturalresources for their livelihoods.Participating in carbon trading will create new revenue streams for Uganda. Thecountry has vast natural resources, including forests and wetlands, which cansequester carbon. By implementing projects that reduce emissions or enhancecarbon sequestration, the country will be able to generate carbon credits that canbe sold on the international market. This influx of revenue will contribute toeconomic growth and poverty reduction efforts.Recommendations:o Government should implement a centralized platform for collecting andstoring emissions data from regulated entities, ensuring accuracy,transparency, and accessibility of information.o Government should provide training, technical assistance, andcapacity-building programs to empower regulators, market operators,and market participants with the skills and knowledge needed tonavigate carbon markets effectively.o Government should develop electronic trading platforms and marketinfrastructure to facilitate the buying, selling, and trading of carboncredits.. Government should allocate resources towards development of thecarbon trading policy and regulations.(cf Support to rural water project- Source per villageThe Ministry requires UGX 1.Strillion annually for supply of unserved villages/population in the next 5 years using several strategies. However, given theeconomic constraints currently, the Ministry requests for at least UGX SObn forimplementation of at least one source per village as per the Presidential Directivesmost critical below 5O7o safe water coverage.I\3( A.-$6>t'The funds will be used to improve water storage and network expansioncountrywide. This will make the network more economically viable and serve morepeople from the available sources. It will also increase the number of sources pervillage under the rural water component.Recommendation:. Government should provide UGX. 5O billion to support improvement ofwater storage and network expansion countr5mide.(df Strategic Towns lllater Supply and Sanitation Project (STWSSPIThe Committee observed that Government secured donor financing amounting toUSD 66 million from the African Development Fund for the implementation ofStrategic Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project with Government to providecounterpart funding.However, project implementation continues to be affected due to lack ofcounterpart funding. This will escalate the cost of the project implementation dueto penalties arising from delayed payment of contractors.The Committee was informed that the Ministry requires additional funding of UGX.12 billion to meet the counterpart funding obligations to increase the networkcoverage in the towns under implementation which include the following; KamuliMunicipality, Kyenjojo-Katooke, Buikwe, Dokolo, Kyenjojo town council andKatooke Town Council.\-lI,rx\YY.r.hd'32Recommendation. Government should provide UGX. 12 billion as counterpart Iinancingrequirements for STWSSP. Failure to provide this funding will resultinto penalties on the side of Government.(ef Inadequate Budgetary Nlocations to Senrice Coverage Acceleration Project-(SCAP 1OO - umbrellasfIn July 2OI9 , the GoU established the " lOOo/o Service Coverage Acceleration Project;umbrellas (SCAP 1OO - Umbrellas)" to re-enforce efforts towards improved waterservices in small towns across the country. The project objectives are to extendwater service coverage to the unserved population (by serving all villages within ornear the supply area), and to upgrade, expand and renew the existinginfrastructure in order to ensure reliable water and sanitation service delivery. Thisproject supports operation and maintenance in 498 urban centres countrywide.The Committee has noted and appreciates the work done by the Umbrellas of Waterand Sanitation across the country through the expansion of pipe networks andrehabilitation of water supply systems with the aim of achieving a safe water sourceper village.In FY 2024 125, the project plans to improve water storage and network expansioncountr5nvide for the areas of Bugarama-Karweru, Ruhwere-Kashenyi-Kateretereand Kagarama - Rushuura-Kibuzirye in Kabale and Rubanda districts in southwestern Uganda requires.The Ministry therefore, seeks additional funding of UGX 25 Billion in the FY2024125 to support the project by extending and refurbishing water infrastructurein the small towns.?a\(I{Ut(t)(-.(-33It'Recommendation. Government should provide UGX 25 billion for SCAP 1OO -umbrellaswhich has impact in provision of improved water supply senrices to theurban poor population countryrride.(Q Water for Production Project Phase IIThe Committee was informed that in order to increase access and use of water foragricultural production as envisaged in the NDP lll, Government needs to provideadditional UGX.4O billion to the Ministry of Water and Environment in FY2024125. Additional resources will be used for:o Rehabilitation of strategic multipurpose dams of Longoritopoj in KaabongDistrict and Kawomeri in Abim District.. Remedial works at strategic multipurpose dams of Kobebe in Moroto DistrictArechet in Napak District and Longorimit in Kaabong Districto Desilting and rehabilitation of parish level communal valley tanks inKaramoja sub-region.Recommendation. Government should provide UGX 4O billion for the Water for ProductionProject Phase II in a phased manner over a three-year period startingwith UGX 15 billion in FY 2o124125.(gf Inner Murchison Bay Cleanup projectThe Committee was informed that the Inner Murchison Bay is one of the pollutionhotspots on Lake Victoria. The objective of the Inner Murchison Bay Cleanupproject is to reduce pollution, restore water quality, beneficial uses and ecosystemservices of the lnner Murchison Bay (IMB). In order to fast track this project, Shs22.5 billion is required for the completion of the National Water reference lab, PIERuality research vessel andtruction of Mbarara Regional(tu!Itfor the new water-.fl!.-,\34(IThe Committee recommends that:o UGX 5 Bn be re-allocated to Inner Murchison Bay Cleanup Project fromIntegrated Water Resource Management and Development Projectunder the Ministry of Water and Environment2.o Government should provide additional UGX 17.5 billion for the InnerMurchison Bay Cleanup Project.(hf Water resources measures implemented in priority catchmentsThe Committee was informed that the Ministry requires UGX. 20 billion forimplementation of Catchment Management Plans to improve water availabilify fordifferent uses and address water related climate change issues and challenges likefloods and droughts. This will be addressed through projects:I662- WaterManagement Zones (WMZS) and 1530- lntegrated Water Management andDevelopment Project (IWMDP)Recommendationo The Committee recommends that UGX 20 billion be provided forimplementation of Catchment Management Plans.(if Restoration of the environment through tree plantingThe Committee was informed that the Ministry of Water and Environment requiresUGX 15 billion for raising tree seedlings. The tree seedlings will be used forrestoration of forest cover.The Committee observed that the continued loss of forest cover and degradation ofwetlands exacerbates the already severe weather patterns in form of prolongeddroughts and floods. tn addition, forest cover has not improved over time and notedthat if this project is not well supervised, it can end up facilitating the rich., Sg. Annex 2 for,,tvS' ,rL..-={+\J35I z--(-/The Committee recommends that:o UGX 2 Bn be re-allocated to Investing in Forests and Protected Areasfor Climate-Smart Development Project from Project 1638-Retooling ofMinistty of Water and Environment. The reallocated funds will be usedto provide tree seedlings3.o Government should provide additional UGX. 13 billion for therestoration of environment through tree planting.o In future, all MDAs should have a component on tree planting in theirbudgets.NATIONAL WATER AND SEUIERAGE COOPERATION (NWSCI[f Financial Obligations under Water Senrice Acceleration Project (SCAP lOOlThe Committee was informed that NWSC has outstanding obligation arising frominadequate budgetary provision and under releases by GOU towards meeting thecounterpart obligations for Kampala Sanitation Project (KSP), Water ServiceAcceleration Project (SCAP 100) and Integrated Water Management andDevelopment Project (IWMDP) (see table below).A total of UGX 95.4 billion is urgently required to clear the outstanding financialobligations related to completed works, secure financial closure for completedprojects and avoid further accumulation of interest.The Committee was also informed that NWSC requires UGX 47.5 billion to meetcritical co-financing obligations to Donor/GoU funded projects in FY 2024125 asstipulated in the financing agreements.The Committee notes that funds for outstanding obligations and new obligationsfor FY 2024125 have not been provided. Failure to provide these funds will escalatethe implementation challenges related to projects under NWSC\3 See Annex 2 for reallocationstwz-fu (a,-(.Iiui,tI.v36of Nwsc in UGX BillionSource: NWSCRecommendationso The Committee recommends that Government provides additionalUGX. 95.4 billion to NWSC to clear outstanding financial obligations.o Government should provide UGX 47.5 billion for critical co-financingnew obligations next financial year.(kf Prospective Donor linancing for Projects under NWSCThe Committee was informed that Government is in the process of approving donorfunding for various Donor/GoU funded projects under NWSC as summarized inthe table below. This includes part of the Euro 45 million additional financing thatis being pursued for KW-LV WATSAN. A cabinet paper has been submitted andsubsequently a request for approval by Parliament will be presented. The target isto have financing agreement signed before the end of the financial year.Donor for NWSCSource: NWSCtawL<,37(l.ProjectsOutstandingobligationsObligations nextN 6^ r.SETotalRequiremenWater Service Acceleration Project (SCAP 100) 45.8 25.7 7L.5Kampala Sanitation Proiect (KSPI 45 0 45Integrated Water Management andDevelopment Proiect (IWMDP)-Gulu 4.6 0 4.6KW-LV WATSAN o 15.8 15.8Mbarara- Masaka-lsinsiro (SWCTI 0 6 6Grand Total 95.4 47.5 r42.9Projects Amount (Shs BnfIntegrated Water Management and Development Project (IWMDP)-Gulu 141.0KW-LV WATSAN 181.1Mbarara- M asaka- Isingiro (SWCT) 266.5Wakiso West Water and Sanitation Project (!V!VWSP) 8.3Grand Total 596.9-l..Recommendation. The Committee recommends that Government adjusts upward theExternal financing celing for NWSC donor funded projects to UGX 596.9billion to match the volume of works expected to be executed duringFY 2024l25ras per the approved workplan.(lf Outstanding Water Bills in Government InstitutionsThe Committee was that the operation, management and maintenance of the watersupply system(s) by NWSC in government institutions continues to be a challengedue to unpaid arrears in water bills. The outstanding arrears for GovernmentInstitutions amounts to UGX 85.9 billion and is expected to grow to UGX 108.4billion by the end of June 2024.The Committee observes that unpaid water bills in government institutionsnegatively affects the cash flow of the Corporation and constrains service delivery.Recommendationso Government should clear outstanding arrears of UGX 85.9 billion toNWSC in water bills.VOTE 157: NATIONAL FORESTRY AUTHORITYaf Forest Resenres Boundary Resunreyed, Marked and MaintainedThe Committee noted that despite various Government interventions to restoreforest cover, there has been continued loss on acreage of forest cover due toencroachment. Additionally, the existing penalties and enforcement mechanismsare inadequate to address the increasing impunity on forest encroachment.The Committee was further informed that the total external boundary of over1 1,000km of the Permanent Forest Estate (PFE) requires re-surveying anddemarcation to restore the s from encroachment. In FY8\..,b\..-q'7"-jlegalt2024125, NFA requires an additional UGX. 1.6 billion to undertake this activityand UGX 3.1 billion for protection of forests from encroachment.RecommendationsThe Committee recommends that;. Government provides UGX 1.56 billion for re-sunreying anddemarcation of forest boundaries and UGX. 3.1 billion for protection offorests from encroachment.bf Inadequate budget for provision of tree seedlingsThe Committee noted that the restoration of forests and tree cover by naturalregeneration or by plantation or by agroforestry has not kept pace with the annualloss of forest cover and loss of individual trees. According to the NDP III, forestcover in Uganda reduced from 2Oo/o in 19861 87 to 9.5o/o in FY 17 I 18. This is majorlyattributed to biomass fuel cooking, expansion of agricultural land, sporadicurbanization and poverty.This has led to climate change as evidenced by severe weather patterns in form ofprolonged droughts and floods. The continued loss of forest cover is impactingnegatively on Uganda's tourism, agriculture, among others; and therefore, needsto be addressed urgently.The Committee observes that one of the strategies to deal with climate change isthrough increased tree planting. However, this intervention has a funding shortfallof UGX 5 billion next financial year.Recommendations Io Government should provide additional UGX. 5 billion to provide treeseedlings under NFA.VOTE 15O: NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT MANAGEMENT AUTHORITYalr.Illage BillLL,utfor planned recrul d structure\r:\>a39\'"I-under the NEMA--qtr=.\tThe Committee was informed that NEMA is undergoing a restructuring process forstrengthening. The restructuring will see NEMA staff increase from the current 131staff to 413 staff, an increment of 282 staff .The Committee notes that these staff will strengthen the regional presence throughestablishment and strengthening regional offices as well as introduction of an OilGas and Mineral Division at NEMA.Under the new restructuring, NEMA has a projected wage shortfall of UGX 5.93billion. This provision if given will also cater for recruitment of the EnvironmentProtection Force.Recommendations:. The Committee recommends that; Government allocates additionalUGX 5.93 billion to enable NEMA recruit more stalf as per the approvedstructure.bf Reduction in Wage Allocation for NEMAThe Committee noted a wage reduction under NEMA from UGX 12.6 billion thisfinancial year to UGX 5.6 billion for FY 24125, indicating a shortfall of UGX 6.6billion. The Committee was informed that the wage ceiling amounting to UGX 5.6billion was provided before the completion of verification exercise of public officersthat was conducted by the Ministry of Public Service.The Committee was informed that although NEMA wrote to the Ministry of PubticService and Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development (MoFPED)for reinstatement of the wage back to UGX 12.6 billion, this has not been done.The Committee observes that if this wage is not reinstated, NEMA won't be inposition to pay staff in post next financial year.mmendations: tThe Committee recommends that reinstates NEMA's wageEack to UGX L2.6 billion. (,,-fr\.:h40tI+flt.=''==--u,-r_r'( :a'Icf Procurement of an Environment Information and Licensing System,The Committee was informed that to increase efficiency in service delivery, and tolink NEMA processes with other government agencies, NEMA initiatedprocurement process for automation of all its business processes.The automation will see an Integrated Environment Information and LicensingSystem procured to improve Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)submission processes, Environment Audits and reduce on delays in issuance ofESIA certificates, and reduce human to human contact reducing further delaysand corruption tendencies.Recommendation:. The Committee recommends that Government provides UGX 1o.65bnto NEMA for procurement of the Environment Information andLicensing system.df Insuflicient funds for Purchase of Environmental Monitoring fleetThe Committee was informed that NEMA has an aging of fleet of vehicles forenvironmental monitoring equipment including Mobile Air and water qualityMonitoring equipment, field inspection fleet, Noise and Vibration meters amongothers.NEMA has a fleet of 40 Motor Vehicles, 30 of which are in dangerous mechanicalcondition. These motor vehicles are necessary to facilitate degradation incidenceresponses, field monitoring and office operations. NEMA has earmarked topurchase at least 7 Motor Vehicles in FY2O24125, but the fleet requirement is stillhigh, given the national demand. These vehicles are further necessary for Oil andGas compliance monitoring and responsetionsThe Committee recommends that Government provides UGX 1o.74bn ofor e monitoring.t.St'''h,'l;rsIt\to NEMA4*4T\purchasesef Establish and Equip NEMA Regional OfficesThe Committee was informed that NEMA has instituted regional offices in the East,North, South and Western regions of Uganda. To enhance service delivery in theregions and compliance enforcement, NEMA needs to strengthen and equip theseregional offices for improved service delivery. This requires UGX 24 Billion.Recommendations. The Committee recommends that Government provides UGX 24 bn tostrengthen and equip the regional offices.VOTE 3O2: UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITYaf Underfunding of UNMAThe Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA) is responsible forestablishing and maintaining weather and climate observing stations network,collection, analysis and production of weather and climate information, (includingwarnings/advisories) to support social and economic development. UNMA ismandated to provide weather predictions and advisories to Government and otherstakeholders for use in sustainable development of the country.However, UNMA faces challenges of; inadequate weather monitoring equipment,inadequate computational facilities, inadequate personnel as well as insufficientfunding for dissemination among others.The Committee observed that the impact of climate change necessitates additionalfunding to enable UNMA adequately execute its mandate. Below is a table showingUNMA's unfunded priorities.t l,Lt/r--L J.tt'a..J.x:II-\K42Unfunded Priorities under UNMARecommendationThe Committee recommends that Government provides UGX 22.8 bn underUNMA for the unfunded priorities.10.o coNcLUsIoNRt. Hon. Speaker, Hon. Members, in conclusion,The Committee is cognizant of the fact that Natural Resources and theEnvironment are critical to achieving increased household incomes andimprovement of quality of life of the population.lndeed, the NDP III's objectives are based on the country's comparative advantagethat lies in its abundant natural resources which ought toexploited whileconserving the environment.However, the Committee noted during the presentation of theinisterial PolicyStatements for FY 2024125, that MDAs under the Natural Resources andEnvironment Committee contin to attract very limited funding and huge budget43I\1...)Ls.NItemFunding Gap Shs BnFY 241251Procurement of a super computer 102Dissemination of weather forecasts 13Revamp and operationalize the upper air station at Entebbelnternational Airporto.254Revamp and operationalize the Lower-Level Wind AlertSystem at Entebbe International Airport1.85Construction of 2 weather obserwing stations at Mbarara andKisoro airfrelds4.26Procurement of 100 rainfall stations and76 Automaticweather stations27lmplementation of weather forecasting system for inlandwater lakes28Establishment of 2 air pollution monitoring stations 1.55Total 22.8+kYcuts. Key areas that have been affected by the budget cuts yet require additionalfunding include rural electrification and provision for tree seedlings among others.Insufficient financing for MDAs under the Committee has made it extremelydifficult for them to attain their targets which are anchored in the NDP III.Therefore, Government should devote additional resources to these MDAs so as toenhance Natural Resources, Environment, Climate Change, Land and WaterManagement to sustainably increase household incomes and quality of life.Rt. Hon. Speaker, Hon. Members, in light of the above, it is the prayer of theCommittee that this House adopts this report and approves the budget estimatesfor FY 2024125 as follows.e(\,4'+--'- 'T 1'tr --: \-:,[,"(<.,"I44t-/.r*Table 18: Summary of Budget Estimates for FY 2o24125 by VoteSource: Drafit Budget Estimates 2024125I beg to EoveI'l-7/-<-. ,((r jr:\'t- t.---. - -Vote DescriptionRecurrentExpenditure(ucx'ooo)DevelopmentExpendltureTotal(ucx'ooolot7Ministry of Energy and Mineral Developnent 110,542,637 1,865,519,81 L,976,0,62,139Petroleum Authority of Uganda (PAU) 61,989,2OO 26,792,OOO 88,781,2OOo19Ministry of Water and Environment 37,341,OO8 1r1411638,28 L,l7g,g7g,109Uganda National Meteorologlcal Authorlty 17,433,384 61O,OOO 18,O43,384150National Environment Management Authorlty 27,4L7,25,4 11,82O,OOO 39,237,254157National Forestty Authority (NFAI 21,88L,723 4,59O,OOO 26,47L,72345JudANNEXESAnnex 1: Committee Reallocations under Energy and Mineral Development/(au. r.I.N46tvSource of funds for reallocationVote Description Category ProJect BudgetOutputAmountUGX BNot7 MEMD DevelopmentGoUProject 1793 MidstreamPetroleum InfrastructureDevelopment ProjectPhase II080003 10ot7 08000 15 MEMD DevelopmentGoUProject 16 1 1: PetroleumExploration andPromotion of FrontierBasinsot7 MEMD Development Project 161O: LiquefiedPetroleum Gas (LPG)Supply andInfrastructureInterrrentionoooo17 10o17 MEMD Development Project 1801: Enerry andMinerals landAcquisition andInfrastructure StudiesProiectoooo78 10080009 10 139 PAU Development Project 1612:PetroleumRepositoryInfrastructureNationalData45 TotalDestinatioa of funds reallocatedo17 MEMD Development Project 1828: RuralElectrification andConnectivitv Proiect240015 30Transfer to AtomicEnerry Agency foroperationalcosts240002 15 subvention AtomicEnerryCouncil45 Total(-ql--JnAnnex 2: Reallocation Table within Water and Environment SectorSource of funds for reallocatioaVote Description Category Project BudgetOutputAmountUGX BN019 MWE DevelopmentGoUProject 1638Ministry ofEnvironmentRetooling ofWater and000003 2019 MWE DevelopmentGoUProject 1530 Integrated WaterResource Management andDevelopment Proiect0000 175Total 7Destlaation of funds reallocated019 MWE DevelopmentGoUProject 1613Investing in Forestsand Protected Areas for Climate-Smart Development140025 2019 MWE DevelopmentGoUProject 1522 Inner MurchisonBav Cleanup Proiect000017 5Total 7Annex 3: Critical PrioritiesU\---l/ru/-p'It'r-\/t'47*irl 1 . r-'qNoKey priorityGap UGXBnMEMD1Wage Shortfall under Ministry of Enerry and Mineral Development 2.62Investments for the National Mining Company 130.03Mineral Laboratory r48.24Feasibility studies at Kibiro and Panyimur geothermal prospects. 196.05Underfunding of Atomic Enerry Rezulation Infrastructure Project 95.0180.0 6Funding shortfall for land compensation for various enerry sectorproiects365.3 7Underfunding of Rural Electrification Proj ects8Gas pipeline Feasibility study 9.09Construction of offices in Tanga 2s.oPAU10Wage Shortfall under Petroleum Authority of Uganda 4.2I2I1IRecruitment of additional Staff under PAUI2Real-Time Monitoring Centre s0.813Disaster Recovery Solution 8.2MWE10.9-13[tffi"JJ.tr13f;1t",*e change and implementation of thelKate141Support to rural water project- Source pel1^}"g.* dD.50.0autI5Strategic Towns Water Supply and Sanitation Project (STWSSP) t2.o16Water for Production Project Phase II 40.017Inner Murchison Bay Cleanup project 22.518Water resources measures implemented in priority catchments 20.o19Restoration of the environment through tree planting 15.02oSCAP 1OO - Umbrellas project (Project code 1532) 25NWSC21Water Service Acceleration Project (SCAP 100) 7 t.52245.0 Kampala Sanitation Project (KSP)23Integrated Water Management and Development Project (IWMDP)-Gulu 4.624KW.LV WATSAN 15.825M barara- Masaka-I singiro (SWCT) 6.0NFA t42.922Forest reserves boundary resurveyed 1.63.123demarcation of forest boundaries24provision of tree seedlings 5.0NEMA5.925Wage Bill for planned recruits under the New NEMA approvedstructure26Wage Allocation for NEMA 6.627Procurement of an Environment Information and Licensing System 10.6to.728Insufficient funds for Purchase of Environmental Monitoring fleet29Establish and Equip NEMA Regional Offices 24.OUNMA3oProcurement of a super computer 10.01.031Dissemination of weather forecasts*),0.332Revamp and operationalize tlle upper air station at EntebbeInternational Airport I -Ys'iJ48il,a-tI^N,.i \//'".T1t3Revamp and operationalize the Lower-Level Wind Alert System at3Entebbe International1.834Construction of 2 weather obserwing stations at Mbarara and Kisoroairfrelds4.235Procurement of 100 rainfall stations and76 Automatic weatherstations2.O36Implementation of weather forecasting system for inland water lakes 2.O37Establishment of 2 air pollution monitoring stations 1.6IJ"(.}.iL\\!r.F-L49-- '--/treSIGNATURE SHEET FOR MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ONETWIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES FOR THE REPORT OF THECOMMITTEE ON EIWIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON THEMINISTERIAL STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL20/24-25s/NNAME PARTY SIGNATURE1Hon. Otiam Emmanuel Otaala(ChairfNRIUI2Hon. Igeme Nathan Nabeeta(DeputyfNRM3Hon. Acan Joyce Okeny NRIU4Hon. Feta Geoffrey NRIU5Hon. NgoyaJohn Bosco NRIU(ll4*n6Hon. Bagiire Aggrey Henry NRM I't7Hon. Wambede Seth NRM8Hon. Agasha Juliet Bashiisha NRM9Hon. Tfimwesirye Josephat NRM10.Hon. Ssentayi Mohammed NRIUz/11Hon. Ssemwanga Gyavira NRM12.Hon. Karubanga David NRM13.Hon. Sendawula ChristineBukenyaNRM14.Hon. Akamba Paul NRIU15Hon. Mugumya Clare NRIVIW1<)hj!I16.Hon. Ruhunda Alex NRM@ t17.Hon. Dr. Magolo John Faith NRM1/18.Hon. Orone DerrickNRMU719.Hon. Apollo Yeri Ofwono NRM20Hon. Twinomujuni FrancisKaziniNRM2r.Hon. Kwizera Eddie WagahunguNRMlr )W22Hon. Ariko Herbert EdmundNRM23Hon. Katalihwa DonaldByabazaireNRMIrIP-IL 2425Hon. Natumanya Flora NRM,a)26Hon. Angura Fredrick NRMW27Hon. KaayaChristineNakimweroNUP"k28Hon. Kanyike Ronald Evans NUPA--29Hon. Nalule Asha Aisha K. NUP30Hon. Tebandeke Charles NUPt31Hon. Aol Betty Achan FDCI32Hon. Nyakato Asinansi FDC33 UPC'/rt,,,,tHon. Akena James Jimmy34Hon. Musilaf John INDEP35.Hon. Adidwa Abdu INDEP36Hon. Katenya lsaac INDEP?a37Hon. Kamuntu Moses INDEP [' ;38Hon. Musana Eric INDEP39Hon. Bahireira T\rmwekwaseSylviaINDEP40Hon. LutamaguziPaulson KasanaSemakula DPa