



Wednesday, 1 April 2020

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. As I indicated yesterday, we shall try to work quickly so that we close by 5.00 p.m. to enable Members to return to their homes and the staff to also reach their homes before 6.30 p.m. I would like to remind Members and the public to take the curfew seriously. Curfew is a curfew; so, you should be indoors by 7 p.m. 

I would also like to thank the members of Parliament for the work they are doing on the Coronavirus campaign. In particular, I would like to thank you for handing over the 180 ambulances to the National Health System so that the population can be supported. (Applause) 

Thirdly, I have been requested by the Minister of Works and Transport to inform you, Members and the public, that during this 14-day lockdown, two ferries will not be operational; the Nakiwogo ferry and the Mbulamuti ferry. So, please be informed, as well as the public. For Kalangala specifically, the Bukakata ferry will continue to be operational. 

Finally, I would like to remind Members that although Parliament has provided sanitisers in the bulk of the floors, I would like to urge you to have your personal sanitisers in your pockets and handbags because there may be very many places where we are moving. Please carry yours. I have carried mine, a very big one. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I had requested the Prime Minister to come and be the first on the Order Paper. He will be here shortly; so, let us use just six minutes to do matters of national importance. I noticed that many of them have to do with COVID-19. I would like to ask our taskforce to take up these issues - because they meet every day - so that they can be handled and they give us feedback.

Let me invite hon. Nabayiga.

2.47
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I would like to raise is about the risky health conditions of people in the isolation centres. 

Kalangala District registered one person with COVID-19. This person came from Dubai on 12th March. When he was tested at the airport, he was told that he was negative. He was told go and isolate himself. He did not do that; he did not stay in Masaka where he is supposed to stay. He crossed to Kalangala and started associating with other people from different villages. 

Madam Speaker, after some time, the people whom he associated with and the community members got concerned because they got to know that he came from Dubai on the 12th. So, they forced him to go and be re-tested at the health unit. His samples were taken and when the results were brought back, he tested positive. 

This person was moving around in different communities. The people whom he used to associate with were identified and taken to the isolation centre. In that isolation centre, people are sharing mattresses. A mattress is shared by four people. They are just putting their heads on those mattresses.

Madam Speaker, in the fight against COVID-19, there is need for provision of mattresses and to emphasise social distancing to ensure that the disease is not spread further. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: We ask our members of the taskforce to note this and the Deputy Prime Minister is here; so that you can handle it. 

2.49
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent importance regarding COVID-19. In Gulu this morning, we registered a case of an escapee of a young man called Charles Okello, who hails from Omoro District. He was admitted because he was with three colleagues; a gentleman, who flew back to London, and was tested and found positive and one who went back to Kenya and was also found positive.

Charles Okello was admitted in Gulu Referral Hospital, simply because –(Interjection)– Let me finish and then the MP of Omoro will give more information. After admission, Charles Okello managed to escape from Gulu Referral Hospital at dawn and his whereabouts are not known.

This is a very serious case because his test results are not yet out but there is a very high probability that he could be positive. This matter should be taken very seriously because we do not know the level at which he was engaging the communities of Omoro, Gulu and even Kampala, where he went to. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the member of Parliament of Omoro, who also has other details regarding Charles Okello, also give complimentary information regarding this matter. It is very urgent. (Interruption)

MS LAMWAKA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to my brother, hon. Lyandro Komakech and the House is that the escape of this 23-year old from Tegot Parish has already caused a lot of panic in the community in Omoro District. 

This 23-year old man presented himself in Lanenobe Health Centre III in Lakwana sub county on Monday, 30 March 2020 at about 10.00 a.m. in the morning. He stayed and interacted with people in the health facility from that time up to 3.00 p.m., when he was seen by a health worker and presented all the signs of cough, flu and high fever.

In his history, he narrated how he travelled to Kampala and stayed there for one week with two nationals from Kenya, another national from Netherlands and another from the UK. He narrated how these people called him after a week and told him that they all tested positive. 

Madam Speaker, the man interacted at the health facility with about 46 people. All the 46 people have been isolated and they are under quarantine in Opit Secondary School. The additional information I would like to give is that even the 46 that are in Opit Secondary School, the institution that has been identified by Omoro District Local Government, are in terrible condition. There is no food for them. 

I have been struggling, as the Woman Member of Parliament for the district, to fend for them although the President directed that we should not do a lot on our own. It is because the district taskforce cannot manage some of these institutions. Anyway, the information I want to give to my colleague is that this situation has caused a lot of panic. I wonder how Gulu Regional Referral Hospital will handle these cases. Thank you, my brother, for giving way. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I think the Prime Minister should take up the matter of the person who escaped from the facility. He should also take on the needs from Kalangala about the isolation centre and the one at Opit Primary School – what? The statement is about somebody escaping from an isolation centre at the hospital. 

2.53
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to bring up a matter, which I know many of you have already known about. We have seen the police, more so the traffic officers, at the checkpoints. However, they are more exposed to danger because they do not have any protective gear at all.

It is my humble request that the ministry concerned comes out very quickly to help these traffic police officers by at least getting them some protective gear. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I believe that matter was presented by hon. Margret Rwabushaija the other day for all the workers. I expect Government to take it up urgently.

2.54
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning students who are currently in Uganda Christian University. The university administration has said that the students must start doing exams on Monday, 06 April 2020. The exams shall be done online yet students are at home. In my district, Amuru, I have about six students who are deep in the villages. They are not allowed to move to the trading centre where they can access internet. 

Secondly, the university gave the directives that all the students must clear their tuition fees before Monday, 06 April 2020. The parents of the students have some foodstuff in their houses but they cannot transport it to the town centres for sell. 

My prayer is that the Minister of Education and Sports should intervene and advise the university administration to halt the exams for this particular period. It is because if they continue emphasising it, it means many of the students shall not do the exams. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Education and Sports here? 

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have also been approached by some students about the same. Theirs is even worse. They do not have smartphones and so, cannot be online. So, much as UCU is a private institution, the minister has to tell us – because these students are not private. We should give confidence to our children. Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We really call upon the minister to take up this matter very seriously. Otherwise, we appreciate UCU for being one of the best universities in East Africa but let them consider the situation. Thank you.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The ministry has taken note of the concerns raised by the honourable members and we are going to intervene. All Ugandans, whether in private or public schools, are under Government’s directives. The President came up with a stand to send all school goers home and they should all be at home.

So, I am going to follow up this matter – I would like to assure –

THE SPEAKER: Please honourable members, allow the minister; he is the one in charge. 

DR MUYINGO: I would like to assure the country that justice will prevail. All those that have been conducting school activities outside the guidelines given by the President will be handled fairly. The Ministry of Education and Sports is going to follow up on all these cases and make sure the directives made by the President are adhered to, to the letter. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go to item 3.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. Yesterday, we had this issue here. We are getting concerns that some Members present here are interacting with suspects outside there. We have heard and talked about this issue for the last one and a half weeks. We were told - we are not privy to what goes on in Cabinet - that one of us was sent out of a Cabinet meeting but when it comes to us in the House, it is business as usual. 

Madam Speaker, maybe we could have a chance through your office to know exactly whether we are safe. So, is she in the right –(Interjections)– the name of the honourable member is Sarah Opendi, the Minister of State for Energy and Mineral Development (Minerals). 

Madam Speaker, we could use your office to see whether we are safe and we hear from the Member whether she is in the right hands. Thank you

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you aware, the instructions for people to quarantine themselves came from the Government. So, I hope the Government minister is not breaching the guidelines. Can I ask hon. Opendi to tell us about her situation?

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My apologies! I am allergic to Saraya Hand Sanitiser. The last time I used it in this House, those who were near me saw – I coughed and sneezed and I ended up with – (Laughter) - so, I am allergic to that sanitizer and I have raised this matter to a number of colleagues, including the Prime Minister.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate honourable colleagues who have reached out to me over this matter. On 23 March 2020 - it was a Monday - the Prime Minister got in touch with me. He called me on phone. The President had tried to reach me but unfortunately, he did not get me. As a result, the Prime Minister informed me that they had been told that I, Sarah Opendi, went to the airport and forcefully took away my husband without him being quarantined. 

Madam Speaker, I am a law abiding citizen and colleagues who have had an opportunity to work with me, even in this Parliament, know how straightforward and honest I am.  It is very unfortunate when colleagues go and tarnish the name of another colleague, misinforming the President that I, Sarah Opendi, can walk to the airport and pick up my husband after we had even agreed that every person that comes into the country must be quarantined. 

I would like to make it clear that my husband arrived in this country on 15th March, before the decision to quarantine every person was issued. The mandatory quarantine was issued by the President on the 18th and my husband, being a civilized citizen, decided to keep himself safe. 

Madam Speaker, it was not only me. Surprisingly, I later got a call from my colleague, hon. Nakiwala Kiyingi, telling me - And when she called she said, “Sarah, of all people - Maybe I can do it but of all people, you?” Yes, this was hon. Nakiwala. 

I would like to be clear. Hon. Nakiwala then told me that her husband returned on 6th March 2020 and he was on the same flight from South Africa with the Minister of Health, hon. Dr Jane Aceng, and she was wondering why? On 6 March 2020, Madam Speaker, you returned to the country and the mandatory quarantine was issued on 18th.  

Hon. Nakiwala then said, it is already 14 days but besides, the Minister of Health was also on this flight. Why should I be stopped when it was my husband who travelled and he was on same flight with the Minister of Health? 

Therefore, let us stop dramatising this issue. Let us be honest and do our work diligently and stop spoiling and soiling the names of people who have built their names. I have a name, not only in this country but even beyond. I just received a Global Health Leadership Award for being the most impactful health minister on the globe. I cannot be the one –(Applause)– going against the rules and regulations, having been the Minister of Health for the last eight years and known all over this country.  

I would like to be clear that as a result of that, there has been a lot of news in the media and some of you have seen this information circulating on how I picked – 

We have issues in the mining sector and I have been struggling to solve those issues; the mafias, if I can use that word. Madam Speaker, the rightful people with licences are not being allowed to operate. Therefore, I knew I had broken no rule, I was not under quarantine and I have a letter from the Ministry of Health to this effect, after the 14 days that my husband put himself under self-quarantine.

As a responsible person, I even went and took a COVID-19 test personally; the results are out and I am negative. However, Madam Speaker, when I met my team - because I went and stopped the illegal miners from mining in one of the mining areas in Kassanda - some of you saw this in the media. After stopping them, the thieves, with support of some kawukumi within the forces, went and raided the mines and they continued mining.  

The presidential directive was for everybody to stay at home but mining was continuing. Therefore, I called my team and met them on Thursday. The next day, the story was all over social media how I had defied the President and had gone to meet people yet I was supposed to be at home. I met my team for a reason, after calling the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and we were planning to have a statement presented in Cabinet next Monday. 

As if that was not enough, since we could not meet, I called the Minister of Internal Affairs because I need the investors to be protected. Right now, the investors cannot reach their mining areas because the kawukumi have taken them over. I called the Minister of Internal Affairs and I met hon. Jeje Odongo privately because I called him when everybody was at home and he said, come to the office and let us meet at 10.00 a.m. We got there and there were no people. 

To my surprise, yesterday, Madam Speaker, the information is circulating. Somebody must be tracking my every movement because I am fighting to restore order in the mining sector - (Applause) - they are now tracking my every movement. 

Therefore, I would like to state that because I am fighting people who are stealing Government resources - Let me explain to this House that Uganda Revenue Authority went and took over that mining area. Can you imagine? (Interjection)- Yes, because taxes were not being paid; they were in arrears of Shs 1.2 billion.

Madam Speaker, can you imagine that when Uganda Revenue Authority went and took over, they had a distress order. What happened next was the police going there and there was a near exchange; the police chasing away Uganda Revenue Authority from a site. Therefore, the matter I have raised touches on the double standards by colleagues in the Ministry of Health. 

Another colleague was hon. Joyce Moriku who was on television on Thursday - because this was public - on the frontline calling hon. Nakiwala and I, highly indisciplined colleagues. I am sorry to say this here and I shouldn’t have said it here but I am extremely hurt that a person of my calibre, who has built a name over the years, can be the one to have her name soiled during this course of time. (Applause) 

This matter is well known and I would like to state it very clearly on this Floor that if anybody can bring evidence of me having appeared anywhere at the airport to forcefully pick my husband, I will tender in my resignation but of course it is not true. I want evidence to be provided and I will tender in my resignation. 

Madam Speaker, how I wish this matter can also be investigated if people think that what I am saying is not correct. I would like to end by saying, let us not dramatise the fight against coronavirus. We are in this together; we all want this to end but we cannot be the ones dramatising and stigmatising and fighting colleagues unfairly. 

I would like to lay on the Table the COVID-19 results that were issued to me showing that I am negative. I would like to issue a copy of the letter from the Ministry of Health showing that I was not under quarantine of any nature. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. We welcome you, take your seat. Honourable members, what she has said has reminded me that yesterday, I saw members of the Pan-African Parliament here. I do not know whether they have finished their 14 days of quarantine. I saw them here briefly; we shall want to know whether they are safe. 

Honourable members, the Prime Minister is here and we said that we would give him time to unpack the directives of the President. 

3.12
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, told us that come today, we should call our district Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) to confirm whether the money was remitted; because he told us it would be there by midnight last night. 

I communicated to my CAO and that of Dokolo and even 10 minutes before I got here, I discovered that the money had not reached the district account, yet they are having problems. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had assured us that the money for the people would be there for the taskforce to deal with the matter of COVID-19. 

One other thing the CAOs told me is that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development assigns officers in the ministry to take care of each district. However, those officers were sent home. When they try to call them, they say they are home; those are the officers that deal with district per district to provide and transmit the money. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here and what he told us yesterday has not come to light. Can the minister tell us what happened because we are together in this fight? The Minister of Finance should also clarify and tell us when the money will be remitted to the district accounts and when his staff will get back to office to send the money to the district. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since they are essential staff, they should be allowed to go to work. You will have to tell us. Let us go to item three. Do the supplementary and then we get the Prime Minister. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUPPLEMENTARY APPROPRIATION BILL, 2020

3.14 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable members, yes, I sent the money and it was expected to be there by midnight last night. However, we were faced with a procedure problem and I wish the Prime Minister could comment on it. 

The districts had not sent us their detailed action plans. According to the law and the procedure within the financial sector, if you have not sent that to the Permanent Secretary, which in my teaching language was called “the scheme of work” and in business work, we say “your budget programme”, then, the money cannot be sent. The money is ready and the Prime Minister will confirm here. There are some procedural problems which I had not seen myself and that is why the money had not yet arrived to the district. As soon as that is done, the money will go. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you handle your Bill and then we go to the Prime Minister? 

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to move that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2020 be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It has been seconded by three members; the Minister of Local Government, hon. Karungi and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. It has been seconded. 

MR KASAIJA: It has been seconded. Thank you, Madam. 

THE SPEAKER: It has come with a certificate. Let us go to item 4(1). The Supplementary is sent to the Budget Committee for perusal and report back. 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

STATEMENT BY THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS ON THE UPDATES FROM THE NATIONAL TASKFORCE ON IMPLEMENTATION OF PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVES ON THE CORONA VIRUS (COVID-19) GUIDELINES ON PREVENTIVE MEASURES AND STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES

THE SPEAKER: Order! Honourable members, allow the Prime Minister to update us on the COVID situation.  

3.17 
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I would like to confirm what the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said. I got two telephone calls from him this morning and he asked me to make sure that all Government ministries and districts submit their requisite details for money. 

I instructed the Permanent Secretary, office of the Prime Minister, to immediately contact them so that they submit the appropriate documentation to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, it is true the minister is pursuing the matter. 

Madam Speaker, I now go back to the topical subject of COVID-19 and give a statement, as colleagues did request yesterday. I have already asked my office to upload this statement.  

We are dealing with a public health matter of unprecedented proportions in our time. As you already know, on 31 December 2019, the People’s Republic of China notified the World Health Organisation of an outbreak of a pneumonia causing illness that was later confirmed to be due to a new virus, COVID-19. On 30 January 2020, the World Health Organisation declared this outbreak a public health event of international concern and subsequently declared it a pandemic - 

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I saw the Pan African Parliament (PAP) members here. I do not know whether they have completed their 14 days of quarantine - hon. Kakooza, hon. Amongin and hon. Okot-Ogong. 

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. We are seated here with hon. Kakooza, a PAP member, who has just returned from PAP. He has not been quarantined. He has no report showing he tested negative and we are on tension. Madam Speaker, are we proceeding properly to have him in the House? Let him come and prove that he tested negative. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we see a certificate of quarantine? Can the Sergeant-At-Arms collect the certificates? 

MR MULINDWA: He even has some flu-like symptoms. 

THE SPEAKER: No, handover the certificate to the Sergeant? 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, it is true we are members of the Pan African Parliament. There is no doubt or question about it. We came back on 15th March and South Africa was not among the category A countries affected. 

Madam Speaker, I think Members have an irritation, which I cannot explain here. When you talk of today - we were tested and taken into self-isolation from 15th March and until today, I have been away. Therefore, he should not dramatise the issue when we were here even before the quarantine. 

Madam Speaker, those who are talking about that don’t have knowledge of when we came here. It is true we were in South Africa and you have the records of when we came back here.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, yes, we are the ones who sent you to the Pan African Parliament but there is no harm in you showing us evidence that you were tested. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I think that the guidelines have been clear. When were they set? This is what hon. Opendi has been saying. We came back before the Government of Uganda set guidelines. I have a record; when we came back the tickets were given by Parliament, we know when we came back and we did not appear before the date of self-quarantine.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no harm in you clarifying with a certificate.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, we shall provide them because we have them.  

MR MULINDWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Those who have been cleared are issued with a copy of the certificate. A copy is here in the name of hon. Atkins Katusabe, who was cleared by the ministry but hon. Kakooza does not have a copy. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, hon. Katusabe is not a Member of the Pan African Parliament. Madam Speaker, where you sent us, the tickets are given, we have the certificates. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, bring your certificate. Prime Minister, take the Floor.

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that I am greatly worried. Everybody here knows that we do not have spare lives. 

Secondly, the evidence hon. Sarah Opendi and hon. James Kakooza gave us here, they are all saying that they came back on the 15th. When you count 14 days from the 15th, it means the 14 days ended on the 29th. I do not know whether these tests were done before or after the 14 days or after the 29th. 

THE SPEAKER: What is your issue?

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, are we proceeding well deliberating important issues concerning the safety of this country when ourselves, we are not so sure whether we are safe? We were with hon. James Kakooza here yesterday and we interacted with other colleagues from far. It puts our lives at a risk when we are not so sure whether we are safe.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have asked Members of the Pan African Parliament to bring their certificates of clearance. It is a simple matter; just bring your certificates.

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, the issue here is can we all get tested because of one reason. We have all interacted with the colleagues who came back from the 15th until now. Can we all get tested to be sure about ourselves?

THE SPEAKER: I cannot answer that now but we can make the request. In the meantime, Members of the Pan African Parliament, get out. Allow the Prime Minister to present.   
       
DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I will quickly go to the situation in Uganda. Uganda registered her case of COVID-19 on Saturday, 21 March 2020. The confirmed case was a 36-year-old Ugandan male who arrived from Dubai, as you have already heard, on 21 March 2020 by Ethiopian Airlines. As of today, the country has registered 44 people who are positive. 

All the confirmed cases have been admitted in Entebbe Grade B Hospital, Mulago National Referral Hospital, Adjumani and Hoima hospitals. All patients presented with mild symptoms are at the moment improving on treatment. The 11 cases that were confirmed last night, are in the process of evacuation to Mulago Hospital. 

Thankfully, Uganda has not registered any COVID-19 related death and we pray for all those receiving treatment to recover fully. 

A total of 2,661 high risk travellers were identified for follow up since January 2020. All individuals under self-quarantine completed the mandatory 14 days monitoring period on 31 March 2020. A total of 1,015 individuals are currently under institutional quarantine.  

Government measures to combat COVID-19 outbreak

Madam Speaker, since the declaration of the outbreak of COVID-19 in China in December 2019, the Government of Uganda established early and undertook proactive measures that enabled us to be able to dictate cases early. These measures include the following:

    1. Blocking the importation of the virus. The focus was to block the virus from entering Uganda. The Ministry of Health enhanced surveillance for all incoming travellers at Entebbe International Airport and other points of entry. 

2. 	Screening of all travellers and the picking of samples from those that exhibited signs and symptoms similar to COVID-19 at Entebbe International Airport and other points of border entry like Malaba, Busia, Elegu, Kyanika and Mpondwe.

3. 	Travellers from affected countries were required to undergo a 14-days’ quarantine and monitored daily by the Ministry of Health surveillance teams. Initially, the ministry implemented self-quarantine for all travellers from category-one countries. However, when the Ministry of Health realised that individuals were not obeying self-quarantine, they switched to mandatory institutional quarantine that was effected on 17 March 2020.

	Travellers who developed symptoms during the follow up period were checked, samples taken, tested and advised on appropriate care. 

4. 	All public ambulances were on standby to transport suspected cases to the appropriate level of care.

5. 	Entebbe and Naguru hospitals were designated as isolation and treatment centres. 

The next effort was on suppressing transmission of the virus. Following the confirmation of the 1st case on 21 March 2020, Government undertook the following measures to suppress transmission of the virus:

    1. His Excellency, the President constituted and continues to lead the national response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

    2. His Excellency, the President also constituted a multi-sectoral national taskforce for COVID-19, which is chaired by the Prime Minister. The membership of the committee is from relevant ministries, Parliament is represented by four honourable members, and the private sector and civil society are represented too. Secretaries general of all political parties that are represented in Parliament have now been invited to be full time members of this national taskforce.

    3. Seven sub-committees were put in place to address the pandemic and to address the multi-sectoral nature of the disease. The committees are:
    i) Health – chaired by the Minister of Health;
    ii) Finance – chaired by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development;
    iii) Trade and transport committee – chaired by the minister of trade and co-chaired by the Minister of Works and Transport;
    iv) Logistics committee – chaired by hon. Kiwanda, Minister of State for Tourism;
    v) Committee on relief and attention to the vulnerable people – chaired by hon. Musa Ecweru, Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness;
    vi) Committee on media, information dissemination and communication – chaired by the Minister of ICT and National Guidance; and
    vii) Committee on security – chaired by hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine, Minister for Security. 

The Speaker of Parliament nominated some Members of Parliament from the Parliamentary Committee on Health to work with Ministry of Health officials on controlling the pandemic. Since then, they have visited Mulago Hospital and other hospitals and they are doing their work well. 

Government continues tracking all travellers who entered the country through Entebbe International Airport and other points of entry from 7th March to 22March 2020 when the borders were closed. This is being carried out by assessing the health forms submitted by all travellers and also reviewing the airline manifests. 

Following the confirmation of additional cases in the country, the Ministry of Health is carrying out contact tracing of all persons who associated with the confirmed cases. To date, 660 contacts are under follow up. 

The Uganda Virus Research Institute has the necessary equipment, reagents and human resource to test and confirm any suspected COVID-19 sample in the country. So far, over 1,000 samples of persons who presented with signs and symptoms similar to those of COVID-19 have been tested. 

Enhanced testing of all individuals who are asymptomatic – that is, those who do not exhibit symptoms but may have been exposed to the confirmed cases, and all individuals under quarantine, who show signs and symptoms, are being tested for this virus. 

Developed guidelines and information materials, which were translated in different local languages to educate the public on the disease, are being currently disseminated. 

The Ministry of Health continues to engage media outlets and other communication channels to disseminate to the public, information on COVID-19.

In the same vein, the Ministry of ICT and National Guidance directed all media houses to provide free media space for COVID-19 related information during prime time.

The screening of individuals has been expanded to Mulago Specialised National Hospital to cover greater Kampala, which is also designated as an isolation and treatment centre for all confirmed cases.

In addition, isolation facilities at all regional referral hospitals have been prepared to receive confirmed cases. 

The Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, is mobilising the necessary resources for this response across board. 

Madam Speaker, on 18 March 2020, His Excellency, the President of Uganda announced several measures to help contain the pandemic in our country. Subsequently, His Excellency, the President issued additional measures to control the spread of COVID-19. Many of you are aware of these directives and guidelines. 

What is the way forward? 

As we continue to battle COVID-19, Government, working with partners and many other Ugandans from different areas,is undertaking the following interventions:

    1. Decentralisation of sample collection from suspected cases at the district level by the district health team, and transporting the samples through an established transport network to Uganda Virus Research Institute in Entebbe.People with COVID-19 like symptoms are advised to call their respective district health officers and district surveillance focal persons on the contact numbers provided per district.

    2. General hospitals and health centres IV are being prepared to handle COVID-19 cases in their respective districts. They will be provided with the appropriate logistics, supplies and training to facilitate the process. Mild and moderate cases about 80 per cent of the cases will be managed at the district level while severe cases about 15 per cent, who may require oxygen therapy, may go to higher centres. Critical cases, which are normally five per cent, may require intensive care and these will be referred to the regional referral hospitals. Additionally, working with the private sector, bed capacity will be provided as and when required.

    3. Additional 220 health workers are currently being recruited to support COVID-19 response in the country. These include 40 Epidemiologists who have already been recruited, 50 medical officers, 50 nurses, 10 medical officers special grade, 40 anaesthetists, 10 laboratory technologists and another group of 20 health workers.

    4. Government would like to emphasise that despite the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak, other routine health services at the health facilities should continue, for example, immunisation, maternal and child health services, reproductive health and other curative services.

    5. Health workers have been oriented to provide psychological support to health workers, confirmed cases and quarantined individuals. This is being done across the country.

    6. Government is considering adopting rapid diagnostic test kits, pending approval by World Health Organisation. This will expedite the testing process and allow for increased numbers to be screened for COVID-19.

Government has worked on a strategy for the lockdown period of 14 days, as announced by His Excellency the President in order to ensure that the implementation of the directives by the President is effectively carried out. Standard OperationalProcedures on each of the directives will be shared with the public by the relevant committees of the National Task Force.

Madam Speaker, Government appreciates His Excellency the President for providing an effective and robust political leadership to the nation in this national response against COVID-19.

I would also like to thank the honourable Minister of Health, her team and entire health work force across the country for the work they are doing.

Madam Speaker, I would like to also thank Members of Parliament and the general public for the vigilance and for taking heed of the guidelines by the Ministry of Health and His Excellency the President. I wish to call upon them to continue with this spirit of being vigilant.

I wish to thank the members of the National Task Force for their commitment and dedication to their duty. We are in this together and each one of us, especiallythose in leadership positions, has a critical role to play in ensuring that the spread of COVID-19 is stopped.

Madam Speaker, like I told you, we formed seven committees and the Committee on Relief has already produced its report. (Interjections) I would like to summarise, with your permission, Madam Speaker.What is going to happen with regard to food relief?

Government will launch distribution of relief food on Saturday, 4th April 2020 in Kampala and Wakiso districts, covering 1.5 million people. We must start somewhere. (Interjections)

The distribution will be done at LC1 level. (Applause) The LC1chairpersons will be supported by police and UPDF for purposes of transparency and avoiding crowds. Security will stay at the distribution point from the beginning of the exercise of distribution up to the end of the exercise of distributing the food.

The relief package 

The relief package will include six kilogrammes of maize flour - per head - (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Just write down what he is saying.

DR RUGUNDA: It will also include three kilogrammes of beans per head. When I say per head, I mean per person.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please listen.

DR RUGUNDA: There will also be salt supplied. (Interjection)

In addition, lactating mothers and the sick will receive twokilogrammes of powdered milk and two kilogrammes of sugar.

Madam Speaker, that is the summarised presentation. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, RtHon. Prime Minister. This is very topical but we shall need to be brief. However, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before we proceed with the debate, there are two areas I request you to address.

When the President was identifying the essential sectors, Parliament was not included. Members of Parliament are here on Government duty processing the Budget. Some of them are having challenges reaching Parliament because they are told that they are not among those that were named. Henceforth, we would like to know how they will be coming to do work. Otherwise, from time to time, we shall have to call them to come here and do work.

Secondly, there is something hon. Opendi mentioned concerning ministers who travelled abroad. She said that the Minister of Health travelled to South Africa, she did not quarantine herself and has continued to work. I even saw her near the President on more than one occasion.We would therefore like to know what the situation around our minister is, for the sake of the head of state and many others who sit with her in meetings.

DR RUGUNDA: May I have permission to be out for about fives minutes, there is something urgent. The First Deputy Prime Minister is in charge.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We do acknowledge your guidance and thank you for strongly standing with the country and Parliament in trying to address the COVID-19 pandemic.

The Prime Minister has just moved out and I am seeking your indulgence that on the Opposition side our Leader of the Opposition should be the last person to speak, and that you allow other members to first give in their submissions then she can come in later. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I have understood the situation.

3.55
MR JAMES ACIDIRI (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have attentively listened to the Prime Minister; he has explained as to why we are in this situation now. It starts with the level of indiscipline, lack of compliance and seriousness at our international airport.

That is how ordinary Ugandans are now suffering; if we had adhered to the rules and procedures established on both voluntary and mandatory quarantine without introducing exorbitant hotel fees, probably we would not be where we are now.

The Deputy Prime Minister has been delegated to take this question from me; you very well know that as Parliament we have been debating COVID-19 for over three months, but Government sat back and relaxed.

That is why the Ministry of Health has found itself without basic equipment to protect health workers in trying to mitigate and stop this global pandemic.

You are panicking now looking for money and trying to release it; you did not prepare yourselves when you knew that this was a global pandemic that would certainly reach us.

Don’t you think that you owe this country an apology before you even explain your current plan of response because you have largely mismanaged this process? 

You are playing a catch-up from day one and it is going to be costly for the country. Don’t you think we should take seriously the health budget because the health sector has found itself in a very unprepared situation?

THE SPEAKER: What is the point of procedure?

MR OROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the Prime Minister was addressing us, he made a very encouraging point that among the sick people none has yet died. Are we proceeding well to come here and say that Government is mishandling the situation?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Acidri please proceed and conclude.

MR ACIDRI: Madam Speaker, as we now consider the ministerial policy statements and we are going to be looking at the next budget we should seriously be considering how we can allocate more money to Ministry of Health, above sectors like Defence where we are wasting money and know that it is not effective in fighting COVID-19. This is my second important point I would like you to take.

Finally, I would like to know from you whether you do not think that we should be working on institutional functionality because yesterday when I heard the President struggling to explain how an RDC can communicate with the sub county, parish authorities, I realised that COVID-19 has caught us in a situation of non-functional institutions. You could clearly see that there was no mechanism through which RDCs have been working with the lower Government structures. 

This is a wakeup call to those of you at the top leadership of Government to realise that positions have not been functioning. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, two minutes please. I do not know whether everybody will contribute but I will try.

4.00
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Moyo Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, I salute and thank you for this opportunity. I came from West Nile yesterday and in regard to the statement of the Prime Minister, we got some facts from the ground.

I appreciate the effort of the Government and the Prime Minister althoughlittle gaps remain, as it could be, but thank you. We have paid attention to the airports, major border crossing points like Malabaand Elegu. However, there are ungazetted border points, particularly from West Nile, where we border South Sudan and DR Congo and where we have refugees. 

The biggest population of refugees in Uganda is in West Nile and there is movement to and fro probably through the ungazetted border points. I would like to draw the attention of Government to plug these ungazetted unmanned points. 

Madam Speaker, through you, I would like to appeal to the Government that we should engage our contact and cooperation with South Sudan and DR Congo for their Government authorities to focus on the following airports. There is an airport called Bumba International Airport. It is in DR Congo where there is a gold mine. People fly in from South Africa and land in Bumba. From Bumba, they easily get to Arua. 

People fly in to South Sudan from Nairobi and other airports to Juba. From there, they come easily to the border and may cross using other small borders. I would like, therefore, to suggest this, Madam Speaker. As I said at the beginning of this debate, you are focusing on China. The disease may come from somewhere else to Uganda. You have seen what I said that time. 

The disease you are talking about, having entered Uganda, came from Dubai when our attention was on China. Today, our attention is on these airports but ask yourself where the case from Adjumani came from. Did he pass through this airport? Madam Speaker, West Nile needs special attention. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, welcome back and I hope my elder has already handed over to you. (Laughter) I am now addressing you here. Arua Regional Referral Hospital, I believe, is among the regional referral hospitals that you have stated we do the treatment where an ICU may be required. 

Yesterday as I was coming back, I passed via Arua Regional Referral Hospital. I engaged the director and other people there. The hospital is in a sorry state. There is no single ICU facility in the whole of Arua, which has a population of more than 3.5 million citizens and around 800 refugees, totalling to over four million people. With such a regional referral hospital, is this not a betrayal to the people of West Nile?

I would like you to take special measures for West Nile. The refugee component which used to be there must work. I was in Palorinya Refugee Settlement, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and I found water, which is a necessity in this thing here, lacking in some zones in the refugee settlement like Zone 2. People were crowding and scrambling for water with the refugees. Imagine if one case gets into that crowd of the refugees. What kind of mess shall we be in?

My prayer is this, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Even for the resources you have already on the ground for programmes like Development Response to Displacement Impact Project (DRDIP); why don’t you direct organisations that are managing the refugee programmes to make sure that the basics which you already had are working? Shouldn’t water be working?

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR FUNGAROO: I would like to wind up by saying this. The biggest concern in this global fight against COVID-19 should be to break the chain of transmission. This means you focus on those who are not yet affected. Focus on preventive measures. 

Therefore, the focus should go to the rural districts; the sub-counties and you need urgent attention to the district health officers. The ones I met in Obongi District when I went there –

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite hon. Nambozo to take the Floor? Please, you have gone beyond your time. Please, honourable member, take your seat. It seems my team downstairs have stopped doing the needful. It is two minutes. Honourable members, do not go into preambles; go straight to the point.

4.06
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Premier for his report. Let me go right to the point. I am also suggesting that this time around, instead of starting from the urban areas, why don’t we start from the rural areas? In Sironko, I have hard-to-reach areas. When we talk about this budget, it may never reach Sironko and that is my worry.

Secondly, on the training for medical staff; this disease has taken all of us unaware. When you look at the medics in the rural areas, they are not informed. When we talk about the budget, they do not even have the basics; they do not have masks. They do not have sanitisers. What are they expected to do?

In the Mount Elgon area, there are so many loopholes. There are so many paths that are bringing people from the neighbouring Kenya and they are all coming in. Our DPC told us that they do not even have fuel to run to these areas, let alone climb the mountains to make sure that they are able to get these people.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on the ambulances that the honourable members gave in. Thank you very much honourable members. However, you are looking at a situation where there are no ambulances in a district. Look at this Government vehicle – and we are talking about social distance – how are they going to transport this suspect to the nearest health centre?

In Bugisu, we have Mbale Regional Referral Hospital but there was a case of a suspect from Budaka who was sent away to a health centre. Right now, our people are saying it is now the right time for the honourable Members of Parliament to be treated back in their health centres at home. What does it imply? They are ill-equipped.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, would you like to speak now? You know, the Deputy Prime Minister is a soldier. He believes in hierarchy. Please hand over and then hon. Nsereko will come. (Laughter)

4.09
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the proper procedure because I could quietly brief the Prime Minister and you will not hear what I have said. If I do not brief him properly, when he comes to answer, he might answer different questions. So, it is better if I report to him what has been raised all over when you are hearing. If I go wrong, then he will correct me.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, as you left the House, hon. Acidri – through the Speaker of course and hon. Acidri is an MP from West Nile – started accusing the Government –(Laughter)– of laxity. He said that Government has relaxed too much and waited until the disease caught us unawares and for that, we should apologise to the public. That is one point.

The second point is that the same MP has accused the Government of using more money on UPDF than on COVID-19. On that one, I will leave it for you to answer but definitely, I will say that he is uninformed. 
The other issue really has been that a colleague was intercepted by a Member from Kumi and he disagreed with the minister. As you arrived, you found the Member from Obongi –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The First Deputy Prime Minister, Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali, in the course of briefing the Prime Minister, has stated that I did not only accuse but I am uninformed because I stated that the defence budget is higher than that of the Ministry of Health yet this is a fact. 

Is the First Deputy Prime Minister, therefore, in order to mislead the House when we all know that this is a fact and that this is the time to reflect as a country on serious business? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will do what the President did yesterday and say that you are both right. (Laughter) Please proceed. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I should not spoil the sauce; let me leave it as the Speaker has ruled; I am right as she said. (Laughter)

4.14
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Prime Minister has presented his response, which we welcome. 

Mr Prime Minister, following up on the President’s speech, there are health interventions, which require us to stay home in order for us to flatten the curve and to curb the Coronavirus spread. That is indeed welcomed. I would like to thank you for one intervention; you are ready to provide the vulnerable people in starvation with food for the next 30 days.

However, there are four other economic interventions that we would like to request you to put in place. All the countries that have told their people to stay home have had four cardinal economic interventions. Madam Speaker, I would like to implore the Prime Minister to look into the matter of loans. All people who are at home are highly indebted. The only way to recapitalise them at the moment is to tell them there is a freeze on their loan interest. That is business.

Second is the issue of utilities; power and water. We are telling people to stay at home and wash their hands as many times as possible. The only way people can stay home and relax is knowing that there is a clear suspension on paying power and water bills.

Thirdly, I would like to hear from the Prime Minister on how they are going to intervene into the matter of commercial rent. Government has told people to lock their shops yet the people would have wanted to remain working - through the stay-home intervention, they have been ordered to close their shops. Now their landlords have presented them with bills to pay. What is the advice of the Prime Minister to these people’s situation?

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to apologise to my honourable colleague for disrupting his flow. Yesterday, we left at a note where the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would make a statement today about the interventions. All the issues my colleagues are raising about interventions, I thought are the issues that the finance minister is going to make a statement to this House on.

So, are we procedurally correct to proceed to raise those very issues before we hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, I cannot guess what members are going to say when I call them. However, let us concentrate on today’s Prime Minister’s speech. We shall discuss the other things after the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has made a statement. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the President also clearly said that as regards delivery of food, people should walk to supermarkets where possible. This is welcome. However, Mr Prime Minister, we have vulnerable groups in society and people with disability. How do they get their deliveries and stocks from the supermarkets? Do they crawl there? Is there a special assistance for such persons?

Finally, Mr Prime Minister, we have seen the brutality of the Local Defence Unit personnel where they have beaten up people including one of my voters called Mama Kaguta in Kamwokya. This woman was beaten and I think she even sprained one of her limbs. 

At the moment, how do you tell the members of the public - we have heard that in Wakiso, a boda-boda rider has been shot at. He is not dead but still, he has been shot at as a result of not adhering to the directives. Why don’t you tell the security forces to go slow so that we do not lose lives as a result of highhandedness? Thank you very much. If we get that clarification, I think we shall be able to move. 

THE SPEAKER: I have written several names but I do not know where I will get the time for all of you. 

4.20
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, RepresentativePersons with Disability, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Prime Minister for his brief. I also would like to thank the President for the mechanisms he has put in place. 

Mr Prime Minister, you said that Government will be launching the distribution of food on Saturday, 04 April 2020. Could it be possible that you give us a plan showing when this distribution will come to our areas? The voters are saying they have heard the President talking about giving the poor and vulnerable people support. However, here you are telling us that you are beginning from Wakiso and Kampala. When are you coming to our districts? We need to see that plan.

Rt hon. Prime Minister, hon. Nsereko has just mentioned persons with disabilities. When you mention vulnerable groups as a blanket statement without identifying the groups, it is most likely that some of our people, especially people with disabilities, are going to be left out. Can I get to know from you what arrangement has been put in place for the different groups so that we know that at that LCI, people with disabilities will have the first priority? That will help us.

Thirdly, what is the coordination mechanism between the national taskforce and the district taskforces? Some of the district people call us, Members of Parliament, to ask questions that we cannot answer. Maybe you needed to give us information and we see how to coordinate because at the end of the day, everyday someone is asking, “what is Government doing? We have heard you are passing a budget; how much is coming to us?” Can we all be at the same level, like you concluded that we are all together, so that we can be together?

In addition, I would like you to give more clarification. For how long are you giving the six kilogrammes? What are the ratios? What have you put in place to ensure that these ratios will be handled?

In conclusion, in Soroti District, we have a regional referral hospital, which is in a very bad state. I do not know whether there are mechanisms to put in place any repairs for that hospital. If you put the COVID-19 patients there, the medical personnel are not enough. Regarding the 220 additional staff that you have mentioned, are they only for Kampala or Entebbe? We would like to know the recruitment group and where you are going to distribute them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we have to stop at 5.00 p.m. and it is coming to 4.30 p.m. Realistically, how many Members can contribute?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, following your concern and the earlier submission by hon. Katuntu, I can see the debate taking the direction of a general debate and yet we agreed that Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is going to give us another report of financial magnitude. 

There is also a taskforce that you, Madam Speaker, set in place a few days ago. I would like to seek your indulgence; wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we listen to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the taskforce so that when we are debating, we are more comprehensive and multi-dimensional, aware that this problem has taken a dimension that is beyond one area?

Madam Speaker, I pray that you direct that we listen to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the taskforce before we can debate in general terms. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, I will need the help of the whips. Some time back, we had requested the whips to talk to you and agree on how many people will speak on a particular issue. However, now every Member wants to speak. 

Let me look for Members who do not ordinarily speak. I still have the list of the Members who did not speak yesterday and last Tuesday. Therefore, all those who have contributed since that time, take your seats. The ones who were able to raise issues yesterday and those who raised issues this morning should sit down. Anyone who spoke on Thursday and yesterday, sit down. Hon. Sebaggala, sit down.

4.27
MR MARK DULU (NRM, East Madi County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the Prime Minister for giving us a highly summarised report. However, I have one issue that I would like him to clarify on and that is the incubation period of coronavirus.

Madam Speaker, if you go to the World Health Organisation website, these are the words they used: “Most estimates of the incubation period for COVID-19 range from 1-14 days, most commonly around five days.” They went ahead to say, “These estimates will be updated as more data become available.”

My concern is, if you read the writings of some scientists, they seem to indicate that the incubation period is more than 14 days. For us in Uganda, we have adopted 14 days. Once someone comes from abroad, has been quarantined for 14 days and has a certificate indicating that he has been safe for 14 days, that person is cleared. Are we safe?

In addition, how about the carriers; what are we going to do with the carriers? That is what I want you to clarify so that Ugandans are safe. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.29
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a few suggestions that I would like to make to Government. 

I have observed that each and every country appears to have a very customised approach to dealing with the issue of COVID-19. If you look all over the world, every nation is preparing for the worst. When the Prime Minister mentioned the capacity of our regional hospitals in terms of the Intensive Care Units (ICUs) that we need, I really worry for this country. Despite only five per cent of the patients needing ICUs, in the Economist, which was published this week, it was noted that Uganda has more ministers than the number of ICU beds.

I would like to hear at this moment that Government is constructing and expanding the bed capacity of intensive care units because we are yet to prepare for the worst.

Madam Speaker, it appears that this disease mutates when it gets to a particular country. In every country, researchers are being engaged to study this. Here, we have Makerere University with very distinguished researchers and I actually read that one of them had already discovered this very strain in some birds that are in this country. Why don’t we bring them on board? When I hear of a taskforce comprised of secretaries-general of political parties - A taskforce responding to a health emergency includes secretaries-generals of political parties! We have left out our academicians who have researched and can even provide home drugs –(Member timed out.) 

4.31
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to applaud the concerns of Members and even the efforts taken by Government towards fighting COVID-19. 

Madam Speaker, it looks like Government has now taken over the sole effort of fighting this disease, even from other leaders, like us, Members of Parliament. In the President of Uganda’s speech yesterday, he victimised other leaders like us who had come up with initiatives to help our constituents and members of our areas with the very few essentials that they would need.  

Madam Speaker, yesterday, the President emphasised that he gave powers to the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs) to screen those amongst the society who have critical health issues that will need to be transported to hospitals. What is happening in Makindye West, in particular, and I know it is happening everywhere in this country now, is that the RDC is using such powers in a negative way. He is doing so, to the point of soliciting for funds from these needy people who come to his office to try and get letters that would help them move from the different destinations to the hospitals. 

Right now, people are packed at his office from yesterday. Those who do not have money will not pass and those who have given him some money will pass, even if they came in for a few minutes. This is an issue which needs to be –(Member timed out.) 

4.33
MS MARY BABIRYE KABANDA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I thank you very much for your address. 

It seems you have taken long to deliver money to the hospitals. Today, the managing director of Masaka Hospital was lamenting that they have not got any money from the Ministry of Health. Masaka already has victims that were picked from the community, but the people who were gazetted have not yet got help. I request that you speed up the process of getting money to hospitals, for example, Masaka Hospital that caters for over nine districts. 

Secondly, we appreciate the efforts and orders the President gave but yesterday, he gave a directive that no private vehicles must be used, even if it is for emergencies. He ordered that people should go to the RDCs or health centres III. 

Let me give Masaka as an example. From Masaka headquarters to Kyesiiga, if you have a strong car like mine, it takes you one and a half hours. If you do not allow people to use private cars in cases of emergencies, then the situation is going to become worse because we still have pregnant mothers who will need to deliver, people with heart problems and many other cases. We request that –(Member timed out.)  

4.35
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the response but I have a few concerns. 

Article 24 of our Constitution prohibits corporal punishment.  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, right from the day the President gave the directives, I have been seeing police, Local Defence Units (LDUs) and RDCs severely caning Ugandans and administering corporal punishment. I would like to know whether the prescribed punishment for violating the directives of His Excellency the President in the fight against coronavirus is caning. 

The other issue that I would like you to clarify is about the distribution of relief to the vulnerable people. You have not told us the criteria that you are going to use to find out who is vulnerable in this situation. I expected you, for instance, to tell us that the boda boda riders and the taxi drivers who were stopped from working are also part of the groups that are going to benefit from this relief. 

The third issue is about the patients down there in the villages. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development yesterday attempted to give a solution but it is not visible. In my constituency, for instance, I have 352 villages and each day, every hour, in every village, they have patients who would like to access –(Member timed out.) 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a point of procedure. I am looking at us struggling to make contributions when there is the wave of the curfew that was imposed. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct for us to request the Prime Minister to be here tomorrow morning and we have plenary start early in the morning so that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development makes his presentation? We can then go and prepare our responses and we spend the whole day debating this important matter. 

The President had also given the Prime Minister express permission to give more detailed guidelines about his directives, which he has not done. Looking at the time, I think we shall not be able to conclude this business this evening. Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct that you call us tomorrow morning so that we have this special session on COVID-19? I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you suggesting that we leave the COVID-19 debate here and we do it tomorrow? I have no problem with that. I do not know about the Prime Minister but we can sit in the morning, if he is available. Prime Minister, what is your position? 

4.38
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, this is a very important subject matter. Many colleagues have views and suggestions that they still want to express, which may be very useful to the whole process of dealing with this situation. Therefore, it is okay. We can spend some time tomorrow morning addressing the remaining issues so that we come up with comprehensive positions that will help the country overcome this enemy. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us continue until we get near to the time I want you to leave. I will let you know – in the next 45 minutes. 

4.40 
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Government for taking the initiative to give food to the people who cannot afford at this particular time. 

It is a good move to give food to the people for the time being. However, what is the Government’s plan in the medium and long term? Prime Minister, much as we are fighting this disease in the short-term, we do not know how long this pandemic is going to last. 

For that matter, I would like to request that since people are now confined at home, this is the right time to engage Ugandans to concentrate on agriculture. I would think that if Government would think twice, we would use this opportunity to give hoes and seeds to Ugandans so that they can work, since it is the rainy season. What is the Government’s plan? I would like to suggest to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that this is the time we can effectively engage our people to –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have agreed to devote tomorrow morning to the COVID-19 issue, so I would like us to stop with hon. Driwaru. I have recorded some names but if there are Members who want to speak, they can register with the Clerk so that everybody gets a chance tomorrow morning. There are those who have not spoken. You can register with the Clerk. I will tick off those who I know have been speaking. You can conclude.

MS DRIWARU: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I wanted to also tell the Prime Minister that some RDCs have not understood what the President said. Some RDCs have closed all the shops, including food stores. This is happening even right now in Yumbe. 

In the refugee camps, all the shops are closed including the food stores and only the mobile money shops are left open. What are we going to use the mobile money for? You get money to buy food but bicycles are not allowed and patients are even dying at home. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think that it is very important that we take note of that. Some communities are saying that they want to hear from their leaders. I would like to request the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if possible, to consider providing Members of Parliament with stickers so that they can also go and talk to the people because we are co-fighters against COVID-19. If the Members are given stickers to go and talk to their people, it would be very important.

Lastly, as we are fighting against COVID-19, we should know that as Ugandans, we have confined people at home. Let us prepare for the result of confining people at home in the long term. If those people now live together, that means the population, in future, is going to be very big. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have discussed with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; he wants to give his statement in the morning. So, let me invite the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development to take the Floor. I have registered some names and I am going to register more so that tomorrow when we start, I have got the names. 

Honourable members, you asked about issues of energy; please, allow the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to speak on the power quickly. We have 45 minutes to close. 

4.46
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, I am giving a statement on the status of petroleum supplies and products in Uganda during this lockdown due to the COVID-19 pandemic –(Interjections) -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, you are the ones who asked this question, allow her to answer.

MS KITUTU: Uganda is a net importer of petroleum products in a liberalised downstream petroleum market. Uganda’s consumption of petroleum products has continued to grow at seven per cent per year. On a daily basis, the country consumes an average of three million litres of each product of petrol and diesel. Of these, 95 per cent is imported through Mombasa Port and five per cent through Dar es Salaam Port. 

Strategies to keep the country well supplied therefore hinge on the effectiveness of the import routes and the in-country storage facilities. In this case, Mombasa and Dar es Salaam ports together with other terminals in Kenya are all being utilised by the oil marketing companies to import products into Uganda.

Following the directive of His Excellency the President, regarding travel in and out of Uganda and closure of schools and public gatherings, there was panic buying of petroleum products from retail outlets in the country. This resulted in reduction of 10 days’ stock of petroleum products that we had and this reduced to a six-day stock. 

The stock levels have been boosted with the recent suspension of public transport for 14 days. Supply into Mombasa and Dar es Salaam together with truck loading has been normal and vessels continue to berth on schedule. 

With measures put in place to ensure steady supply of petroleum products and fair competition in the downstream petroleum subsector, the ministry will vigorously monitor the subsector and engage Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) and other stakeholders in the value chain to ensure that the country remains well supplied with quality petroleum products at competitive prices during this period.

At the moment, however, we are still stable on the inland stock position within the private facilities in the country while the Uganda National Oil Company is pursuing options for urgent restocking of Jinja storage tanks. I beg to report. –(Interjections)– That is on petroleum -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you asked for information about the petroleum supplies in the country. The minister is talking and you are also holding meetings.

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, I will now go to the issue of power supply.  I would like to first correct the statement, which was made that we have cut off power. We no longer have load-shedding but we have –(Interjections) Please, listen. We do not have load-shedding but power outages because we have enough power. 
		
THE SPEAKER: Please, listen. It seems COVID-19 has charged you. (Laughter)
	
MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, what we have been experiencing are power outages whenever we have technical issues like poles falling during the rain. That is what has been happening. 

For example, yesterday, there was an issue in Kira. A house fell and broke our poles and so, some parts of the area were out of power. However, by evening, we had restored it. What I am urging you is to do, whenever you have power outages, is to report them and we act immediately. 

There was a case raised by the Kapchorwa woman Member of Parliament. Kapchorwa is on the lines called the Kumi 33KV Feeder. That line is 254 kilometres –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Our reserves in Jinja are in my constituency and as far as I am concerned, there is no fuel in those reserves. They have been privatised by the ministry and they are now being used by people to store fuel for others at a fee. Currently, there is no fuel because of that. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to lie to this august House that they have made efforts to stock fuel in the reserves when, actually, there is none at the moment?

THE SPEAKER: Are the reserves in Jinja or Nakasongola? Where are your reserves? Chairperson, Committee on Natural Resources - it seems he has some issue. Please, come this side. Let us listen to the chairperson of the relevant committee. 

4.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Keefa Kiwanuka): Madam Speaker, hon. Mwiru is sadly right. As of Wednesday, as part of our preparation on the review of ministerial policy statement, we checked up what is available at the Jinja reserves. There is only 8000 litres.

This is a very serious issue that we need to think about. Government has no control over the private providers that the minister is talking about. I do not think she can say with confidence how much they have. Their stock is subject to demand and supply.

As Committee on Natural Resources, what we have been pushing for is to ensure that UNOC is capitalised in order to get stocks in Jinja and also at the bulk storage centre, which is being constructed at Buloba. 

We are very surprised that this is not being seen as a priority by the Executive or by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Nothing at the moment is provided for that. (Interruption)

MR OGUZU: Thank you for giving me the opportunity to inform the House. The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development just stated that there is no load-shedding in the country. 

I come from West Nile and I can attest to the fact that the people of West Nile are in darkness. The generators you supplied are not functioning. How do you expect power to be there when the generators are not working? It would be important for you to first get information from across the country to help you make a statement from an informed point of view. Thank you. 

MS KITUTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think what I was addressing is the current situation, the crisis, which we are in; we are not on the policy of UNOC. I am speaking about these 14 days. How do we handle the situation and how we do we supply power? Mr Chairperson, please, I need your support in this time. (Laughter)

Otherwise, it is true that we have been trying to capitalise UNOC and we are working on it but we have to address the current situation now. That is the priority. 

On the issue of power, it is true, West Nile has been a hot spot. However, we are working on the power issues in West Nile to evacuate power and you just need to be calm. 

The transmission lines are coming to evacuate power to West Nile and have extensions built. This is not something that is done in two days. The company, which supplies West Nile had challenges and it cannot cover the whole area. 

The other issue is the unreliable supplies from the Nyagak Dam. I am working on the power to West Nile as a priority but I need support from you, members of Parliament. (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are really heckling the minister. Let her finish. We shall give you an opportunity to speak. 

MS KITUTU: I was at a burial of hon. D’ujanga and one of the members of Parliament stood up and said that they would vote. Therefore, I really need support from the members of Parliament. We need to work together so -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, take your seats. (Interjections)

MS KITUTU: I meant the burial of hon. D’ujanga’s son. That is what I said. The statement that was mentioned there despite an honourable colleague being in grief - we need to be compassionate. How could that Member bring about such things when people were mourning their son? 

You know we are all on the ground but we are doing our best; West Nile is our hotspot. Just be patient. We are working. Otherwise, if you continue whatever – there are certain issues we have to be patient about. 

I was explaining the power issue in Kapchorwa, responding to what the honourable member asked. I was telling the House that the line is 254 kilometres long and it has T-junctions. These T-junctions distabilise its power supply. Any slight problem on one part, the whole 254 goes off. That is what we are acting on very quickly. By June, that line will be stabilised. 

We have new power in city 2, which we are - (Interruption)

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get some clarification from the honourable Minister. First and foremost, you have given us a difference between power outage and load-shedding. 

However, as lay men, we thought that when you live in an area for more than two months without power, it would automatically qualify to be load-shedding.  Does it mean that in an area where you had power and you have failed to get transformers and in areas where there were transformers, that were vandalised – is there no company that can replace them? How do you expect those people to live without power?

Now that we have the COVID-19 problem, how are we going to be in position to help our people in health Centres IV, III and Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital? Sometimes, we find that there is no power for more than a week. I would love to get some good information from the minister.

How are we going to help our people if we have totally failed to get companies or people to bring back transformers that were vandalised? Thank you.

5.12
MS PROSSY MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. Honourable minister, you said that you need Parliament to help you but we can only do that when you tell us the truth. You come here and tell me that there is no load-shedding when I sit in Rubanda and spend the whole week without electricity, what should I tell my people?

The only way Parliament can help you is to tell the people the truth. I was in Kabale Town and power is on and off. I do not know what you call that.

May be to help you still, how many agencies are answerable to your ministry? We have very many. For example, in Rubanda, the agency that is responsible is UEDCL; how are they answerable to you and how do we go to them? Madam Speaker, allow hon. Akamba to give me information.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okori-moe and then, hon. Nokrach 

5.14
MS JANET OKORI-MOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I also appreciate her for giving rapid response whenever she is told about a problem. 

Honourable minister, please, get interested in Karamoja. You have talked about Kapchorwa - on your priorities being in West Nile but I was in my constituency about three days ago and the place is in total darkness.

The power supply to Abim comes from Pader through Agago but when I went to the village, I found out that poles had broken down and the hospital is in total darkness. 
Sometimes, you need to check on the staff that side because whenever we get a problem, it takes weeks before power can come back. As you look at West Nile and Kapchorwa, look at Abim also. Thank you very much.

5.15
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH (Independent, PWD Representative, Northern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I am raising is on Gulu and northern Uganda. Power in Gulu is very unreliable. In a week, we may have power only once.

This problem may be because of the wooden electric poles. I suggest that the ministry begins thinking of improvising metal electric poles because many times, the poles have fallen and there is no power in Gulu.

I beg you to look into it seriously, not only Gulu but all parts of northern Uganda. There is sustainable power only once a week. I would like to hear about what you are going to do for our people. Thank you.

5.16
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inquire from the minister; since she restricted us for 14 days, which strategies is she using to rectify the situation in Adjumani? Almost 90 per cent of justifications you have presented are the usual ones we have been receiving from the ministry.

Can you tell us how you are going to help us in the 14 days? As we are seated here, I have evidence on my phone that there is a total daily blackout in Adjumani. We do not have power that is sustained for a full day. 

When we were in Kyankwanzi, the President promised that we shall have alternatives, which are short and long-term. Can you give us a brief about the short term? Thank you.

5.18
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I welcome the minister to the ministry, which is a hot spot. The problem we have in that sector is the balance between generation, transmission and distribution of power. That is the area which is sick. You need to do something about it. We have a lot of power now generated but the transmission is seated down, distribution is totally failing and is in ICU.

When we talk about the 254 kilometres, the powerline from Kumi up to Kapchorwa, I saw my sister from there crying. The problem is because of the substation in Mbale.

The power unit in Mbale is very obsolete. This is information I have been sharing with the people of Umeme informally and they told me that this station is as old as the old regimes of Uganda.

Some of them were constructed during the late Amin’s time and then, the other ones during the Obote time. They need to be substituted. It is not just about the distance alone.

We need a big investment in Mbale in order to stabilise the power supply. I trust and know that you are a good minister; you can do something. The problem is that you have just come. Let us support the minister. She will deliver. I am quite certain on that one. 

We have a problem with Rural Electrification Agency (REA). This is a Government agency and we have given them money. Right now, we are supposed to have this project of EXIM Bank but how many of the constituencies have seen work going on properly? We need close monitoring from your ministry. Please, come to Kumi and see what is happening there. They started a line of around three kilometres but then abandoned the project. It is not REA but the companies contracted. What is happening? We need you to come –(Interjections) You will get the information later. Let me first finish what I have.

Madam Speaker, I need enough time. REA needs to be helped by the ministry to come down and check on the companies, which are executing the power projects. We also now have the production of concrete poles. My colleague from Gulu mentioned it. We badly need it. There is a company already manufacturing them in Soroti. Why are we still going for wooden poles, which are a problem to us?

There is the issue of population growth. Come to Kumi and see. The population of those days was using one transformer but today, we are still using the same number of transformers. When welders start work, power goes off. We rely on Mbale and then Kapchorwa relies on Kumi. Kumi is already sick because we rely on Mbale and then Kapchorwa. What are you going to do for the people of Sebei?

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up. 

MR AOGON: I would beg that you give them some fuel. Give them fuel for generators in the meantime so that they also catch up with the rest of the country. Please, do something for Kapchorwa. Those are good neighbours. They supply us with food, honourable minister. 

Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

5.22
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the minister. My first question to the minister is, how many hotspots do you have as a minister in charge of this docket?

The whole of Oyam does not have power. Last time, I was on a radio talkshow. I spoke for only 20 minutes and power went off. I was then reliably informed that that is the order of the day, so much so that even some of the NGOs are relocating and leaving the district headquarters.

Another issue of clarification that I would like from the minister is that in the face of Coronavirus, what alternative do you have for the health centres IV like the one we have in Oyam District? Madam Speaker, this is not only a problem of Oyam but it is a problem for the entire northern Uganda. I do not know which grade you put us as northern Uganda and yet, we do not have power. 

Finally, we thought that Karuma and Aswa woud help us with this problem. When is this one coming? The entire sub region has a very big problem, Madam Speaker. 

To conclude, I would like to tell the minister that we have a staff from umeme on our whatsapp platform but he has even failed to tell us the exact problem. Honourable minister, where is the problem? Are you coordinating with the distribution agency of power? Are they telling you the truth? Let me get some information. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Peter Okot. There is no smuggling. (Laughter)

5.24
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister, knowing very well that electricity is a source of employment. In the north, generally, the level of powe is mainly for lighting. It cannot run industries. As we know, a number of investors have run away from the north to other districts where power is stable.

So, we would like to know what plans the ministry has to put power of industrial nature up north, to ensure that it powers industrial growth so that unemployment is dealt with. 

Sometime back, this House also processed a loan to ensure that power reaches every sub county in this country. How far have we gone to ensure that that has been implemented? Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Galiwango, followed by hon. Olanya – no, you are a smuggler. Please, sit down. (Laughter)

5.25
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister for the communication. However, there are quite a number of issues that we have. For example, in Mbale, there is a sub county that is adjacent to the newly inaugurated industrial park. The industrial park was given power but this particular sub county has no power. 

I would request that some power is connected from the industrial park to this sub county. Given the fact that there is COVID-19 and a curfew, there is increased theft that is taking place. Due to lack of power, people are taking advantage of darkness to break into people’s houses. If we have power, it will be very helpful to those people in that sub county and also the other sub counties.

Honourable minister, the REA people moved around mapping some areas but they stopped at that. We would like to know why the process is taking very long. If they could quicken the process, it would be very helpful to us during this situation, where people are redundant and are going to resort to vices like theft. I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is 5.30 p.m. and I need to release you. Honourable minister, how much time do you need to answer? Two minutes? Can she answer tomorrow? 

5.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I would also like the honourable minister to try and help us. Why is it very expensive for people to use solar energy? How can you make solar energy available and a little cheaper for people or to subsidise on your umeme, which is never there?

You talked about power outage and also load-shedding. In Gulu, it is never there during day time. In the night, it comes for a short time and disappears. Should we not call that load- shedding?

Apart from that, whenever the transformer is not there or is spoilt, must it be the community to buy it? Is it umeme or the community? The community cannot afford those transformers. Please, how can you help us? It is worse for those with factories and businesses, which require power. You are killing people’s businesses.
 
Please, help us. It is not just about the 14 days; it is beyond them. You need to help us better. You are not helping us enough. Thank you.

5.30
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, from what the Members have shared, you can see that the problems are related. People want power. Actually, in one of the United Nations’ human rights declarations, access to power is a human right. You are right to demand for power.

Madam Speaker, it is true in 2006, the country had a problem of load-shedding, reason being that there was not enough power. However, the Government invested more in generation. 

What we are doing now is to review our Act and I want a department in the ministry that can do integrated planning. I must thank the Member from Kumi. That was a very brilliant explanation. 

You know, when you are planning for generation, there should be transmission lines waiting to evacuate the power and a distribution line on the other side. The challenge is that that link was missing. By November, however, Karuma Dam will be delivering 606 megawatts on the grid and Ayago is about to begin as well.

Therefore, power availability will soon not be a problem in the north. There are dams, which are complete and power has not been evacuated. The good news is that right now, in the new budget, the priority, which the President has given us, if COVID-19 does not disorganise us a lot, should be transmission and distribution. 

Therefore, I need your support because that is the weak link. I must agree with you that a line of 254 kilometres with lines of 33KV is very low. As a result, we need to move to higher grade. I was in Kenya and I noticed they are on 400KV yet us who want to distribute power all over the place are still on a mere 33KV. 
Therefore, these are things we are looking at now strategically to push up our transmission levels and also ensure distribution companies are doing their work.

UEDCL is a Government company and they are working in 43 districts. They normally take care of those people where Umeme said it was not economically viable. I also need support to see that this company – it is our own and it is what we look at to take over from Umeme and that is the vision ahead. 

Otherwise, -(Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. There is something very important about UEDCL, which has forced me to rise on a point of order. That company is the one supplying Amuru but last month alone, we spent 21 days without power in Amuru.

Madam Speaker, if we give the contract to that company, I think they will be worse than Umeme. The issue of power is very serious. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to start thinking of handing over power to that company yet, they are worse than Umeme? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you intend to hand over power to UEDCL? 

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, UEDCL is our company. What I have to assure the Members is that this company has not just been funded. Otherwise, it can perform the same work like UEGCL, which is now managing Isimba Dam. They are all Ugandan companies and they are ready to take on ESKOM.

So, the challenge is – that is why I have told you that in this budget, we have to prioritise funding transmission and distribution. You cannot expect a company to perform when they have not been allocated a budget. The same thing happened with UNOC. They cannot have oil reserves when you did not allocate – in fact, the allocation was zero and that is why the Jinja Oil Reserves are at zero. Otherwise, if you allocate money - that is what we are going for in this new budget. That is why I am appealing for your support to be able to distribute and transmit power.

Anyhow, power is now generated and it is available. I just need to evacuate and distribute it. I need money to fund those investments. Without that, we shall continue here and – Gulu has enough – Aswa has power but I need to evacuate it. As a result, I need funding to build the transmission lines before power can reach you. This is the same thing with West Nile. We have power in West Nile but we are only working on the evacuation lines. Like I have told you, 33KV – For Sebei, that line is very old. I do not want to – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, have you laid those proposals in the policy statement? 

MS KITUTU: Yes, Madam Speaker. That is why I need your support. At Cabinet, transmission and distribution were number one on the list. Therefore, I just need your support for us to move on well. (Mr Atiku rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: I think there is a problem, which hon. Atiku wants to raise. 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will not waste a lot of time. The minister seems not to be well informed with the situation on ground in West Nile. The truth of the matter is that West Nile is off grid. In fact, it has been WENRECO generating 3.5 megawatts purportedly, of which only 1.5 megawatts have been supplied. 

Madam Speaker, WENRECO has failed to generate the 1.5 megawatts from Nyagak because of the prolonged drought. Just a few months ago, when the situation was very bad, the ministry, through ERA, transferred Electro-Maxx Ltd from Tororo to Arua with generators of capacity eight megawatts. 

This started very well for about six months. Madam Speaker, the situation we now have is that Electro-Maxx Ltd has been transacting through Absa, which previously was Barclays Bank and they have had an issue, which is in court. 

The money that UETCL sent to Electro-Maxx Ltd through their accounts in Absa was frozen. So, Electro-Maxx Ltd cannot access that money to procure fuel to go to West Nile to generate electricity. Therefore, West Nile is in darkness. In the face of COVID-19, Arua Regional Referral Hospital, which has been earmarked as a hub for West Nile Region and at the same time for its capacity to be built to handle cases in West Nile, has no power. That means the Intensive Care Unit will not function.

It was very important that the minister gets this information and acts on it so that fuel is availed to Electro- Maxx Ltd to be able to generate the eight megawatts of electricity. Thank you.
	
THE SPEAKER: Does the minister know about the freezing of the accounts of Electro-Maxx Ltd by Absa Bank? 

MS KITUTU: Madam Speaker, I am aware of that case and that is what we are working on to see how power goes to West Nile. Meanwhile, we are also working on the longer process of evacuating power from Karuma Dam to the other side. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now 20 minutes to 6 O’clock. I do not want any Member to be arrested for breaching the curfew. I would like to adjourn the House to 10 O’clock tomorrow morning. We will resume the debate on COVID-19 before getting into the other work. House is adjourned to tomorrow at 10 O’clock. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 2 April 2020 at 10 a.m.)
