Tuesday, 19 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.31 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward K. Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you and I hope you had a nice weekend. On a personal note, I want to say that I have been overwhelmed by the generosity that you displayed in as far as personally I am concerned. On 2nd March in my constituency, we experienced a disaster caused by a Tsunami sort of situation when we had a very stormy rain, which was unprecedented and ravaged the area leaving five people dead; hundreds without homes; and food and schools were destroyed. 

On learning this, I informed you and immediately you ran to my rescue and you were able to raise over Shs 5.0 million to assist me to rehabilitate the area. I am extremely grateful! I have been touched - when I say touched it is not only me but also all people in Bukoto Central. You did not do this because of plenty of money, but you did this because of your kind heart and actually I consider you as a Friend. I take you to be Friends indeed. This will have a big impact on the people in Bukoto Central. Thank you very much!  (Applause). (Mr Sebuliba and Mr Sekikubo rose_)

Well, honourable members, both of you were standing but none of you approached me to indicate that you had an important issue to raise. Honourable members, we started this procedure of allowing Members after the Communication to report matters of urgent nature that need to be addressed, especially, by the Executive. 

For instance, you were coming then the bridge collapsed and you know you will not be able to return to your constituency, and you have not heard any statement from the Executive about this, then you come here and report. It should be really in form of a report so that action is taken. But something, which has happened some two or a week ago, that one if you want to raise it, it should be by away of a question. 

So, if there is a matter of urgency, you come and let me know and then you report so that action is taken because, when you put a formal question it requires research for the Executive to answer. But I think I give you the benefit of doubt that maybe the procedure was not clear to you, but let me, therefore, take yours. [Mr Sebuliba: ”Point of clarification”].  Clarification on what I have said?

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I sympathize with your people and with you particularly as a representative of those people here in Parliament. I have heard you well thanking the parliamentarians, but I have not heard you clearly - you can clarify to me - what has government done to the people, particularly he Ministry of Disaster? I thought it could also have played a role in helping because the disaster was of a higher magnitude; lives were lost, lots of property were destroyed, what was the response of the government? Has it done anything apart from the little we have given you?

THE SPEAKER: It will be a question of reporting; I would not like you to make an accusation in one way or the other. But what I can say, immediately this happened, I reported to the appropriate authorities, I reported to the Rt hon. Prime Minister and they ordered action to be taken. But apparently, I think it could be that the budget could not support the disaster of that magnitude when actually it is also supporting a permanent disaster in the North. So, for me to come here and say the Ministry of Disaster did this or did not, I find it a problem. But what I know, the spirit may be willing, but the body may not be. But I must say that other organisations came in, and I must thank the Red Cross because the Red Cross came in after two days and then other groups came in, in one way or the other to assist in the situation.  But you have come in; you are great Friends. Thank you very much!

2.37
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I took note of your Communication and your guidance, but I was surprised that the matter that was so deep was not reflected on the Order Paper, the strike of traders in Kampala. I thought the Prime Minister would be in position to have a statement on the Order Paper to explain to us.  

Mr Speaker, the matter of Kampala Traders Association is not new. I understand very well that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member, as you see, you are talking about what happened over the weekend and there are many reports that this matter has been negotiated and settled. Why should we revive it now when actually there are official communications that they have ended it, and they are negotiating with government and they have been given 21 days to find a solution? Why do we not wait and see what happens after 21 days instead of debating it now? Because, we will be dealing with issues that have been discussed among the parties concerned and then reviving it here – 

I think let us wait and see what happens in 21 days. But it was something very important, I agree, but I must thank that the Executive headed by the Rt hon. Prime Minister and other ministers met these people, this is the report I got, and reached an understanding. Let us give it time, please.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Possibly, Mr Speaker, since I am a Member of the responsible committee, I thought that since the Prime Minister is here, he should give us the benefit of knowing exactly what is taking place more so that KACITA appeared before the same committee on 23rd last month. I thought that Members of Parliament would need an explanation.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe the Prime Minister will write to the Speaker, and the Speaker will communicate with the appropriate committee. Let us give them time, please.

2.40
MR JOHN ERESU (Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter with respect to the performance of our House on certain issues. Sometime last year, a select committee was appointed to look into the issues of immigration, the issues of work permits issued to various nationals who come to work into this country. But up to now a report has not been submitted to this House and it would appear that it may take long time for that report to be submitted.  

On the other hand, Mr Speaker, we see new developments. For example, although I am restrained to bring it here, in the traders’ strike in Kampala, an element pertaining to work permits and issuance of trading licenses and so on, were also pointed out. I would imagine by presenting this report, Parliament would find out some of the anomalies that occur in the office that is concerned with the issuance of such documentation. So, can I, therefore, ask for guidance from you, Mr Speaker, as to when this report will come so that we find the way forward in handling some of these matters?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I will get in touch with Dr Kasirivu Atwooki, who is the chairperson of that committee to find out what has happened and let you know. (Mrs Odwong rose_) But I am closing this matter with her because I explained the procedure, and there were only two who had stood and for benefit of doubt I allowed them, but maybe I can allow her.

2.42
MRS JANE AKWERO ODWONG (Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to bring to the attention of this House a matter of national concern. Mr Speaker and Members of this august House, you know and you have always supported the people in the North. You know what the LRA rebels are doing to the communities in the camps, and you have heard of incidences of women being murdered, of women’s lips being cut.  

But, Mr Speaker, I stand on this Floor this afternoon, with a very heavy heart, to report that on the 25 of March 2005 in Padibe, at around 9.30 p.m. our national soldiers, the UPDF soldiers, beat, raped and forcefully took some properties of women, school girls and men. It is believed that these soldiers who were in the barracks, Indian Battalion, before evening were mobile soldiers from the 91st Battalion. 

Those who were directly affected were from both sub-counties of Padibe east and west and some of them include Acola Betty who was beaten and raped; Amite Pauline who was raped by seven soldiers; Awiny Balidina whose money was taken away and Okot Francis whose property was taken away. Others affected were Alube Charles, Onen Phillip, Okwera Bosco, Orach David, Kamau Patrick, Lamunu Christine, Langoye Joseph, Okot Robert, Aneno Helen and Otema David.  All these people were from Padibe west.

Those from Padibe east who were beaten and admitted to hospital include Onex Zario, Ongwech Lamu Ton, Aluo Cons, Orach Benson. All these people were taken to Padibe heath centre for treatment.

Mr Speaker, when the district authorities intervened in the matter by going up to the sub-county headquarters, more women declared that they were raped by the 91st Battalion who were from an operation in Lalak hills in Khartoum, where rebels were hiding. Two soldiers were arrested at the spot and the women were able to identify them to the authorities. The following morning, the soldiers of the 91st Battalion were moved away to Muchwini for other operations.  

Mr Speaker, even during that operation, a man who apparently slept and covered himself with a kikoyi was carried by the soldiers. When they found that he was a man, they beat him up in the barracks and kicked him for wasting their energy. (Laughter)  Mr Speaker, it is no laughing matter.

On this Floor of Parliament, I Akwero Odwong, the Woman Member of Parliament for Kitgum, I have always stood firm and upright to laud our UPDF soldiers. We have commended them for the operation they have carried out against the LRA.  Mr Speaker, when the operation now turns against the civilians and some of them even have the audacity to say, they have now launched a biological warfare - the biological, meaning their manhood now to be turned against the women. When the battlefield now turns to the women’s bodies, where will the women turn?  The rebels kill them and our own sons in the UPDF rape them. Where should we go? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, this is a serious matter. It has been reported. Apparently, the Members documented it; I do not think we can readily handle it just now. I do not know what the Prime Minister has to say.

2.46
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker, I am saddened by what I have heard and I have no hesitation directing the Minister of Defence to investigate the matter and report to Parliament within ten days from now. It is a very grave matter, and it requires to be fully investigated. I thank you.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You would appreciate that actually I represent Masaka District, both public and private, in all respects.  But, I would like to inform hon. Sebuliba Mutumba that actually government did a lot of work. I have visited the site where the incident took place, and twice I found there government officials trying to assist the situation and up to now they are still doing their best. I would like to give this information to him that actually the question he raised was genuine, but also a lot of work is being done by government. I wanted to report this, Sir.  Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT
(THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS)

(Debate continued)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the statement we had which was not completed is the statement by the Minister of Education on the subject we debated for two days, but there were three people who wanted to complete this process and these are hon. Latif Sebaggala, hon. Ochieng Peter and hon. Eng. Gagawala Wambuzi. You see what happened, some people went away, but we persisted and then, it is only those who were there when we were adjourning that were given the opportunity.  

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I had to go away because I had a very urgent personal call, and I have just one small matter to raise with regard to the policy statement given on the paper on selection of disabled students.  

THE SPEAKER: I wish you had indicated that to me, I would have included it, but let me see please.

MR MWANDHA: Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, we have hon. Latif Sebaggala, hon. Ochieng, and hon. Wambuzi Gagawala

2.50
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for having recognized members who really attended up to the end. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement, and I have some few areas for clarification.  

Mr Speaker, we all believe that indeed there is a need to have so many Ugandans offering Science related courses; there is no doubt about that. But I would like to inform the honourable minister that in as much as we would wish many Ugandans to offer Science related courses at campus or at higher institutions of learning, it goes without saying that there is a lot that must be done in secondary schools.

Mr Speaker, not all schools in urban areas are well equipped with laboratory equipments. How about rural areas? It is obvious that there the situation is worse. When it comes to private institutions, I have never seen and I have never heard Ministry of Education giving out laboratory equipments to private institutions. We know that private secondary schools greatly out-number government schools. 

I think justice would demand that the Minister of Education comes out broadly to assist private schools, if our policy can really bear fruits. But, we cannot talk about improving or having so many students offering Science related courses at institutions of higher learning minus government’s contribution especially towards stuffing laboratories in private schools, not even forgetting the government-owned secondary schools which are also under stuffed. 

On page 3, the minister had this to say: “Many observations have been made by stakeholders that the current sponsorship system favoured students from rich families who go to high fee paying schools staffed with competent and better supervised teachers….” Mr Speaker, I need some clarifications because we all know that all teachers are trained from the same institutions.  If it is Makerere University, those who are going to teach in secondary schools are offering BA Education and they all qualify in various grades.  So, this statement that “competent teachers” when we all know that all teachers are competent does not arise because, they are all trained in our institutions. So, when they graduate, it automatically –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you have students in your class, do you not grade them?  

MR SEBAGGALA: Mr Speaker, you grade them. If the minister had said that those graduates who come out with first class they are in urban schools, then that would really have made a difference. But when we talk about competent teachers, we mean that any teacher who graduated when he comes out he is compete enough to handle students. I believe that since they are all getting the same training, the government should try as much as possible to put up a policy that maybe teachers who get out could be facilitated to go to rural areas and are paid well. That would really mean some good sense. 

Mr Speaker, when we talk about having students on quota system, the system is good, but I believe that the system needs a lot of understanding. For instance, in urban areas you must understand that not all students in urban centres come from well to do families, there are some schools in urban centres and some students in urban centres who are really badly off. So, I believe that urban centres will also get access to the quota system as it is, putting into consideration that there are some schools in urban areas, which are really badly off and some families in urban centres which really require assistance from the government. 

Mr Speaker, it is my humble request to the ministry that since by the beginning of this year Science subjects were made to be compulsory in senior three, why can we not hold on that those who are in senior three up to senior six will remain with the status quo. The status quo remains and then after some four years, five years then we really go into full gear in putting more consideration to science related courses. 

Finally, Mr speaker, I believe that if the government is trying to encourage students to offer science related courses, right now the university cannot admit more than 20 per cent students offering science related courses unless we are going to offer theoretical sciences. We do not have enough laboratory equipments at Makerere University. I made my research, I was there and I know what I am talking about; they are not enough to cope up with the new government policy. So, we all agree that it is really necessary, but let us give it time so that in 2010 the system can become effective. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

Mr Mawiya: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: What procedure? I have got a list of people to make their contributions. No, procedure on his contribution? How?

MR MAWIYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember by the time we left on Thursday, you had guided the House as to how we are going to move, or we are moving. You had reduced the time to three minutes because very many of us had indicated that we wanted to contribute.

THE SPEAKER: And the position is three minutes.

MR MAWIYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: So, please be vigilant. Hon. Ochieng is not here. Hon. Wambuzi is not here, but taking into account the constituency of hon. James Mwandha, I think I will make a special concession so that you use the three minutes to make your contribution.

2.59
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disability, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for exercising affirmative action. In view of the time constraint, I just want to concentrate on paragraph eight, “Criteria and guidelines for admission of people with disabilities/special needs to universities.’ 

First of all, I want to thank the minister for including people with disabilities in this statement. Disability is crosscutting and I think she is the only minister who has given a policy statement, which includes disability. (Applause) Right now, I am battling with the Minister of Works with the support of the Prime Minister on the issue of accessibility, but I am getting very little response so far. But I thank the Minister of Education for this statement.

I want the minister to clarify in the guidelines the following points: 

One; that if a disabled student qualifies on merit and he/she is one of the best who even if he/she was not disabled, would automatically be sponsored by government, I think that particular student should not be included in the quota for disabled students.

Two; if a disabled student would qualify for one of the 16 students from the districts, I would like to propose to the minister that that particular student should not be put on the quota for disabled students because, automatically on merit he/she would qualify under the quota of 16 for the districts.

Three; if a disabled student is the son/daughter of a minister or Member of Parliament or a Managing Director, somebody who can afford to pay for this student, again, Mr Speaker, I want to propose to the minister that that particular student should not go on the quota of the disabled students –[Mr Kubeketerya: “Clarification”]- and I have no time to receive any clarification.

Four; Mr Speaker, I want also to propose to the minister that the quota for disabled students should take into account the issue of gender so that both women and men students are taken into account. 

Five; Mr Speaker, I think there is a problem because some of the districts are well placed; the districts of Kampala, Mukono, Wakiso and so on. But there may be districts out there, whose disabled students may not be able to compete if there was no consideration for other districts. I, therefore, would like to propose to the minister that we should make a reservation of two students per district so that at least all the districts have the opportunity to have students with disabilities being sponsored by government. Otherwise, we may end up with 64 only coming from a few districts and the rest of the districts not having the opportunity to have their disabled students sponsored by government. As a disciplined person, I will not go any further. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.04
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just have one concern. I would like to thank the minister for the statement, but when we go to bullet six, that is the quota system, I am not comfortable with the guidelines given below. When you take an example of Mukono District where I belong and you consider Buvuma Islands, which is actually marginalized with one secondary school in the state you know, and Mr Speaker, you remember last year I presented the petition of the people Buvuma. But as we talk now, the situation is still wanting. So, when we go by this criterion of selecting 16 students in every district, we shall kill the objective of the quota system. To me, I think the objective of the quota system was affirmative action for that district such that each district actually has students at the higher learning institutions. 

So, I am of the view that even we consider counties because, Mr Speaker, the moment we do not consider counties then people will think agitating for creating districts such that they can benefit. Because I do not see in any way how Buvuma Islands can benefit in this system if the state has refused to give them teachers and you want them to compete. 

So, I am proposing to the minister that if the objective was affirmative action for those districts, really to consider counties because these 16 students can even come from a parish. For example, Mukono town council will be in position to raise the 16; so, what about Buvuma? Sir, I would not love to start agitating for a new district but if the condition warrants that unless you have a district you can benefit, I might think otherwise. I thank you.

3.06
MRS DOROTHY HYUHA (Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, to allow me make some observations, remarks as a Chairperson of the Social Services Committee over the statement from the Minister of Education and Sports on pertinent policy matters concerning higher education, particularly admission policy to public universities.

Mr Speaker, honourable members, I wish on behalf of the Committee on Social Services to commend the Minister of Education and Sports for being action oriented. (Applause) Three weeks ago, when we invited the Minister of Education and Sports and reminded her to respond to a number of unanswered questions regarding sports policy, when she came back after three weeks, she delivered the policy statement -(Applause)- and already as we debate, we are talking of admission special quota to sportsmen and women.  So, I am certain, with the National Physical Education and Sports Policy, we shall have better guidance in this country.  I hope at an appropriate time, we should find time as Parliament, as Social Services, to seriously debate and see how this one is going to be operationalised in this country.

Our second concern, Mr Speaker, while we are commending the Minister of Education and Sports about unanswered questions, which had remained for about sometime in the Ministry of Education and Sports, is the conflict between MUBS (Makerere University Business School) and Makerere University. Just last week, the minister laid before this august House an amendment bill on Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions, Bill which is going to answer this conflict. We seriously commend her for that! (Applause)

The third area, Mr Speaker, which has remained unanswered for quite sometime, is the quota. Honourable members, you all recall that on 16 May 2003, I presented a report on behalf of the committee on a Friday. This is the longest debate I have sustained on this Floor, which we started at 10.00 O’clock and I left this podium at 4.00 O’clock, non-stop. And from 2003, it is just last week that we got a response. Honourable minister we want to commend you for this!

So, Mr Speaker, why did the committee support the quota system? The quota system in that report which I am referring to, if you all recall, we had an extensive debate, it raised a lot of concerns, it raised a lot of suggestions both short term and long term. And, Mr Speaker, we all agree as committee that the quota system is just a stop-gap measure, a short term solution to address a policy like UPE, pro-poor to increase access of the rural poor to universities, to access the sponsorship into public universities.

The committee believes that this quota system will address equitable development of manpower in districts. Mr Speaker, you all recall that in that detailed report, which I presented on 16 May 2003, we had even statistics showing admissions of students who access sponsorship from public funds into public universities –[Mr Bikwasizehi: “Clarification”]- can I be allowed to contribute Mr Speaker? I was saying that in that report, it clearly showed the statistics of every sample, a research carried out by the committee, how many students have accessed government sponsorship and entered public universities?  

And we noted that in three consecutive years, you would find districts like Bundibugyo, like Kibale, like Moroto, like Kamwenge, Kanungu, Kalangala getting one student every year, while one district has had about 200 students accessing government sponsorship. So, in three years, if those students originate in one given district, that one has developed only three students, three skilled manpower while another one has around 500 and, therefore, we feel that this quota system will help to address the need for equitable development of manpower.  

We also believed, Mr Speaker, that hard to reach districts like the island districts, Kalangala for example, where you cannot convince senior skilled teachers to go and serve - somebody was asking what the minister means in her statement - arid areas like Kotido, insecure areas like Pader, Adjumani where you cannot convince certain experienced teachers to go and serve. And when we talk of experienced teachers, even if we do not talk of grades from universities, teachers when they come out they acquire certain skills of teaching.  Somebody has undergone in-service training of marking. A teacher who is an examiner does not teach the same way as a newly graduate teacher who has just come out of school.  You like it or not, there is a difference and, therefore, many of these teachers have been attracted to schools with good facilities, schools with huge PTA funds and, therefore, they cannot accept to go in these areas with inadequate facilities. 

These inevitably, Mr Speaker, cause imbalance in passing of exams and, therefore arid areas, islands, insecure areas, the rural generally have had that disadvantage of attracting good teachers, leave alone the poverty levels. So, having analysed all these issues, we all agreed as Members of Parliament that we should support the quota system.  

I want to inform you honourable members that even after that time when the Speaker, who guided us during the debate on 16th May, gave the Executive time to go and consult, from time to time, the minister kept on giving us guidelines, but I want to assure you that the guidelines we have now are far much better than what we received before. One of the issues, for example, originally the guidelines were proposing that the LCs, a magistrate, opinion leaders would form a committee, which would select, but now they have come out that the selection of these candidates should be done professionally or technically by the public Joint Admissions Board with the computerization done by UNEB. So, that is a serious modification, which we appreciate.

Mr Speaker, the ministry agreed as per the discussions with Social Services, that this system should be reviewed from time to time so that even new districts, which will come up, can also be put on board. So, even if new districts come up tomorrow, we cannot stick to only 1,000 students, they should be in position to revise these numbers so that we take into consideration of the new districts to benefit from quota.

The other area of emphasis, students are free to apply for any course of their choice under quota. So, the 16 students from each district, from the understanding of Social Services, will be taking those courses they applied for; whether they applied for Social Work and Social Administration and they qualify they should be admitted, whether they applied for Engineering and they qualify, they should be considered. So, the quota will be for these 800 positions set aside for districts, the 104 set aside for sportsmen and persons with disability, these candidates should be considered on their choices of interest, which they applied for, it is not conditional.  

Quickly, to comment about the other 3,000 students, which are going to be considered for critical Sciences and Arts and Humanities, Mr Speaker, the emphasis here should be the word, ‘critical’.  Although the media have blown it out of proportion, from the understanding of the Committee on Social Services - we also first got alarmed when we read it in papers that it had diverted from what we had been discussing with Ministry of Education! It was talking of more Sciences and no admission in Arts and yet the message is that consideration of critical and to us, even an Arts course or discipline can be critical, even a course in Humanities is critical, even some course in Sciences is critical. 

If you took time, honourable members, from the submission of the minister Annex A has Science subjects, which are critical hence, not every Science course is critical. The list on Annex B has both Arts and Humanities. What is critical, Mr Speaker, from the understanding of the Committee of Social Services, should be those disciplines, which have immediate key economic development, which can cause economic development, courses which should be for job creators than job searchers. That is how we interpret this word ‘critical’ and out of every 100 students admitted on these 3,000, 53 will be Sciences and 47 will be Arts. It is just a difference of six and, therefore, when I hear people saying, “The courses have changed, it is going to admit only sciences” I do not understand. So, I wanted to clarify that and I want to end by saying that – (Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having heard the statement of the minister and the debate that has been going on on the Floor of Parliament, the honourable member holding the Floor is presenting something near to another report. I was wondering whether she has got a copy, and she can avail to us a copy. Otherwise, I do not know whether it is a contribution and waiting for the minister to answer and some of these things would have been better in the committee if it was a policy matter or statement. So, this is the guidance I am seeking, surely we could be having this report, such that we can follow what she is saying because it is lengthy.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, no, you will not bring the file because even if you have the file, his case is, are you presenting a different report and, therefore, do you have copies? You are just commenting on the policy, I think, and that is the position.

MRS HYUHA: I am not presenting another report, I am giving the committee’s position on this new policy matter, how we have supported and also having been given an opportunity to listen to Members, what they contributed.

So, Mr Speaker, I want to say that the committee analysed most of these issues, it is not something new. Since 2003, when we presented this report, we have received a series of reports from the ministry concerning critical subjects; it is not emphasizing admission of Arts, it is emphasizing admission of candidates who are going to take disciplines in critical subjects, which may be Sciences, Arts or Humanities.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, the committee highly recommends to this august House that we support the Ministry of Education and Sports on this policy. I thank you, very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Perhaps, honourable chairperson, as a committee do you have anything to comment on - because from the contribution here, I heard previously, Members were saying that there should be a notice of implementation of this policy. “Two years from now this should be the policy” so that people know about it rather than, you announce it, you implement it, do you have anything to say about that?

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, as a committee we wanted this policy. You remember from the time I presented the debate on quota in 2003, we feel they have delayed to implement; it should be immediately.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the question is, do you think it is unreasonable to demand a notice to the public that are going to consume this policy that, “We intend to implement this policy in a year or two?”

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you, the chairperson for giving way. I would like to seek clarification from the Chairperson of the Committee of Social Services. We are all aware that this year Sciences are compulsory to all senior threes, and the objective was that they groom these students, when they reach senior four next year they all do Sciences and when the go to HSC, we have Science students such that the same will apply to the university. I would not really agree with the chairperson that this nation does not deserve to be given notice such that, if for example we are giving four years to implement this policy, everybody will be extremely happy – 

MRS KAFIIRE: Clarification.

THE SPEAKER: No, clarification should end, can you answer and then resume your seat.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, when people begin saying that Sciences are being made compulsory now, I get to wonder! Ordinary level syllabus - and I am talking as an experienced teacher of secondary - is clear. Before you register, you must have done a selection in languages, you must have done a selection in humanities and you must have done a selection in sciences so that you qualify. 

What happened is that, sciences, they have just added on the list, not that they have started to make them compulsory this year. I wanted it also, Mr Speaker, to be on record that about three years ago, in teachers training colleges, it was noted that the performance of primary teachers particularly in Science, languages was unbecoming and, therefore, admission to teachers colleges of sciences -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Chairperson, my understanding of the observation was that, it is now compulsory for students in secondary schools to include Science as a compulsory subject. That is what he is talking about, that it has started this year according to him.  

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, I know the minister who is an implementer is here but from the best of my knowledge, I know that on the list of Sciences -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  Please wind up, honourable.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, I was saying that on the list of Sciences what happened two years ago, the list of subjects to be done they have just increased. Originally Biology has been compulsory throughout, they have now added on the list Physics Chemistry and in teachers colleges before you are admitted you must have passed Science, languages it is now compulsory so that primary education is added. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Now the Rt hon. Prime Minister and Chancellor.

3.27
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apollo Nsibambi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I did make it clear that whoever graduates can get a transcript within seven days from the day of graduation. This has been confirmed by the assistant registrar and he is here; those who do not get their transcripts have got encumbrances.  For example, they may have debts and so on and so forth; and anybody who is aggrieved on this matter can appeal to the Ministry of Education and Sports and if not satisfied, can appeal to the technocratic Premier and the matter will be dealt forthwith. So, I am very pleased with Makerere University and other public universities. 
 
We thank you, for your contributions because, we are going to take them into account; in order to improve the policy, we have to. I want to say that there is no system, which is impeccable; whatever system you propose, it is bound to have a blemish.  We must have a system which is easy to implement, but if you make it too complicated, then it will be very difficult to implement so that is another consideration and we have been talking about the necessity to emphasize Science for many years. So, nobody has been ambushed on this scope. Let me also say the world is moving very fast, they are not going to wait for Uganda. While people are busy going to the moon, we are busy trying to remove our jiggers, as one person said and you cannot afford to do that!  Nobody is going to wait for Uganda.

Finally, because I am a person of few words, let me quote this statement: “For every five students registered in the higher education institutions, only one of them is registered in Science and Technology” you see, and the sources are National Council for Higher Education survey and the World Bank Tertiary Sector Affirmative Action report for Science and Technology. So, this is very sad, we have simply to focus on Science and Technology.

Only today, I was speaking with the Ambassador of South Korea and he made it clear that they had to focus on Science and Technology that is why they have made it, and they also give them good salaries so that they do not suffer from brain drain. That is another matter, which we shall have to take into account; you have to remunerate these people. We are now afflicted by HIV and we need again scientists to study this matter, obviously assisted by people in Humanities, but primarily scientists.  

Finally, let me appeal to media actually not to distort this policy because I have heard many FM radios having a policy debate. And when our Kabaka was 50 years old and we were celebrating at Namirembe, a whole Bishop stood up and criticized the policy when he was not knowledgeable -(Laughter)- yes, he had been misled by media. So eventually, I was given an opportunity to speak and I said that I had already written to him but he had not received my letter. So, I want to appeal -(Interruption)

MR SEBULIBA: Thank you, hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. Actually, I was there. The Bishop said he was going to comment but since he had not received your letter, he was going to read it first, then he will make his observation and comment.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Prime Minister. Mr Prime Minister, you mentioned about South Korea, the action they took and the emphasis was on technical schools, not like us here where you built 7000 classrooms of UPE and you do not build even a single technical school.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, the situation on the ground -(Interruption)

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Mr Speaker, Sir, people are trying now to ambush the system so that they may speak.  Let me reiterate that when the Bishop criticized it, he was applauded and afterwards I even talked to him and I said, “You are leader, you cannot comment on a system you are not fully aware of.” So, here I want to appeal to all leaders religious, political, cultural to first internalise the policy before commenting on it. I thank you and I support the policy.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable Members, you will bear with me to interrupt this debate, which is going to be concluded by the Minister of Education. I have no aim to interrupt the debate to announce that in the Galley, are women council leaders from the districts of Bugiri, Iganga, Jinja, Kamuli and Mayuge of Busoga. They are here with us to see what is going on, and you are most welcome to your Parliament! (Applause)
 
And, there is an achievement by one of us, hon. Kasole Bwerere. Yesterday he turned 70 years old. (Laughter) Congratulations! Let us continue with the debate. Honorable members are asking the birthday person that are we going to the gardens? 

3.35
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Geraldine Bitamazire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Members of Parliament, and the Rt hon. Prime Minister, who have contributed to this debate. Over 28 Members of Parliament have made comments in support of the proposed scheme and many of them have given useful advice on how science education can generally be improved in this country so that each student in the country can access basic science, and science education in general. 

I would like to say that the Ministry of Education has taken note and I will make sure that whatever we do we implement this scheme properly so that no body is jeopardized and that the efforts and the objectives are achieved, Mr Speaker. All the programmes and plans will be targeted at minimizing constraints and shortages that may threaten the smooth implementation of this sciences scheme.  

The debate covered two major policy issues and I believe among the 28 comments and responses, most of the points have been very similar. Therefore, I would like to start by responding to what I think are common abuses, which have been expressed by the members.  

This debate was focused mainly on two issues: sponsorship with a bias to critical sciences and humanity disciplines for sustainable and accelerated national development; and the second aspect of the debate has been on the quota system to respond to the needs as expressed by the Members of Parliament and the general public to promote equity in access to university education in this country. Those have been the key issues or areas of debate.

Mr Speaker, let me respond to what I thought were general and similar remarks made by many members.

Arts and humanities disciplines and professional courses are not phased out in the scheme as the mass media has been reflecting. I think the chairman of the committee has made this point and I once again state it categorically that arts and humanities disciplines and professions have not been phased out from this scheme. The focus is on identified critical disciplines for the development of our country, and this includes sciences and arts. So, I appeal to our friends the mass media, to make this clarification.

On critical analysis, the recast sponsorship scheme at public universities will cover 53 percent under science and technology, and 47 under arts and humanities. So when you compare the critical list for sciences and that for arts and humanities, the balance is almost equal: 53 Vs 47. That variation is very narrow and many students who qualified and applied for various courses in science, technology, arts and humanities will be admitted and sponsored under the 4,000 government scholarships.  

There is no cause for alarm and my objective here is to clarify these issues, which had otherwise been misunderstood. And indeed some of the issues, which were brought up on the Floor by members, are to be responded to. The Government will continue to sponsor 4,000 students as before, no more, no less. So there is no cause for alarm that some students who qualify will be thrown out, left out and so on. The number of scholarships has remained constant, until further notice.

Under the recast sponsorship scheme, the principle of merit will be maintained and strictly applied to the admission process, as has been the case before. This is to avoid compromising academic and professional standards and to avoid - and very important too - discrediting the university education in this country, which is known all over the world.

Mr Speaker, I want to go on to clarify that the recast government sponsorship process at public universities will be reviewed from time to time following nationally identified manpower needs.

I am taking into consideration some of the comments, which assumed that probably the policy has come to stifle everybody. We shall review this as we move along.

Furthermore, the recast sponsorship is to improve opportunities for Ugandans who apply scientific knowledge and skills with national, social and economic development.  

It is also intended to enhance active competitiveness by Ugandans for jobs nationally and internationally. Because if we came with a list of Ugandan professionals who are abroad, many of them are in professions biased towards science and technology.  

Some Members of Parliament assumed that this was an ambush. I want to say, Mr Speaker, that the National Policy on Science Education was launched in 1992 in the Government White Paper on Education, Chapter 7, and pages 113 to 135. I believe in our library at Parliament we have got that Government White Paper on Education. That paper was endorsed by Parliament at that time and so I believe in formulating policies, every Parliament will not go over what previous Parliaments have passed.  

Let me quote, for emphasis and clarity, from that White Paper: “Government has already enunciated its policy of developing a firm national technological and technical base within which technical, commercial and immediate technology education and training components have assumed special importance at that time – 1992. 

I go on to quote; “Government fully concurs that Uganda must effectively prepare to deal adequately with challenges caused by rapid scientific and technological changes and must, therefore, prepare adequate skilled manpower that is necessary for high agricultural productivity, diversification of the economy and industrialization of the productive system.” 

That was as far back as 1992, so there is no ambush. The idea here is that we are becoming proactive in the present government. We are putting what we put in our plans, into effect and action. That is why that paragraph I have read is now coming up, because of the proactive approach to development by government.  

The principle of job creation rather than job searching requires professional skills and knowledge based on humanities and science disciplines in balanced proportions. The hon. Prime Minister has quoted figures of the enrollment at universities, which is so imbalanced that we should not just continue with it.  

There were many concerns about the gender and I want to say and clarify that the affirmative action policy is to continue being applied to admission of female candidates, as has been the case. So, in the new orientation the gender is taken care of already by the ongoing policy.  

I want to note in general that the recasting of government sponsorship at public universities is not ill timed. It has been long overdue, noting the national micro policies on the human resources and manpower development in this country. I believe my colleagues are aware of such micro policies as far as human resources and manpower development is concerned. 

Another response is to the quota system comments. I am very happy and I want to thank the members for supporting the quota system, because nobody spoke about it negatively or opposed it. I want to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Social Services and the members for being very consistent on this issue. (Applause)

Recasting government sponsorship at public universities has for the first time introduced the quota system in the admission of students covering all the districts, with 16 slots each. The quota sponsorship will cover the sportsmen, it will cover the sportswomen, and the students with disabilities. Under this category students will be admitted to do sciences and humanities according to their scores and according to their choices. That again enlarges the humanities and arts and sciences imbalances. The quota system is in response to the hon. Members of Parliament and other peoples’ demand for equitable access to university education. This will translate, among other things, into equitable development throughout the country. Each area will be covered under this type of admission process. We believe this will bring about equity and balancing of opportunities.  

The quota system is not based on the size of the population, as many members were commenting, nor is it based on geographical location of the district. The scheme, which covers 25 percent of the slots, is to address needy districts and needy students. It has nothing to do with size of the population or the geographical location of the district. The criterion here is need, not population size. The 16 slots per district will be - and this is very important - in addition to opportunities for admission in any other slots. If a candidate from district X qualified under the sciences, fine. If he qualified under people with disabilities, fine still. 

The understanding is that each district will get 16 slots and that is all –(Interjection)- no, these are bonus affirmative slots in addition to any other admission processes that have been covered. The selection for the 16 candidates, I want to emphasize, will be done by the Universities Admissions Board, based on the list produced by UNEB. And I am happy the chairperson clarified that as well. Many LCs and councilors have been looking forward to carrying out the selection exercise, but let us pilot it with the admissions board and probably in future, if need be, it might be done by LCs.  

As I conclude on the quota system, I want to assure the Members of Parliament that districts will access lists of candidates selected from their respective areas. As soon as the admissions are completed we are going to circulate these lists so that you get to know who from your district has taken one of the 16 slots for your district. 

I am very happy once again that the Members of Parliament have made very good contributions to the implementation strategies and guidelines. First of all, universities have been issued with detailed guidelines and it is already realized that there will not be any shortage of facilities because for several years Makerere University has been admitting 90 students for Medicine on government sponsorship, and they have been admitting students on private sponsorship. That means there is space beyond or above 90 places. So, if the number is now increased under government sponsorship, I do not see any shortage. It will reduce the number of private students but there will not be any shortages because there has been that slot normally occupied by private students but which is now going to be extended under the new orientation. So, the issue of inadequacy of facilities at universities, where we have private students, should not arise. 

Many Members of Parliament - and I am very grateful for these contributions - have been making remarks about the possibility of implementing these strategies. What has the ministry done or going to do? Mr Speaker, I want to inform you and the Members of Parliament that the following are going to be done or are already being done: training and retraining of science teachers, and construction of laboratories in phases in all schools in the medium and long-term. Today teams are going around the country to construct 54 laboratories and many more will be constructed in the near future. 

The ministry is already busy reviewing the curriculum, which will include improvements of methods of teaching. The ministry is to also step up production of science equipment. Mr Speaker, let me inform the Members of Parliament that the ministry has got an industrial firm known as STEPU. STEPU is a factory where the ministry manufactures science equipment and materials. I am very happy that we have put more money into that firm to produce more scientific equipment so that they can be cheaply accessed by private and public schools as well. 

Guidance and counseling are very important. Many people were talking about children being forced to do certain subjects. We are saying can we guide the children regarding the courses that they should take according to their interest, ability and demand? Because if we do not guide these children, some of them might take courses, which might be useful for their personal application but which might not be in demand. But experience also indicates that some students do not have the courage, without guidance and counseling, to try out new subjects; and girls are very good at that until you encourage them and say, “But you can do mathematics”. I am happy we have the chairperson here who is a famous and well-known mathematician. So guidance and counseling in schools is to be strengthened.

What about those who are already in the pipeline? Those who are in senior 5 or senior 6 are not affected by any of these regulations or guidelines and those who have already identified their courses of study are not also covered. We are talking about those who have not identified their courses of study. They should be critically advised to make sure that they do not ignore science subjects.

Mr Speaker, we have the energy for rural transformation. Schools in rural areas are going to benefit from this scheme and we are in advanced negotiations with the Ministry of Energy to make sure that in rural areas schools are given priority. And where you have power you can very easily do a lot of physics, science, biology or whatever.

Additional resources have been secured from JICA. This is a Japanese organization and they are coming to teach secondary science teachers in this country. They have already arrived in the country to do the training and re-training. 

The ongoing recruitment of teachers is to cover 70 percent science and technology teachers. Secondary schools curriculum is being reviewed to release more time for sciences and other practical subjects - and very important too - partnership with the private sector. Many members have come up to ask, “Why doesn’t government help the private sector”? That is a wonderful recommendation and indeed government is considering this but we are working in partnership and many of them have already started planning for introducing sciences in their respective institutions.

Further on this remark, we are already in consultations and networking with science bodies. The National Council for Science and Technology has already been approached and made input into this. The National Planning Authority has already given us their input into this matter, and so have researchers at universities - and I have Dr Kasozi over there. Employers and academicians have already been brought on board to improve the implementation strategies for this scheme.

As I said, 28 members contributed and indeed I do not intend to go over the 28 comments. I thought I could just pull out what I thought were the main points, which were brought up on the Floor, and clarify them as I have done.

Another issue, which was pointed out, is the loan scheme. The discussions and consultations are going on. I am very happy to make a progress report that the first consultation report has already been received by the ministry. We are now working on the implementation strategy and the constraint now is where to get the money from. 

Many ideas have come up; we can talk about an investor and if any of our Members of Parliament can invest in this scheme, we shall discuss the terms. We are looking at borrowing from the bank so that the banks can administer this loan. We are really looking for sources of funds to operationalise the loan scheme. It is long overdue but we have to be very careful because we are talking about money. 

The major issue now is, if we do not employ everybody who goes out of the university, suppose we give a loan and a young man or woman is not employed for two or three years or getting a salary, how do we recover the loan? The nitty-gritty of the issues has to be analysed before we can come up with the implementation of this policy. But I am happy to say we have advanced in our consideration of what can be done under that scheme.

Let me say that most of the contributions have been taken up and I would like to assure the members that the Ministry of Education will do everything possible to make sure that the implementation of this scheme is carried out smoothly. We shall be, from time to time, reporting to you on the progress made. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister.

MR MAWIYA: I thank you very much. I am rising on a point of guidance from you, Mr Speaker. Out of the 28 members that have contributed to this statement by the minister, I did not hear any actually against the policy. However, very many have alluded to the fact that there are no facilities in the 75 government schools, about 270 only have labs, and maybe only 50 have just been disbursed. 

Also, the science teachers are still lacking and at Makerere even other universities, science equipment and infrastructure is still lacking. So, this is where I am seeking your guidance that although the minister has tried to allay our fears, I am personally not satisfied. That is why I am suggesting that we should give some time for this policy, about two or three years, for this policy to take root. (Applause) That is the guidance I would like to seek from you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a ministerial statement giving us details of a policy that the Government has taken up over the issue. The purpose of our contributions is to help the minister improve the policy and as you have heard, the minister has appreciated your contributions and has undertaken to continue to consult us and to brief us on what is going on always. 

We have a sessional committee to monitor the activities of various ministries, including the Ministry of Education. We shall also be continuously questioning the minister and pointing up the issues. I think that the minister, or the Government, has taken into account what we have said. They will go back, think about it and see how best it will utilize the wisdom that we have displayed during the debate. I thank you very much. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.01
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is supposed to answer four questions. One is on mango disease in the North, then banana wilt, spread of Tsetse fly, and the issue of cotton. I am grateful that you have allowed me to respond to the cotton issue and then the mango disease in the North. However, (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, I suggest that you deal with the statement on cotton because that is the one we planned for last week, then I will find time to accommodate you during the week to deal with the other two issues. However, we are happy that you have indicated that you are ready to make the statement. So, let us proceed with the cotton, honourable member.

MRS MUKWAYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. For purposes of the record allow me, before I go to my statement, to set the record straight. On Thursday I was not in the House because the Rt hon. Prime Minister had cleared me to go for a conference, and the Speaker also permitted me to be away from the sitting of this House. I must also mention that I am not known to disobey lawful orders. So the record should indicate that I am a very obedient Ugandan to the Constitution, to the leadership and institutions of the State. Thank you.

You recall that on 9 December 2004, hon. Elijah Okupa, Member of Parliament, Kasilo County, Soroti, moved a petition in Parliament on the liberalization of the cotton sector, which in effect called for the total liberalization of cotton production, processing and marketing and -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, order, honourable members!

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, we have been provided with a statement about the mango disease in Northern Uganda and I can understand the minister proceeding on the cotton –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Well, as you heard, these are the three statements – please, those who are distributing copies, distribute the cotton statement.

MRS MUKWAYA: The cotton paper is one sheet and it was presented on the two tables – yes, I submitted this on the table outside the Chamber.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Order, please, you have been directed to where it is.

MRS MUKWAYA: I was saying that in his petition, hon. Okupa Elijah also challenged the cess and seed levy, which are currently being applied under the cotton sub-sector. He contented that both the cess and seed levy are a cost to the cotton farmer. On 14 December 2004, Parliament unanimously passed nine resolutions in support of the petition.

One of the resolutions, which required an immediate response, concerned the minimum price for cotton. My ministry was required to issue by Thursday, 16 December 2004, the minimum price of cotton, which should not be below Shs 500 per kilogram. Due to the need to consult further on this matter, the deadline of 16 December 2004 could not be met. However, my predecessor, Dr Fabius Byaruhanga, did make a statement here in Parliament on Tuesday, 21 December 2004 - I am laying this before Parliament, its own Hansard to that effect - giving detailed background to the cotton industry, cause of collapse in cotton price, positive impact –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can assist us by giving us the page.

MRS MUKWAYA: Okay.

THE SPEAKER: The date and page, please.

MRS MUKWAYA: Yes, most obliged. This Hansard was of Tuesday, 21 December 2004, covering pages 12055 to 12066. 

Hon. Okupa’s petition gave detailed background to the cotton industry, cause of collapse in cotton price, positive impact of the Government ginners partnership, zoning and the Government position on the issue of indicative price of cotton offered to farmers for this season. Government announced the increase in price of cotton by Shs 50 per kilogram, from the indicative price of Shs 300 per kilogram to Shs 350 per kilogram thus committing Shs 6.4 billion.

I wish to report that government has since then remitted Shs 2.9 billion and a supplementary budget, which Parliament graciously allowed, of Shs 3 billion. And when you add these figures, the Government has made its contribution of Shs 6.4 billion.

Mr Speaker, honourable members will recall that this House agreed to forward the issues on cotton to the Committee of Agriculture. Let me quote this because it was in December last year. Hon. Sebaggala requested that; “Madam Speaker, having heard from the honourable minister, from the chairman of the committee and even from the various contributions from various members, I beg to move that the issue of the cotton sector be forwarded to the relevant committee for further investigation in as far as the concerns hon. Members of Parliament raised are concerned”. The Deputy Speaker, put the question and the record indicates that the question was put and agreed to.

On the basis of this record, I beg to submit that the Committee on Agriculture should proceed to invite all stakeholders and after that make a report to Parliament. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honorable Members, from the statement of the minister it appears that we dealt with this matter last year and we decided to hand the matter to the appropriate committee to interact with various stakeholders and report now. That is the position. We have to wait the outcome of the committee’s findings and report before we can proceed to debate it. There is no point debating this statement. This statement is just reminding us of what we have gone through and I thank you, honourable minister for the statement.  

4.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr John Odit): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for that guidance. I also thank the minister for her response to concerns that have been raised by Parliament on this very important crop. It is true that Parliament passed this resolution giving the committee only three months to report its findings to the House. The three months probably elapsed two weeks ago but the committee has been doing its own research. Our effort has even taken us to India and in India we found some very useful information, which can be able to guide government in tackling the issue of cotton industry.  

Right now the Legislative Council is searching for other related laws, which we can be able to compare with the Cotton Development Statute. There is a public notice within the precincts of Parliament and we believe that starting from Thursday this week Members of Parliament who are interested in presenting their case to the committee should appear and present the case. So, the process is ongoing and we know that once we wind up with this public hearing the answer should be prepared so that we can present our position to the House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

4.13
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Minister of Agriculture who has cleared this matter very well. I want to make it clear also that she is not a disobedient person. In fact the acting Minister, hon. Mary Mugyenyi, rushed to Parliament after we had started and she apologised for the absence of any Minister or Minister of State for Agriculture, in Parliament. That is what made me angry, the absence of a Minister or a Minister of State for Agriculture to take charge because as you can see, now that she has taken charge, the backbenchers are petrified. They are fully satisfied -(Laughter)- and that has been my battle with my colleagues. 

Occasionally I lose my temper and I do not protect them, but I want to make it clear that they try their best. I want to urge them to ensure that if the Minister is not there, the Minister of State should take charge so that we move together. I thank the Minister of Agriculture.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mrs Florence Sekabira): Mr Speaker and fellow Members of Parliament, I am standing here to respond to the questions as raised by hon. Mwandha in relation to the policy on disability and the measures Uganda is taking in the implementation of the African Decade for Persons with Disabilities.

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development has been working on the national policy on disability. Exclusive consultations with stakeholders were carried out throughout the country. I would like to inform you, therefore, that we have the final draft of the national disability policy but we have had to look at it again after the recent release of the Uganda population and housing census results. A final national policy draft will be produced within this month or by the end of May 2005. It shall then be submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for a clearance certificate.

Implementation of the African Decade:

The Plan of Action for the African Decade for persons with disabilities is not very different from the United Nations Standard Rules on equalization of opportunities for persons with disabilities, which Uganda has been implementing. 

Honourable members, disability issues are crosscutting and as such some of the objectives of the African Decade have been mainstreamed and are being implemented by various actors such as line ministries, like the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, and other ministries. The NGOs and community based organisations as well as people with disabilities organisations, are also playing a role. Each ministry budgets for its activities for operationalising the African Decade within their mid-term expenditure framework ceiling. As the lead ministry responsible for disability issues, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development undertakes the responsibility of reminding other ministries and departments of government.

Two stakeholders’ workshops were held late last year and the following objectives for the Uganda National Plan of Action for implementation of the African Decade for Persons with Disabilities were agreed upon. These objectives, and some of the major activities that have to be undertaken, are as follows:  

Objective one is to formulate and implement national policies, programmes and legislative framework for full and equal participation of persons with disabilities. Some activities that have been undertaken include:

i. A Uganda plan of action was developed in consultation with the line ministry and other stakeholders.

ii. Draft national policy and guidelines have also been developed. The draft national policy on disability is here; I have a copy of it but I think you will have to await the final copy. However, the draft will be put in the library for you to go through in case you want to make comments. 

iii. A Bill on the disability law has been drafted working hand in hand with the Equal Opportunities Committee of Parliament and of recent hon. Alex Ndeezi decided to present it as a Private Members’ Bill.

iv. The National Council on Disability Act, 2003 is in place and the council was inaugurated. District and sub-county councils are being formed. In fact, it has an office in Kireka; it is not renting, it is in government premises in Kireka.  

Objective two is to promote the participation of persons with disabilities in social, economic and political development processes. In this area, as you all know, a lot has been done. In the political arena you have councillors at the local levels, up to village level, and other activities that have been done including a draft employment policy, which includes issues on disability. 

The Federation of Uganda Employers has been contacted and sensitized on the rights and potential of persons with disabilities, and we have agreed that it also takes up the responsibility of sensitizing employers on the employment of persons with disabilities, and their potential.  

An implementation plan for accessing micro finance services to persons with disabilities was formulated and arrangements are underway to put in place the necessary mechanisms to operationalize it.

Community based rehabilitation programmes will continue to be implemented by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to reach out to the different players to sensitize them on the need for full participation and involvement of persons with disabilities in social, economic and political activities in their communities.

Objective No. 3 is to support and strengthen the development of people with disabilities’ organisations, and organisation of parents of children with disabilities. What we have so far done is to carry out training and sensitisation workshops of organizations of persons with disabilities in management and leadership skills to enhance their capacity in all aspects. Mainly our ministry has given technical support in these areas. However, in areas where we are implementing community based rehabilitation programmes, some disabled persons’ organisations have accessed funds for income generating activities and other organisations have been supported with recommendations from the ministry to access support from other sources.

Objective No. 4 is to ensure and improve access to social services. Line ministries and other stakeholders are providing services to persons with disabilities as provided for in their action plans. For example, the Ministry of Health is handling issues of prevention, curative and rehabilitation measures; the Ministry of education is handling special needs education programmes, while the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is handling community based rehabilitation programmes, and functional adult literacy. 

In the functional literacy programme, some instructors have been trained to reach out to the visually impaired, or the blind persons, and for the deaf adult learners, more is yet to be done. The programme has also provided Braille equipment and papers to adult learners with visual impairments. 

Home-based services are carried out at community level to train persons with disabilities and parents plus guardians or helpers to manage disability to avoid secondary disability. This is mainly done where we are implementing community-based rehabilitation programmes.

Objective No. 5 is to develop and implement programmes geared towards providing physical accessibility and information in accessible formats. Some work has been done. We work hand in hand with the information providers and sensitize them on the need to have various accessible formats for persons with disabilities.  

Training sign language interpreters is being undertaken by the Uganda National Association of the Deaf. Braille instructors are being taken care of or being trained by the Ministry of Education in Kyambogo, and high technical experts are also being trained by both our ministry and non-governmental organisations.  

Development of guidelines for architecture is for the Ministry of Works and we hope they will continue to work on that. I am also aware of it because our department was consulted on the draft policy, which they call the Building Control Bill. The Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication has a draft Bill in place that they are working on to ensure physical accessibility. So, we shall continue to work hand in hand with that ministry and follow it up such that this comes to pass. Whatever structures that are constructed should be disability friendly, but that is the responsibility of that particular ministry.

Objective No. 6 is to strengthen mechanisms for monitoring and evaluation activities of the National Plan of Action for the African Decade, of Persons with Disabilities. I am proud to report that this august House was able to pass the National Council for Disability Bill, which became an Act. This Act established the National Council for Disability, which is already in place. It is well placed to ensure that it establishes a monitoring, evaluation and co-ordination mechanism such that persons with disabilities are able to equitably benefit from all services offered in this country by the Government, the private sector and the non-governmental organisations.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, issues of disability are crosscutting and transcend one individual sector. We shall continue to work hand in hand with the other ministries as we continue to commit ourselves to the well being of persons with disabilities in this country.

My ministry will continue to be responsible for the policy formulation in those areas that fall under its mandate and it will also continue to give guidance in the implementation of the programmes as implemented by other government departments and ministries.

I thank hon. James Mwandha for raising the questions and I thank all of you for your continued support to my ministry. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. May I take it that towards the end of the month you will have worked out the policy so that we postpone the debate to that time?

MRS SEKABIRA: Yes, Sir. Towards the end of May we shall submit to the Ministry of Finance our draft policy such that the Ministry of Finance can give us a letter of clearance, a certificate that will help us to then discuss the Bill in Cabinet. Then finally we shall have a draft policy in place. 

As for the Plan of Action for Implementation of the African Decade, I would like to lay on the Table the Uganda National Plan of Action for the African Decade for Persons with Disabilities and the document on the African Decade so that the Members of Parliament can access and internalise it.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Mwandha, do you have anything to say?

4.30
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Mr Speaker, first of all I want to thank the honourable minister for responding so quickly after I raised the matter. 

The reason I raised the issue of policy was the concern within the disability fraternity of the absence of the working policy on disability. As a matter of fact, many of our development partners in the sector of disability have been wondering why, in spite of what the Government of Uganda appears to be doing in disability, there is no policy as such. I know that there has been a process to develop this policy in which I was also involved. 

I have seen the final draft. The final draft is a very good document and I was surprised why government did not make this document public up to now. As the minister says, it has been overtaken by the publication of the census results. If it had been issued a year ago, at least we would be having a document, which we can show to many of our supporters and also which would be a basis for us to make sure that government departments attend to the issues of disabled persons.  

You know the way governments work, and particularly the bureaucrats; if you do not have an agreed policy in place on any particular matter, it becomes very difficult to make people take action on that matter. The question they will continue asking is, “What is the policy”? Anyway, May is not too far. I hope that by May this policy will be in place and I hope the minister will present this policy to this House so that the House is aware of the disability policy by the Government of Uganda.

As I stated with regard to the Africa Decade, the OAU, which subsequently became the AU, decided to take on this project that for the next ten years from 2000, governments of Africa should attend to various issues of disability, and I gave some benchmarks. What is happening in other countries is that they have a national institutional framework for implementation of those guidelines by the African Union. Will the minister give us a list of things that the ministry has done? It is rather surprising because –(Interruptions)

MR SEBALU: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving way. I do support the ideas as being put forward by my colleague and actually in the Pan African Parliament these issues have come on the agenda of the Pan African Parliament. One of the committees of the Parliament has the specific mandate to deal with the issues you are raising and it is encouraged that in the national Parliaments similar activities are taken on board. For specific information, the chairperson of that committee is hon. Loyce Bwambale. 

MR MWANDHA: I would like to thank the honourable member for that information. It is good to know that one of our own is a member of this committee in the Pan African Parliament, and I hope that we shall have the opportunity to work more closely with her on these matters. 

The point I want to make is that we need a national institutional framework for the implementation of the Decade’s objectives. Without it I do not think we are making much progress because recently we received information that in September this year in Addis Ababa, member countries are going to report on the progress that has been made on this particular programme. When I was requested, I could not lay my hands on anything that we have done in Uganda! That is what made me wonder exactly what was happening. So, I hope that the minister will consider very seriously the need for an institutional framework so that we can implement this in a systematic manner. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. No, we are not going to continue with a debate on this matter, especially as we have been told that we are working out the policy. A report is going to be given to us at the end of the month, or in early May, and when that is done, we shall comprehensively debate the policy. But the appeal is that if you have any idea to contribute to working out this policy, you present the same to the ministry so that it can be taken into account in the final draft that will be presented to us. I thank you very much, honourable member.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 19/2005 TO THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT 

4.37
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Question number 19/05.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have received written communication from the Minister who is supposed to answer this question that she is indisposed and there are no other ministers in the ministry who would come here to answer the question. 

Honourable members, I have the letter here dated 18th, I do not have to read out the details of indisposition of the Minister. But she says, “Therefore, I wish to request for postponement of my response to next week”, and she has given the reasons, which are well known to me and I believe her. The matter will be dealt with next week.

MR KEN LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I cannot doubt what you have said except that like the Rt. honourable Prime Minister recently said, I am equally disgusted by these ministers. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, you cannot be disgusted by an act of God. If it is an act of God you do not condemn God for doing what he has done, but I assure you it will be taken care of next week. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON VOTER REGISTRATION

4.39
THE CHAIRMAN, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 7th April 2005 upon various concerns being raised by Members of Parliament, the Speaker of Parliament referred the matter to the committee to consult with the Electoral Commission, get a comprehensive response from the Commission and report to Parliament on 14th April 2004, that was last Thursday. 

Mr Speaker, this is to report that the committee held a meeting with the Electoral Commission on the 12th of April and now wishes to report as follows:

The report was ready as of Thursday; I see it just being circulated now, I do not know why. Mr speaker, before I proceed with the report, I wish to lay on the Table, for information, the following documents, which we circulated last week. We sent to every member’s e-mail address, we now wish to lay the hard copies on the Table. The documents are: 

1. An Analysis of the Voters’ Population by District.

2. Deployment of Electoral Commission Mobile Registration Teams.

3. Gantt Chart for various National elections, 2004/2006.

4. Proposed Programme for the Referendum 2004/2005 on Political Systems.

5. Cameras issued per district.

6. Comparative cost of holding the update exercise.

7. Schools and Institutions where Registration of voters took place between August 2003 to 8th April 2005. 

8. Media Publicity and voters register update (7th March to 8th April 2005).

9. Percentage of eligible voters to be registered voters in other countries. That is a comparative study.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay these documents on the Table as hard copies for reference of Parliament. But I am sure the honourable members have looked at them on their e-mail addresses. (Interruption)

MR JAMES MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I regularly check my e-mails, but I have not seen any of these documents. 

MR OULANYAH: That document was sent by e-mail to all users; if yours are not there, then there is a problem. There are two received sections that you must check. You have to check the regular one and check the old user reception centre you might have it there. Unless you have not mastered this art of the – please, check it, we sent the information and I have my word on that. 

Mr Speaker, when you referred the matter to the committee, two issues were raised by Members of Parliament. 

a) The issue of Registration in Schools: The concern was that this matter was not sufficiently handled. That is why we have in the documents I have laid on the Table a list showing what was done. 

b) There were concerns of Insufficient Number of Cameras deployed in the districts. That is why there is a document showing details of how these cameras were deployed, over 5000 cameras were involved.

c) Poor Remuneration: The details will be coming later how this matter affected the performance in this update exercise.

d) The final issue that was raised by Members of Parliament, Mr Speaker, that there was no update exercise undertaken, in essence saying nothing was done.  

Mr Speaker, I wish to state that from the date we met the Electoral Commission on the 12th of April, we had with the Electoral Commission a total of 299,070 new voters captured in this process of the update. Two days later on the 14th, the number had gone up to 414,458. These are the partial general updates on the returns on what took place during the update period. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, this morning we received a further update from the Electoral Commission showing that as of yesterday morning, the returns that had all come puts the total now to 648,107.  Mr Speaker, the target of the Electoral Commission was 1.5 million voters projecting from what had been provided in the census report. By these projections, the Electoral Commission, through this effort, has managed to achieve 79.11 percent of its target. 

Mr Speaker, I was expecting some –(Interjection)- for the Commission at least, because in the circumstances that I am going to outline in the next five minutes, you would see that they have done to stretch to 79.1 percent new voters on the register. 

Mr Speaker, is the Commission acting within the law? There were concerns that the things that are being done by the commission seem to be arbitrary and do not seem to make sense to the people who are supposed to benefit from these processes and build confidence in the electoral process in this country.

Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission is mandated under Article 59(3) and 61(e) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda to compile, maintain, revise and update voters registers. During the national registration exercise and the Photographic Voter Registration and Identification Systems (PVRIS) contacted countrywide in August and September 2001, the Commission, using parish registration teams, registered 8.2 million voters out of a total of 10.7 million eligible voters.

Mr Speaker, registration of voters under the authority given to the Electoral Commission must be continuous. The Electoral Commission Act of 1997 Section 18(1) requires the Commission to compile, maintain and update the voters register on a continuing basis. So, the last exercise that ended on the 8th April was not an abrupt or an unplanned action. It was part of the process of continuing voter registration that the Electoral Commission has been carrying out since 2001.

The Commission trained all district registrars, their assistants and staff, equipped them with cameras to carry out this exercise. The details of what they realized in that process is in the next paragraph. So, the Commission in doing this continuous registration was acting within the law, going to schools inclusive. I even remember the time they put an advert in Parliament when there was no urgency for voter registration. They brought cameras to Parliament and I was informed that only 17 Members of Parliament turned up. So, this is the kind of response is not just in Parliament but also countrywide and this puts the Electoral Commission in a very difficult situation. 

Secondly, was the given deadline, of 1st and then finally 8th of April 2005, a lawful practice?  Yes, Mr Speaker, Section 19(7) and (8) of the Electoral Commission Act mandates the Commission to appoint dates by Statutory Instrument on which the update exercise shall end. In 2003 the Electoral Commission noted that there was a likelihood of holding a referendum and highlighted milestones necessary for the same to the government. The government then issued a political roadmap to the transition leading to the next cycle of elections. Unfortunately, this roadmap was overtaken by events. However it is now clear that a referendum is likely to be held under Article 74 of the Constitution to change political system. So, this was an act within the law to cut off registration within a period of time, to prepare process the register for an election, in this case a referendum. 

The report states the objectives of the update exercise, which was to be a mop up exercise for a short period and in order to prepare for the referendum. The report shows you the targeted voters by this process of an urgent and massive registration. But Mr Speaker most importantly, the Commission encountered significant problems in this exercise and we have outlined five main ones that were encountered. I do not want to go into the details, Mr Speaker, but I will start with the first words on the report.

Mr Speaker, the first one is voter apathy. Just like I am demonstrating with the case of Parliament, it is also true with the people. People rush on the last two days to register yet it has been on and on for a long time and that –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But when you insist about Parliament, you said 17 turned up, did they expect more than 17?  Because it could be that the 17 are the ones that needed to be registered. So, it cannot be used as an example of apathy.

MR OKUPA: Mr. Speaker, I was one of those Members who made a transfer when the Electoral Commission was here. We were upstairs in the Members Lounge. I am surprised that the chairman says he was informed we were 17, yet we were more than 50 people who were there that day. I do not know who gave you this information.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, I am sure hon. Okupa has his records of what happened. I am relying on the record from the Electoral Commission. I would look at yours and compare because that is what I got from the Electoral Commission. (Laughter) I have no better authority than the Electoral Commission –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: No, you see, hon. Chairman, the point will be that you say only 17 turned up when actually 100 of them were already in your register. If I really know that I am already in the register, why should I come? So, you cannot really use that number to saw apathy. 

MR WAMBUZI: Seventeen percent Members of Parliament did not react, but you see the population of Members of Parliament is not changing much in this House whereas the population of voters by age, new voters like the students and what not is changing much more radically. So, I think the Electoral Commission should have been more serious about giving you information about what happened there than what happened in this House.

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I just want to respond that the Electoral Commission is a serious institution. When I was Minister of Justice, colleagues explained the difficulty that they had to go and trace the district registers to register. Working with the Speaker’s office, we organized for the Electoral Commission be stationed here so that it will be easier for Members –(Interjection)- to up date and transfer, and the Speaker graciously authorized the Electoral Commission to be here. Probably when the 50 registered that was a day when the Electoral Commission forgot to register and remembered only the day when 17 only registered. But this was on request by Parliament and we worked with the Speaker’s office and many Members actually were given the opportunity to up-date their register.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, those were not my words. I am presenting, but I lifted those words from the institution responsible for this exercise. I have never sat on any table here to register any Member of Parliament.

Secondly, late enactment of the Referendum and Other Provisions Act, 2005. This law was assented to on the 10th of February 2005, and was received by the Commission on 15th February 2005. This led to the late release of funds – Mr Speaker, actually the second issue, which had been addressed and members were raising concern -actually there were nine members on the – between 7th March to April 8th.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you do not have to labour on the issue. The issue is this, do they have 100 members who are not on a register that they expected to come and they did not come, because it could be that every member is already on a register, why does he bother?

MR OULANYAH: Oh, yes, Sir, otherwise, they would not be saying that only nine turned up.

THE SPEAKER: And how many did they expect?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, this is a moment of truth and this is what we should deliver to the population; that when these dates are set, we should respond to them.  That is all I am saying.

MS MUGERWA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Given what has been happening here in the House.  All of us who talked about the updating of the register complained about the absence of the Commission people. The public was travelling to the centres and they would not find anybody, and all of us raised this issue. I think nobody would give us a correct statement beyond what the Speaker said in response to the Minister of Justice.  He told them, if I recall the words that “actually there was no exercise of updating the register.” So, is the chairperson in order, to ignore what had been complained about in the House about the absence or the poor performance of updating the register, Mr Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us proceed with the report because the chairman is just using information from the Commission; he is not creating his own information. It is on the basis of the information received from the Commission that he is giving his report. He is not the one who said nine, but the point of nine depends on whether there were several Members of Parliament who were not on the register and were given the opportunity and did not go. But if they were and they knew they were on the register, there was no point for them to go, because they checked their respective constituencies. This was a facility to help those who might have doubts and want to come and register here. So, it cannot be used as a point of reference for the problems that have arisen in the countryside. 

I received several hundreds of letters from all corners of Uganda complaining about this exercise, and some of these letters were faxed to the Commission. So, these are the complaints we received and they are the complaints we reported.  But if the Commission is satisfied, then I think those complaints from various parts of the country are not justified. We can take it at that.

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, can I raise a procedural matter?

MS BALEMEZI: I am seeking clarification.  How many times are we supposed to register? Because when the chairman is talking of only nine or 17 Members of Parliament registering, then how come we are in this House if we are not registered? 

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, I was on the point of late enactment of the Referendum and Other Provisions Act, 2005. That clarification will take me back to the point we have ceased.

THE SPEAKER: You complete your report.

MR OULANYAH: So, as a result of late enactment of this law, there were difficulties because the Commission could not ask for funds from Finance before the law was in place. They could only request for these funds as recently as January 2005. The Commission once again requested for funds for preparatory activities for the referendum from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, but they were not released.  

Under the circumstances, the Commission commends the general update of the voters’ registers exercise on the 7th of March 2005, before any money for the referendum was released.  Indeed the first release of the referendum funds was received on the 15th of March 2005.  

Due to this delay, the Commission is now constrained to organize, conduct and supervise all the referendum activities within a very tight framework. The activities include general update of the voters’ register, processing of the register for display, the mandatory display period for a minimum of 21 days, processing of the register for polling, canvassing for votes, civic or voter education for the mandatory period of not less than two months, preparation of polling material and polling between April and June, and this is not a simple task.  

Inadequate funding led the Commission to depend on existing local government administrative structures and its personnel for its field activities. All stakeholders have raised concern on the continued reliance of the local government officials to supervise electoral activities, the Commission sought to employ independent personnel down to the parishes and budgeted for this accordingly.  However, funds were not approved and the Commission has continued to depend on the existing local council structures and personnel such as sub-county and parish chiefs to supervise the various activities.

Finally, low morale of the Electoral Commission field officials owing to low pay. The Commission submitted a budget of 34 billion for the referendum, but the government reduced it to 22 billion. Following the reduction, the Commission was constrained to reduce remuneration for update officials from Shs 40,000 Shs 25,000 per person for the entire two weeks, while dropping allowances that were meant for local council people mobilization of the people to come and register. 

The issue of field arrears dating back to 2000 are still nagging us. Mr Speaker even last Session of Parliament, the issue of the 3.5 billion for the people who participated in the 2001 elections have not yet been paid up to to-date because the money has not been made available.

Operational Problems:

Late delivery of materials:  

The Government roadmap on the transition was released on 17th February 2005. The Commission realized that there was a likelihood of holding a referendum before 2nd July 2005 because that is the constitutional deadline for this process of changing political systems under Article 74. The Commission immediately embarked on parking and dispatch of update materials to all districts in the country notwithstanding the fact that finances for the referendum had not been available. Inevitably, some materials reached their respective destinations rather late. The last district to receive update materials was Gulu, which received them on the 9th March 2005.  

Publicity of the Update Programmes:

At the beginning of the update exercise, sub-county update officials and the chiefs were requested to make programmes of how they would move throughout the sub county. They were also requested to publicize their programme widely for all residents to know and follow. The Commission, however, later received complaints that the programmes were not adequately publicized as required. As a result the Commission reiterated its earlier instructions to the District Registrars to ensure that programs were pinned up at sub county, parish offices and other conspicuous public places and also authorized additional funds for districts to publicize the programmes on local radio stations. All these details, Mr Speaker, are contained in the documents I have laid on the Table.

Inadequate equipment and manpower:  

It should be noted that in 2001 the Commission purchased 5,000 digital cameras. At the end of the registration exercise ten cameras were lost. The floods that hit Kampala City in April 2003 affected 517 cameras. Another 1,114 cameras got spoilt either in the PVRIS registration exercise or during continuous voter registration and required repair.  Therefore, at the beginning of the update exercise the Commission had 3359 digital cameras in good working condition. 

Based on the Electoral Commission general update plan, the Commission required a camera kit per sub-county in addition to the two cameras already at the district offices. This brought the total number of cameras deployed to 1,364 countrywide.  

The Commission received complaints regarding inadequate or faulty equipment, especially digital cameras and rechargeable batteries from the field at the time of the initial dispatch of update materials. The Commission dispatched an average of five additional cameras per district to cater for any shortfalls, and wherever shortages were reported, the Commission has responded by dispatching more equipment. 

Since this was considered to be a mop up exercise and constrained by funds, the Commission felt it prudent and cost effective to deploy a registration team at sub-county level, the registration team draw parish by parish programmes to register in two days, approximately 300 persons per parish given the 5,297 parishes countrywide.

It should be noted that while the update of voter’s registers was conducted at parish level, the subsequent display exercise will be conducted at the polling station level.

Recommendations:

1. The committee recommends that Parliament must ensure that sufficient funds are availed to the Commission, and in good time.

2. Parliament and the Executive must ensure that electoral laws are passed in good time.

3. Parliament should expeditiously pass the resolution under Article 74(1) to enable the Commission carry out requisite activities.

4. All leaders and other stakeholders should communicate directly to the district offices or to the headquarters any electoral related problems for possible and timely remedial action, and 

5. All leaders should cooperate with the Commission in mobilizing voters in their constituencies to participate in the electoral process.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, for free and fair elections to take place, there is need for the cooperation and support from all the stakeholders in the electoral process. All leaders at all levels must play their roles in ensuring that the Commission achieves its goal of organizing and conducting elections through an impeccable electoral process.  

This update of the voters’ register was for purposes of the possible referendum. That update process ended on 8th April 2005 to enable the Commission obtain the results of the update, process the register, display it as required by the law and be able to have an impeccable register when time for voting in the referendum comes.

Continuing registration of new voters will resume immediately after the referendum and the Commission plans another update exercise and the subsequent display period for the next cycle of elections. 

We wish to take this opportunity to assure you, honourable members that the Electoral Commission is committed to carrying out its constitutional mandate and looks to you with hope for all the support. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of the committee, for the report.

5.13
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee for having this timely report to update us on the measures being taken and the achievements registered so far. 

Mr Speaker, first of all, I wish to seek clarification from the chairman about the photographic voter registration and identification system.  So far said, it has not been confirmed to us whether the face recognition process is actually in place? There have been complaints that the photographic or the facial recognition system has not been able to capture – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The chairman, will not know that exactly.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Well, I hope through him, once he registers it, he can be able to forward it to assure us that the total number that we have – (Interruption)

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, I remember there was a by-election in Masaka and in that by-election a photographic register was used and in all those districts where we have had by-elections, be they chairmen or MPs whom we have lost, a register bearing photographs of members is available.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, but the one I was seeking, is it full proof that one cannot register twice as was intended in the system? The system was meant to check double registration and my concern is, it has been persisting in some areas, the PSVRI have not been able to capture that.

MRS MUKWAYA: The chairman of the committee is saying that the Electoral Commission has been able to register under this new method 8.2 million from 10 million people. You remember when we were using the voter rolls, there were 10 million people who voted, but through this process, and I would invite my colleague, the Electoral Commission is your institution, to go there. They could take you through the process of how they clean the register, how they identify the double voters and the minors. The system is there; you can visit the Electoral Commission because the chairman will not answer it here.

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Mr Speaker, I will not dwell on that one but at an appropriate time I hope I will put it to the attention of the committee to scrutinize to make sure that when we say we have 10 million voters that is the actual number we have.

Mr Speaker, the committee has complained about the late enactment of the Referendum and other Provisions Act and the subsequent late release of the funds. Right from the year 2000, we knew that we were going to have the same process again in 2005 to choose the political system for this country. It is so surprising that we seem to be heading to where we know when we are not prepared.  I do not know how government is looking at this but it is a shame! We knew that in the fourth year of the present government we had to change the political system, but we waited until we were late, caught up by lack of funds; the ministry of finance cannot release the funds, there is no enabling law in place and at the end of the day we end up with a haphazard exercise. 

Government should take note of this and let this stop at the voters’ update exercise. But in the subsequent exercises, let funds be released in time, let us prepare Ugandans, let us make the process as transparent as possible for all stakeholders to be convinced that the exercise was free and fair. Short of this we shall have claims, counter claims, and accusations here and there.

Mr Speaker, I also took note of the fact that 5000 digital cameras were purchased for the exercise.  But to note that the entire Commission is still vulnerable to floods, why don’t we get serious as a country for the first time? You destroy 1,114 cameras, 517 cameras how about the registers themselves, are they safe?  How about the chairman and his entire Commission, are they safe in such a condemned situation? Why can’t we find good and appropriate headquarters to house the Commission, which plays a very central role in the democratisation process of this country? But to hear that it was equally affected, because is it in the wetlands? Is it subjected to the African development? Somebody must -(Interruption)

MRS MEHANGYE: I am a Member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, and actually the Electoral Commission complained about where their offices are located and said they would like to move and have a different place. These cameras were stored and they thought they were safe, but they became mouldy. They have sewerages passing right here and there; yes the place is quite wet. There is possibly a lot of water because of being down town, so that is how the cameras were spoilt.  They actually begged this Parliament that they could get money to build different offices in better places. That is what happened, thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank my colleague for that information, but I hope the ever-serious Prime Minister should look at this seriously. Why do we not prioritise the Commission?

MR MIKE SEBALU:  Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. We are told that, that number was destroyed by the flood. The clarification I would like to seek is that, are the remaining ones safe?

MR MBALIBULHA: The floods destroyed the cameras, and I believe there are some pieces of destroyed cameras. With the earlier allegation that they were stolen, can we look at destroyed pieces of those cameras?

THE SPEAKER: I think there is an Auditor General to deal with this; he is the one to check on this and say, “Okay, you say they are spoilt, where are they?” It is not really for us to do that; let us wait for the report of the Auditor General.

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I raised this very question when I was meeting the Commission, and they agreed that the committee is very welcome to visit their premises and we look at the dead cameras. So they are waiting for us, and you are invited when we visit; I will give you the date.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I take note of my colleagues’ contributions and information but all the same we need to have a modern way, particularly this nerve system called the Electoral Commission because, it sits in tandem with the whole process that enhance democratisation and participation of the people in governance. I do not see why we should have any delays, why should we dilly-dally about this. Once that happened it is time to move to a safer area where we can have a reliable data bank on all this. I am sure once that matters comes on the Floor, no Member can stop it.  

Mr Speaker, lastly, is about the 3.5 billions arrears owed to the officials. This is very, very much depressing on the electoral officials in the field. I must tell you, Mr Speaker, and honourable Members of Parliament, the electoral officials at the district, parish and sub-county were reluctant to participate in the voter update exercise, and this is why it delayed. They never wanted to participate in the first place because they have outstanding arrears, and I would suggest that the appropriate committee should take up this matter of such that people can have the morale to work for the Commission well aware that their funds are ready and shall be paid. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.24
MR KALULE SSENGO (Gomba County, Mpigi): Mr Speaker, thank you.  Mr Speaker, I am a bit disappointed by the committee’s recommendation because some of our concerns were in fact that a lot of young men who had become of age had been left out, because first of all, the exercise was not publicized, and therefore, people did not know that it was going on.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, the cameras that we are talking about had actually even more faults than what we have been told in the report. Even those that were being used were breaking down from time to time. So as a result of this, the exercise was not successful; very few people had their photographs taken. Even the centres where they were updating from were not enough. They were just selecting one centre in a sub-county where to carry out the exercise.

But Mr Speaker, I come from a county with large sub-counties of even up to 40 miles in width. I even have parishes, which are 80 miles across. Now how do you expect a person to travel 30 to 40 miles to go to an update centre? So, Mr Speaker, when we raised this issue, we thought the Commission would take trouble to set up more centres for those very big counties and sub-counties.

Mr Speaker, there is also the question of very poor pay. Recently I went around my constituency and the people updating were complaining that they were being paid Shs 2,000 to cover a parish. How do you update a parish of 18 miles with a mere Shs 2,000, Mr Speaker?

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker, Wakiso district neighbours Mpigi district; we graduated from Mpigi. But the Electoral Commission informed us that the best performing district in registration is Mpigi. This is because the district registrar and the deputy have been using their fuel money to go to villages.  The problem was that the young people do not want to go for registration, and actually it was in Mpigi where people initiated to go to secondary schools to register students who were already above age. You can find that information - and actually Wakiso learnt from what they were doing in Mpigi.  But in Mukono, where I come from, the district registrar and his assistant were seated at the headquarters, waiting for voters to come to them.  I just wanted to give you that information.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, the committee’s report arising from the report from the Commission is to the effect that the exercise was excellent. If the registration is over 70 percent, isn’t that very good performance? This is what they are saying. 

MR SSENGO: But, Mr Speaker, it seems what is actually on the ground is very different, because very many young people were never registered, and these are more in number than we the grown ups. So, how did we get this percentage of 72? I have a fear, Mr Speaker, that we may be getting figures, which are not accurate.  

So, as I was pointing out, how do you expect a person to cover a parish of 18 miles across with only Shs 2,000? I had expected the committee to recommend a repeat of this exercise because it was poorly done. That is why I am not satisfied with their recommendations. I know it has some financial implications, but what do we do if the exercise was not properly carried out? Let it be done once again. We must avoid problems in the future because people are going to complain. They are going to say the exercise was bad; people will go to court, and we might find ourselves spending even more money than what we may spend by repeating this exercise.  With those remarks, Mr Speaker, I thank you and I request that this exercise be carried out once again to satisfy all Ugandans.
 
5.29
MR MICHAEL OCULA (Kilak County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, thank you for giving me chance. While I thank the chairperson of the committee and his team for the timely report, I must say that this is one of the most disappointing reports I have ever seen from this committee. If you check the language in the report, it is excellent, but if you imagine the magnitude of work done by the committee, you find that they did almost nothing.

Mr Speaker, if you check this report, it is more of trying to justify the inefficiencies of the Electoral Commission rather than trying to solve the matters, which were raised on the Floor of this House; and that is exactly where my point of disappointment is based.  

When Members were raising complaints on the Floor of this House, I expected the committee to summon the Electoral Commission and then they tell them how far they have gone with the exercise, where they have failed.  In other words I would have expected that in Kilak Constituency, in one parish we did not register people at all, or we registered only 200 people.  But if you look at the report, it is more of complaining and more of a departmental report than a report to Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I am even more disappointed with the committee’s recommendations. Instead of trying to direct the demands to where the sources of funds are, they are again demanding that Parliament must ensure that funds. What have we not done, Mr Speaker?  How does Parliament make sure that funds are released?  We finished our part in the budget, the rest is supposed to be government to give funds to the Commission. Now where has Parliament failed exactly to give funds to the Commission? It is turning again another blame to Parliament; that Parliament should expeditiously pass resolutions and so on. Some of these things are supposed to come from government, the laws of the elections and so on.

So, Mr Speaker, I really feel that what my colleague, hon. Kalule Sengo has said should have been the recommendation; that this exercise was not successful and therefore, should be repeated so that we capture all the voters.

Last time when I was talking on this same matter, I said on many occasions, whenever people are petitioning for bad elections, always the Electoral Commission is sued together with the people who rigged the votes, and I thought through such an exercise, those things could be avoided. So Mr Speaker, I still think that let this exercise should be repeated until it is sufficiently done. I thank you.

5.34
MR CHARLES KOLUO (Serere County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to dispute the fact that the Commission has achieved 79.11 percent efficiency. I have a testimony, which I would like to give. Towards the close of last month I went to my constituency. Funny enough a whole parish of Kanyagani in Katata sub-county had no voters registered. They had apparently been there registering people, photographing defective films. So, the outcome was completely no result including mine. I registered in 2001 but I was not in the register so I had to retake the photograph and re-register. In my opinion and that of the constituency, the objective of the exercise is far from being achieved, and I beg the Commission to repeat it. Thank you.

5.36
MR HILLARY ONEK (Lamwo County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will only give a recommendation.  This voter registration exercise, which is currently going on is based on a computerized system, which means, therefore, that photographs and registration can be done instantly and can be transmitted into the main data bank that would verify whether that is a double registration or not. Actually the data would be available almost instantly. So, there should be no time limit for registration until maybe a week or two before elections. That is when you want to put your data together for the purposes of voting to verify the voters. The time limit is not necessary since it is not manual registration, which would require time to record and so on. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr speaker, probably the Member holding the Floor could request the Electoral Commission to make their submission to Finance on how the system works. When they register you from the field they take that registration form into another system that compares you, first of all, within the district, region and then nationally. 

Technology changes everyday; the system we have should have been updated to match the system now but because of financial problems the search engine has not been up graded. So, they can give us the information; how many minutes does it take to search for one individual from 8.2 million people to identify whether he/she is not registered twice? 

So, it is not just registering and putting you on the register, probably the Electoral Commission should explain to the House how the system works, but the best option would be for the colleagues to go and visit the institution and look at it. Find time in the morning to go and look at the system so that you can support your own institution. 

MR ONEK:  Thank you for the information, Madam Minister. However, I still feel that even these ordinary computers we have on our desks can accommodate that data of eight million people. It is not a big information base really; my small laptop can accommodate all that or even double that. So, maybe the system of transmission from the camera to the other is being handled by stiff hands, which are not sure. 

I think efficiency has to be implanted in that Electoral Commission so that things which are computerized it can take a matter of minutes. There would be no need of putting a very large time space between the time of registration and voting.  You could give about two weeks everybody would have been in the data bank and we would be able to vote. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I suggest that the registration be open until everybody registers and maybe we stop two weeks before the voting so that everybody votes.  Thank you.

5.39
MS GRACE TUBWITA (Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Mr speaker, I want to add my voice to what my colleagues have contributed. I feel the updating exercise was not properly done. 

On 7th March I was in Katugo parish, Kakoge, one of my sub-counties. The exercise was supposed to end on the 8th April, but they registration officials told me they were given only one day to be in that station and expected everyone to turn up to update the register. Very many people were left out. We have very wide parishes and you cannot expect everyone to turn up for registration on one day. 

I also got a complaint that the people registering were not taking photographs. There are people whose photographs never came back and wanted to be registered in that station. So, you find that most people were left out. In fact, the moment I arrived there, people gathered and they all had the same complaint.  

On 8th March I was in Rwampanga sub-county where I found the same complaint; still they were given one day to update their registers. They had the camera and these people unfortunately never had films so they were not in position to take the photographs of the voters in that area. 

So, Mr Speaker, when you look at all these problems, you realise that very many people are going to miss voting, and it will disorganize the whole process. How could a large parish be given one day to register? Yet even the information flow was very, very, poor. People were not informed; some of them do not have radios yet the announcements were on radio. So some of our people were not aware that the updating exercise was going on. If there were no people to mobilize them to come and update, then that was really a big problem.  

So, I want to add my voice to what my honourable colleagues are suggesting; that let the whole exercise be repeated so that it can cater for those people who really – Let it be continued –(Interjection)- It should be a continuous exercise so that others can also be in position to register.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.42
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo county, Soroti): Thank you honourable Speaker.  I only have one question to raise and this goes to the National Political Commissar because the Prime Minister has just stepped out. 

Honourable Speaker, the Commissioner has done its best, the problem is funds.  All these issues, which are being raised here, are related to the funds. Electoral Commission cannot perform if they are given far less than what they asked for. 

The issue of the cameras: We have heard from this report, some have been spoilt, some were destroyed, some were stolen, and they will need replacement. 

The voter registration update: Voter registration officers are complaining about their money. The arrears have never been paid. So all the concerns raised in this House zero down to the issue of the funds. Honorable National Political Commissar, you are in charge of the Government, are you in charge?  This should be a priority!  What is happening?  Can we find money for the Commission to provide for better accommodation such that when we buy more equipment floods do not destroy it? Can we provide money to clear the arrears? Can we provide money to buy more equipment and films?  What is happening?

5.43
MR WANJUSI WASIEBA (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Electoral Commission for the good exercise they did in Mbale Municipality. They were not a 100 per cent; there were a few errors here and there. What I know is that decentralization means taking services nearer to the people.  The Electoral Commission decentralized their offices and took them to the district. 

I would imagine that the District Registrar should be able to plan well to be able to accommodate everybody so that everybody is happy. But I think this particular registration was rather abrupt because it caught some of us unaware, we could not plan for it.  

I would request the Electoral Commission that whenever they have such an exercise, they should be able to inform every stakeholder so that he is aware of what is going to happen. It would also be good that they work in conjunction with people who are in groups.  

For instance, in Mbale Municipality we have got a garage where people repair vehicles. This place has got so many people. I wish the registrar could be able to effectively plan how he is going to carry out this exercise, we would not be having any problem at all.

The other problem that the Electoral Commission should be able to correct is also to make sure that students in higher institutions of learning are also assisted. If somebody wants to transfer from Makerere to Mbale or to register, it is rather expensive for such students with the incomes that we have to travel to Mbale to go and register. So, I wish that there could be able to revisit some of these places. 

Lastly, I want to say that I have managed to visit Electoral Commission on a number of occasions and whether you are coming in or getting out, there is good security there. I wonder how the cameras or any documents got lost from the Electoral Commission. I think this could be an inside job or just to create a scapegoat that let us say that we lost the cameras so that they do not give a good service.

I would encourage the Electoral Commission to be able to make this exercise to be ongoing so that whoever has not done it can be able to do it and maybe next registration should find even lesser people to register than what they have left behind now. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.47
MR SAIDI NASUR (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you Mr Speaker for this chance. As much as I would like to have the exercise to be extended, I do not agree with my colleagues here for the sake of Arua Municipality. 

I remember reporting to this House in 2002 during the photographic photo registration exercise in Arua. We were invaded by people from different constituencies who came in large numbers to off set the balance in the Municipality. 

Recently when I went to Arua, the same exercise was going on. This time they were coming in buses, lorries, despite us informing the members of the Electoral Commission, no action was taken. 

So, it is very sad, Mr Speaker, if this exercise will go and these kind of activities continue to happen in the Municipality. Tomorrow it will be a very bad election exercise in that area. So, for the sake of the town, I will say that the registration stops there unless Electoral Commission gives us guarantee that they will go and do something to the Municipality –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So honourable member, your problem is that Arua was flooded.

MR SAIDI: Yes, Arua is being flooded. Even up to the 8 March 2005  –(Laughter)- people were coming from a constituency nearby and registering in the town.

REV. BAKALUBA: I want to thank my Colleague for giving way. I also heard that there were some pickups which were ferrying some people to the Electoral Commission offices. So, we do not know whether it is correct, but it is being alleged here in Kampala that they saw pickups ferrying in people to the Electoral Commission. They were wondering what they were going to do there.  So, it can also be connected to what my colleague is saying.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable member is there any problem if we are coming from Gomba or Mukono and we go in the same transport to get registered. What is the problem?  The problem is to make it simple for us –(Interruption)

MR WAMBUZI: In fact, Mr Speaker, I have been encouraging people in Bulamogi to come and register so that they vote for the district –(Laughter)- and they vote me. So, I beg to inform the honorable member of Parliament for Arua Municipality that actually there are very many people from Arua who are working in Kakira Sugar Estate, who are working in Lugazi Sugar Estate and indeed in other areas. They take Arua very seriously that they may actually want to register there not for the sake of rigging but because they feel it is their home where they should register.  I would urge that we should encourage people to go and register where they feel they would like to vote as a matter of principle. 

THE SPEAKER: I think the law is there. If a person does not qualify to be registered at Parliament, when they display voters card, we will say but we do not know this person, he is not born here, he is not working here, he is not supposed to be registered here. Then the Electoral Commission will deal with him. So, if these people are from Zaire or DRC and so forth, you should check on that.

MR SAIDI:  Mr Speaker, what my colleague from Bulamogi is saying it is true. The people of Arua love their district and they would like to register there.  But the law is very clear, you register from where you are born or where you originate or where you reside, not where you work.  Now the case of Arua Municipality –(Interruption)

MR OFWONO:  I thank you for giving me way.  Mr Speaker, you know municipalities are very complicated areas.  I am a Member of Parliament for Tororo Municipality.  We are also getting scared because people who are being registered are unknown to us.  This is done in the schools where Kenyan students are being registered. I do not know the aim of such registration.  So, there is a cause for the Member of Parliament to get scared.  Why do you ferry people on buses? Where do they get that money to ferry people? What is the aim?  There should be a problem.  So we should take a precaution.

MRS MUKWAYA:  Honourable colleague, the Hansard is a permanent record. It is unfair to the districts where you have the police, the intelligence officers, the RDCs and our agents. How can these people ferry people and the police does not arrest them? You mean even our agents are not vigilant to go and report?  So you are saying there is breakdown of law and order in those areas, we should take action on the service –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much.  I am standing on a point of order.  The point we are discussing this afternoon is very crucial and we have a Minister in charge of Justice.  Is it in order for the honourable Mukwaya to hijack the Minister of Justice and let us assume that she probably wants to regain the Ministry? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER:  I think the honourable Minister stood to give information.  Information is not only reserved for the Minister in charge of the Ministry, anybody with information is free to give it and help the debate.

MR SAIDI:  Mr Speaker, what the Minister of Agriculture is saying it is true.  In 2002, we reported a matter to the RDC- I am sure you got a letter which the RDC wrote replying my inquiries.  It was very rude. We had a confrontation with him, but later we solved the matter.  We took people from the Electoral Commission, the person in charge of Northern Region, he went and saw the situation and said it will be corrected during the updating.  This time the exercise became sophisticated because they came in buses. We informed the RDC; good enough this time they included another issue that they wanted to remove the movements from the town. So the government in the district got interested and now they are investigating.  

So, I am saying, Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate that Ugandans want the exercise to be extended. In the municipality the people I represent are saying that they do not want the exercise to be extended because it will inflict the number of voters in the town.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member from Masindi- I am trying to be representative of all the areas. 

5.55
MS BINTU LUKUMU (Woman Representative, Masindi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am wondering if really the committee went out in some of these areas to sample so that they come up with these recommendations?  

I just came back this morning from Masindi. One issue that was presented to me was that now that the exercise has ended and there are some polling stations whose registration forms were not even received in Kigumba Sub County, in Kigumba Parish; eight polling stations did not receive the registration forms and these people do not know their fate. They have raised this issue with the district registrar and they are being assured. 

I wanted to find out from the Minister responsible, what is the fate of these people? Why have you decided to end the exercise when you are aware that there are these anomalies?  It is in this respect that I am supporting my colleagues that the exercise should be left open so that if these anomalies are identified, they can be rectified.  Thank you.

5.57
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I would like also to share the concerns of my colleagues about this registration exercise.  You know the problem with our people and this is the reality of how they are, they respond to issues.  If you set a registration update without something that attracts them to go and register, they will just take it for granted.  

As much as the Government was thinking about holding a referendum, there was no formal announcement that a referendum will be held on such and such a day requiring people to register.  Therefore, it was impossible for people to actually feel the attraction that normally pulls them to register. 

But more importantly the exercise as reported as were, in my constituency was also very badly handled.  By the time the extension came, you would find that the registration forms that were sent to some sub counties were so few that they would get finished.  

The cameras had batteries, you take four or five photographs, the battery is finished and you had to go and recharge.  When the extension was made – because that camera is for one Sub County. In a place like my county, which is so large, it was just a total mess.  So you end up in a situation where, if we allow on the basis that the date was ended, we shall deny so many Ugandans who have a legitimate responsibility to make a critical decision.  

Since the referendum is about deciding which political system to move on to, we must make sure that maximum opportunities are given.  Let everybody register so that tomorrow if we do not change from the movement to multiparty, Government is not blamed that it used registration to sabotage the process.  To me, this is the most important thing.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Kayunga. [Members: “Kampala”.] Kampala?  Yes, honourable.

6.00
MS SARAH NANSUBUGA (Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Please let us be representative of areas, rather than individual constituencies.

MS NANSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I had one valid point, which I felt it did not come out clearly in the report. It is about the Graduated tax collectors who staged at the centres, which were meant for the update exercise and this jeopardized the whole exercise of update. Now that it is a continuous exercise, I would really request the Electoral Commission to make sure that the Graduated tax collectors do not mix the two issues, because really it affects the update exercise.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.01
MR SAMUEL ABURA (Matheniko county, Mororot): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  The general view of the whole House is that, or the consensus is that we should repeat the exercise for special communities like the pastoralists.  We, in Karamoja we are not yet settled people; we are not in any stable place, we are a mobile community.   Most of the people who came from the Electoral Commission during the updating of the last registrar did not go to the crowds. I think this time they should take the idea used during the census. 

The census people went down to the cattle camps where there large communities of the Karimojong.  Similarly the Commission should facilitate those who are to go to the field and follow these people.  Otherwise, most of the registers in Karamoja are slow because registration is done only in the urban and the suburbs, they do not go to the rural communities.  

I am advising, therefore, that if this exercise is coming, we have LC III in place who can accompany the updating committee to go the grassroots.  That is the information I am giving.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, don’t you think the problems have been identified? We should really end this exercise?  Don’t you see that the issue is money, money to buy cameras, money to pay the people? These are the reasons that are hampering the exercise.  But anyway the report is that 70 percent were successful.  

6.03
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will be very brief.  First of all, I would like to appreciate the good work the Electoral Commission is doing in very difficult conditions. They are almost acting as martyrs for all of us in very difficult, cumbersome, unexplainable situations and yet we are expecting them to do good work.  

For example, Mr Speaker, if photographs or taking pictures could be messed up in Kampala, what sort of situation do you expect upcountry?  I would like to testify that picture taking in Lubaga South has been in a terrible and indescribable mess. I would like to testify here that there is a problem.  

Now the way forward: If the registration cannot continue then we should have an option. The option would be that we do away with the referendum process and prepare a substantive prosperous register in preparation for the elections of 2006.

Mr Speaker, the money required is quite enormous, we might assume something is going to be done, but judging from the amount of money the Electoral Commission is expecting, we may not get that money.

I am challenging the Government, as I conclude, the referendum was intended to work during the first transition period, after that things would take off in a natural manner.  Otherwise, I would like to challenge the Leader of Government Business very amicably. I do not know of any polity in the world today where voting on a political is still going on – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you be relevant, we are talking about registers, we are not talking about elections.

MR LUKYAMUZI: That is right, Mr Speaker.  Finally, I was proposing that since there are no chances of getting this money; let us do away with the referendum exercise.  According to Article 69, if you revisit it, the choice of a system is done in several ways. Let us use one of the easy ways of reaching it – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When time comes to deal with the referendum we shall deal with it. Today we are dealing with the exercise that has ended.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I want to conclude by saying that we must reopen because we do not have any explanation in accordance with the United Nations Human Rights Bill of Rights. You have no right to distance me from participating in a referendum; doing so is treasonable in law. I am serious about that.  
6.07
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Democracy is very expensive, that is what we are always told when there is justification for expenditures on issues of democracy.  I am wondering why when it comes to registration, which is the basis of this democracy that is when the money is not there?  This is when we should really be putting money, because this is the basis, this is the beginning.  If we do not have the voters, then you cannot begin to talk of democracy, or if the voters themselves are saying, “I was not involved. I am not there,” we cannot have democracy.  

So, Mr Speaker, I wanted to think - I do not know, but I stand to be corrected - there are many activities that are going on very well in this country. I have got NAADS in my district; it is privatised. Why don’t we privatise this registration?  Has someone thought about the implications, you would find the thing well done.  Privatise it and you will get very good results in very short time. 

As I said, in case it does not conflict with any law of this country, let us agree that for someone to give us very good results- we know in Packwa Parish where Besisira is born we expect so many people – we tag a value to a parish.  We have got all the cameras. We send someone there; we know Ugshs100,000 or Ugshs200,000 is enough for a parish. we shall have the money. Where is all this money going? 

 I have been doing some little calculations here, with Ugshs100,000, you need Ugshs500 million to register all the people here very well. When you give Ugshs100,000 to anybody, he will do a very good job in a parish.  How do you give someone Ugshs 2,000? The problem is we have been using a very rude system where there is a commissioner in charge of the region, the registrar, all these have got stop gaps, then sub county chief, everybody has got some ugshs2000 to expect.   

You should privatise, let people bid, people come and do the job and the job is done and we shall have 100 percent. We should not begin to walk around, we are there, we are doing this, up to when? When we come here we begin to blame each other that the job is not well done.  We shall only get the contractor and say, “We expected 1.5 million people why do you have 600 people? This person who has been contracted to do the job will make sure he reaches everybody. How he reaches the people is not our problem.  For us we sit here and wait for the democracy we are craving for. It is expensive; we should pay expensively for it.  Mr Speaker, I wish to submit.

6.10
DR CHRISPUS KIYONGA (Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues.  I have also carefully listened to our colleagues in the House. The majority think that a lot of people were left out in so far as updating is concerned.   

I also listened carefully to the assessment of our earlier complaints by our committee. The committee has also on top of the report presented attachments to support that a fair fraction of the voters has been captured.  So, we have this apparent disagreement between our perception as the people representing the population and a quasi-technical assessment of what the Electoral Commission has said.  

It is possible that we have some problem somewhere. It is possible, for example, Electoral Commission could make an error and think they have captured 70 or 80 when actually they have captured less.  

But it is also possible that ourselves, we the population, because we are getting nearer to an election, we could be high per sensitive to the number of people that has actually not been captured. 

This is possible because if you look at what the Commission has been doing, they have tried continuously to update. Before this recent update they were in the field and only about 100,000 people turned up and we did not hear a single complaint.  But now we nearer an election naturally we the Members of Parliament and the people we represent are more interested that they be registered.  

So, I think there is a difficulty here which has been further compounded by the contribution of hon. Lukyamuzi and my good Friend Prof. Latigo. Hon. Latigo particularly made a very sharp point that we could go now to the referendum about change of political system and the return could be that the population have refused which is also a possible result. People can turn around and say, “You see, this was a Government plan in collaboration with the Electoral Commission to fail to register people and then get this result”.  

So before my colleague answers, hon. Speaker, I wanted us to consider a possibility because this at the end of the day a technical matter.  It is matter of science, we can go and check, did we capture 70, 80 or 90?  So, I wanted my colleague the Chairperson of the Committee to consider a possibility of hiring a technical team to do a quick pilot scheme because the register is there with the Electoral Commission with photographs. 

We can choose a number of parishes on a random basis and a check is done.  We may find that about 70 or 80 per cent of the people have been captured, given the needs for money in other areas. I would appeal to Parliament to go with that assessment that if we have somewhere between 70 and 80 imperfections we should proceed with that for the purpose of the referendum.  But prepare better for the update before the elections in March 2006.  I would like my colleague to consider that, Mr Speaker.

MR OULANYAH:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I am sure we got a very good beating today and I am sure the honourable members are smiling.  But, Mr Speaker, this just shows the seriousness with which we took the subject.  It is no laughing matter; it is a matter of vote in these situations. It is a very serious matter and people take it seriously.  That is why these concerns are being raised.  

Mr Speaker, we can cite millions of cases. I can cite from my own constituency many cases.  But as it is, we have to put this fact against the law, the law that this Parliament passed, the Constitution that governs this country. Those are the standards we have to apply. Our emotions, sometimes factual or objective, we have to apply them to the law. I have applied them to the law and that is why I might be found ridiculous to many of you.  

I am just citing the law, the law you passed; not the Electoral Commission.  Now what is the law you passed, the Electoral Commission law that you passed? The Electoral Commission that Parliament passed made provisions for these things that there has to be cut-off dates. This cut-off date has to be announced by statutory instrument, and there has to be processes done before any major event is done.  

Now, what are the major events in this particular situation?  It is the referendum.  What is the period estimated for this thing to be finished, in the fourth year of Parliament?  When is the fourth year of Parliament ending?  

THE SPEAKER:  No, honourable member, please, law is applied on the facts. The situation as you assess here is that the Electoral Commission did not go to a station with cameras to get their records.  Is it a token presentation of a case to them that you have done it when they are not equipped? The complaint is about equipping Electoral Commission.  Hon Chairman, these are their grievances, we have to examine them, whether there are merits or there are no merits instead of saying the laws says seven days and seven days have passed we have to close. 

6.14
MR FRED RUHINDI (Nakawa Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I thought I had for a long time-shared with my colleague, the Chairperson of the Committee, the provision of the law in Article 74(3). I thought we had got the same understanding of it. It says that the resolutions or petitions for the purposes of changing the political system shall be taken only in the fourth year of the term of any Parliament. I thought we agreed that the understanding of this is that, the system may not change in the fourth year. What is required strictly in the fourth year is the receipt of the resolutions or petitions for purposes of changing the system.

THE SPEAKER:  Well, the provision talks about resolution or petition. I think that is what you are talking about.

6.17
MR OULANYAH: Hon. Fred Ruhindi is a lawyer and hon. Speaker is a lawyer and I am a lawyer, and not a bad one.  Even that article is subject to interpretation. We want to adopt a safe passage that is subject to interpretation.  Could the Constituent Assembly have intended that the referenda, the decision to change political system, could be done on the last day of Parliament?  Could they have intended that?  Well it is possible, but there is a question of possibility now.  So I want us to see clear from where we are talking about possibilities, whether we stay within the safe margins. That is all I am saying.  But it is up to this House to take decisions on them.  But  I will have put myself on record on this.

Mr Speaker, the issue I want to comment on is the issue that has been raised by the hon. Ken Lukyamuzi.  Our Electoral Commission actually needs to be praised for what they have done in the circumstances if we are being fair.  

Our Electoral Commission, I remember when I first joined Parliament in the second year, I made a statement that the Electoral Commission should have been under the Department of Disaster Preparedness, because of what really happens.  Some times you have laws coming back here for change in a matter of a minute.  

I remember when the hon. Bidandi Ssali argued here to pass an amendment to the Local Government Act, after a law was passed and it could not be implemented, and we passed that law in one day or two days.  Now these are the things we are talking about.  

The Electoral Commission has become a fire brigade and in most countries where there are fire brigades, they receive thanks from the population.  The Electoral Commission has acted as a fire brigade for a long time.  We should look inwardly and see where we have made difficulties for the Commission, whether as Parliament, whether as the Executive and we should change so that the process of processing electoral matters in this country is improved. So that public confidence is restored on the Commission because that is what we need for the Commission to operate.  Now what they have been able to build in the last so many months, the few years that the new Commission has come in is being shuttered by the debate going on, not considering what they have gone through.

For instance, they requested for money in February, Ugshs.17 billion to process this referendum.  At the time there was no money; they started without money.  They have received so far Ugshs5.7b out of Ugshs17 billion.  We are here expecting magic out of the Electoral Commission.  That is the situation.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, the Chairman of the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is persuading this House this afternoon that the major problem of the Commission is financial.  In Kamuli District in the by-election, there was only one by-election at that time. But if you go to Kamuli and ask how poorly the management of that election was, you would shudder. The election for one district was totally mismanaged.  The issue of money was not an issue, it was only one district.  

The whole Electoral Commission was mobilized; all districts brought all their vehicles in Kamuli.  But really if you go and see what happened, you will really cry.  So the issue actually is not money.  Is the hon. Chairperson of this Committee in order to suggest that the issue is money when actually the real issue is mismanagement of election process?

THE SPEAKER: No, you see the mismanagement of electoral process could depend- because the Commission is not well facilitated.  It cannot provide the services it is required because the money is not there- (Applause)- The difference here is that the Electoral Commission says it performed well, you are saying it did not and you agree that they did not have the funds.  So we have looked for funds to help it to perform as expected.  It is a question of having different conclusions. 

When you say in spite of lack of money, I performed well.  So if you performed well, then somebody will say, you do not need money to perform well, continue.  But I think the Chairman is saying they need facilities in form of money.  So he is not out of order for him to say the problem which you are complaining about is caused by lack of funds.  So the next question will be, how do we help this situation?

MR OULANYAH: Mr Speaker, in the document I just laid on the table, I would like to look at Kamuli District.  Kamuli District, the census put the total voting population at 322,714.  The registered voters by 2001 were 217,387.  4,843 voters were registered in the continuous registration process and the partial update show that an additional number has been gained.  

The total number of voters as of this morning, voters that have registered are 229,463.  Now the statistics taken is from the Bureau of Statistics, Population Census.  The statistics the Commission is using to get this number is the number of actual voters they have on the register as of this morning.  The percentage is 71.1 per cent.  Now this is something about science that we have difficulty to contest. We have a figure provided and that is a target that the Commission was targeting to reach and they have gone to the extent of getting in Kamuli District.  

The honourable member comes from Kamuli district, these are the facts I am dealing with.  May be if you are confronted with these facts, you would also be seeing what I am seeing.  

Secondly, there were issues raised about schools.  Hon. Speaker, the annexure part of the document I have laid on the table. I have Apac, four schools; Bundibugyo, 15 schools; Hoima, 10 schools; Bushenyi, 12 schools; Kabarole, 41 schools; Kampala, 24 schools; Kamuli, 18 schools; Kibale, 24 schools.  So you will look at this document, there are on your e-mail and now we have had copies that can be circulated to you.  These are the facts I am confronted with. I am not cooking any figures, honourable Members.  These are figures that were given to us, but these are simple statistics.  Unless we have now gone beyond the figures, then it will become difficult.

Mr Speaker, let me answer one or two specific issues that were raised.  The issue of the floods:  I think it is proper if the honourable members can reflect on things that have been here and then we move from there. 

This matter was even brought by the committee. It has been brought three times now in this Parliament about the flood that keeps confronting the Electoral Commission offices; it is not new.  But we get used to these things and now we are saying it is bad, but we have been shouting about this thing for over three years.  

I have been in that committee since I came to this Parliament, but these are the difficulties. The machine itself, the thing that keeps the database, the Commission even wanted insurance, but Government does not insure.  They wanted a system created specifically to keep that expensive equipment, but the premises were not provided. Next time this flood will strike the main database itself.  I am told the equipment cost $17 million or in that range but that is what we are talking about.  

Mr Speaker, the issues raised by hon. Kalule is that we should repeat the process. As I said there are laws, the Commission was acting within the law. If there is need to improve on the law that is up to this House. It is not up to the Chair or the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; it is up to the House and Government to take that decision.  

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I take exceptional of some of the comments that are made, for example the one coming from my honourable colleague from Gulu, hon. Michael Ocula.  Mr Speaker, you referred this matter to the committee on the 12 April 2005, we were to report on the 14 April 2005 and here are honourable members expecting us in 24 hours to travel countrywide and source this information.  

Now, honourable members, you really expect magicians to perform these jobs, but that is what happened. Why didn’t you point it out here when the matter was referred to the Committee?  Instead of saying, well you tried your best; two days we have a report. We listened to the Electoral Commission full day; followed the proceedings covered by the press. We asked questions, we raised concerns and they provided these documents and they showed their concerns.  Now, honourable members turn round and make – like we have just been playing, it is not fair. 

So, hon. Ocula, please, when we get out I think you should come and thank me for what we have done –(Laughter)- Even if the hand signs might show the contrary, I would be pleased that you come to me and do something about that. 

Honourable members, you have all asked for extension of time. I have given you what it means in my opinion and in the opinion of the committee what its implications are.  If you can deal with the implications I do not think the Electoral Commission will resist one second in doing what is necessary to make it operate efficiently.  But as they said this particular exercise was meant to prepare a register ready for a referendum for change of political system and that is what they have done. So, that one under the law is closed, so if the extension is approved then other things also have to be extended to accommodate the processes that they have outlined. I read them out- I do not want to repeat them now.  

The submissions of the honourable members particularly, hon. Hillary Onek, yes, those cameras use what they call the CF5 systems.  You will take it out of the camera and down load it. It is not linked because you would have a problem linking a little camera in Pader with the database in Kampala. On Jinja Road here there might be those difficulties still, they have not reached that far.  

The second problem is the staffs that were trained originally to use this backed off because they were not paid. So, they had to get new lots of people to deal with this emergency.  Now that is all we are asking the honourable members to appreciate while we come to the decision that we are about to take.  

Honourable Pirir and the honourable members, you have raised good concerns. Hon. Besisira, he says we should privatise and – of course, those are all very innovative proposals. It is up to the wisdom of this House to adopt them and recommend them.  

For us as a committee an assignment was given to us, four issues had been strongly raised by members of Parliament. We raised those same questions with the Electoral Commission. They provided answers with support documents showing that they have indeed realised a target of 79.11 percent.  It is based on total estimated number of voters arising from the national statistics the census.  Those who came of voting age and the number they have of voters who are registered. That is how they come to that figure.  So, if there is a contest that can be verified by scientists. 

The other information that I should give now is that, there is going to be a display. If at the time of display it is only your photograph missing, but you are already on the register, you details, location, village, everything is there, only your photograph is missing, there will still be able to take those photographs.  But they will not be able to take new registrations because of the problems I have just outlined on how it will take them to process the register. That is why the report of the committee has presented this position. Honourable members, I take the strong words kindly and I beg to sit down.  Thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Chairperson and the Committee for the report. We have ended the debate on this matter. The matter has been probed and you have received the report and views have been expressed as to improve the process then what else because –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO:  Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister without portfolio and NPC had come up with a workable proposal on a way forward about piloting this exercise such that we ascertain.  As you maybe aware, Members of Parliament, this is the core of the entire exercise once we fail it, once we do not involve people in determining the political system, the other following processes will have a problem.  So, I would suggest that possibly we have a way forward as given by the NPC.

THE SPEAKER: No, the Electoral Commission is an independent Commission, which has its mandate and it has accessed what we have said.  If it wishes to adopt the ideas given here, including that of NPC, it will be able to follow it up. We cannot order it.  That is why when the issue came up and the Executive show that it is taking it up, we said it may be risky for the Executive to take up when the Electoral Commission is an independent.  

It is better that the Committee in charge of the Commission deals with it, otherwise, other person will say that the Executive is the one which has done this and the other.  But now this has been done, with us they have given us the figures, they have heard the complaints that you have raised and the support we promise to give them as far as finance is concern.  Now it is up to them to go and think about what NPC has suggested and they can always report to us about the results.

DR NKUUHE: Mr Speaker, much as I tried to listen to what the NPC was saying, he is trying to say we should pilot and find out what sort of percentages we have of registered or updated voters. I thought you do not even need to pilot since everything is on computer. They could actually find out nationally what the average is per region, per district, per sub-county and then you establish a partner. If any particular region has a very, very low proportion then they could find a remedy; try to find out why and then find a remedy.

THE SPEAKER: The Electoral Commission can hire the services of our consultant here –(Laughter)- I think honourable members with this we have to come to end of today’s business. House is adjourned until tomorrow-

CAPT. GUMA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to request members through you that according to today’s Order Paper, I saw the report of National Economy closer. It seems to me that presumably tomorrow we are likely to discuss it. So I request members to come with their reports.

THE SPEAKER: We come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 April  2005 at 2.00 p.m.)

