Wednesday, 30 April 2014
  
Parliament met at 2.12 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. This is the sitting that is last before we celebrate the international days. As you may already be aware, tomorrow Thursday, 1st May 2014, is the International Labour Day and it will be observed in many parts of the world and it is as well a national holiday in Uganda. For this reason, Parliament will understandably not meet and I urge you to attend the national celebrations which will take place in Ntungamo District. I wish you all merry Labour Day celebrations and a good time to be with your constituents. 

Hon. Members, you may have heard the sad news that recently, over 200 girls were abducted from their school allegedly by the Boko Haram group in Northern Nigeria. This is indeed a tragic and unfortunate incident for not only these young children, but also for Nigeria, Africa and humanity at large. Parliament of Uganda therefore wishes to join all peace loving people of the world in condemning this brutal and grisly act and urge whoever is holding them to release them unconditionally. We convey our sympathies to all the parents, the government and the people of Nigeria during this trying moment. 

You recall that yesterday, I made a communication in relation to this particular Bill which is now still on the business to follow, that is, “The Retirement Benefit Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011” which is number 88 on the business to follow. My communication yesterday was in relation to a letter a copy of which was given to us by the people who authored the letter which was from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, written to the Minister of Finance around the 14th of this month seeking or requesting the Ministry of Finance to withdraw that Bill from the House. 

I made a communication to that effect and yet, as I am aware, we already had a meeting scheduled for the committees to meet from the 13th of next month to begin discussing the Bill. I thought it would be a waste of our parliamentary time if it is true that this Bill is going to be removed and yet Parliament is scheduling meetings for it and inviting people to have discussions on the Bill. 

This morning, arising from that communication, one Mr Moses Bekabye who is the interim Chief Executive officer of the Uganda Retirement Benefit Regulatory Authority came to my office and made some clarifications about what is going to happen. That Bill was not to be withdrawn and in my opinion, that Bill is urgent. This is one of the sectors that is causing haemorrhage in this country. It is causing pain to our people who should be enjoying the sweat of what they have worked for all their lives. This Bill therefore comes at a time when it is urgent and should be handled and a threat of its withdrawal therefore became a matter of concern to all of us. That is why I raised that matter yesterday. 

So, for the members who are responsible for processing this Bill, a meeting has been scheduled from the 11th to the 13th of May. On the 13th, the meeting will end at Midday to enable you come for the plenary because the 13th will be a Tuesday of May this year. It will be at Serena, the former Ranch on the Lake in Lweza for those two or three nights. The committee is therefore urged to go and participate in that meeting, draw all your conclusions on what needs to be done to improve on this Bill and complete it and it will be on the order paper on the 14th for discussions so that we finish with it before we go for the recess. 

This Bill should not go to the next session of Parliament. It is an urgent Bill, which you should take time to complete before we go on recess. Therefore, the Clerk is notified that on the 14th of May 2014, this Bill should be reflected on the order paper for discussion and I am urging the committee to compile and complete their report and propose the amendments to enable Parliament to act on this and complete it before the 15th when this House shall rise and be adjourned for a recess and end of session. Thank you very much.

2.18
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance; my district Amuru borders Southern Sudan and recently the community of Amuru District, Atiak Sub-County Bibiya and Okiri parishes witnessed the influx of the community from South Sudan. They entered inside our district not through the official border point but another point and when they came to Amuru, they moved with their herds of cattle and guns and right now, they are settling in Okidi Parish in Amuru District. 

These people are posing a security threat to our community since they are moving with guns and whenever our local people move and meet them where they are staying, they normally cane them and caution the people of Amuru never to step where they are based. We realised that when they were crossing to Uganda, they were not registered as refugees from South Sudan. It means they are inside Uganda illegally. 

Our prayer, as a community of Amuru district, is that Government should intervene immediately to help the people of Amuru District, Okidi Parish. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we need the government to follow up all the refuges who are inside Uganda. They should be registered and let all the guns they are moving with be taken over by Government because our people are very scared.

We also request Government to follow them up, have them registered so that if they are proved to be refugees, they should be taken to the refugee camps like the ones in Kiryandongo District.

Finally, we appeal to the Government of Uganda to be very keen especially in monitoring the border posts. We need high security maintenance at the borders. And if possible, Government should increase on the security personnel manning these border posts.

The people of Amuru District are really scared especially those in Atiak Sub-County where many Dinkas from South Sudan have entered. We need very urgent government intervention to maintain the security of our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member for Kilak County. Yes, minister, do you have something to say on that?

2.21
MS ROSEMARY NAJJEMBA: Thank you so much. Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the concerns and will forward the matter to the responsible Ministry of Internal Affairs. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you taking clarifications?

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The problem in Amuru is not only present there. It is scattered throughout the country yet we are now registering nationals. I would like to request the honourable minister to let us know how we are going to deal with this situation so that these people, apparently not Ugandans, don’t access our national identity registration exercise. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I also would like to seek some clarification form the minister. Are refugees allowed to enter our country with guns? Are they allowed to do that and if yes, then are Ugandans also allowed to carry guns as walking sticks? I am saying this because the lives of very many Ugandans are at stake. There are so many people that have been slaughtered in Southern Sudan and we know that – these fellows have been at war for so long and slaughtering a human being just takes some of them a second. So, if they are entering Uganda with guns – we are not saying they shouldn’t come here but they should not bring in the guns because we don’t have any war in Uganda. Thank you.

MS NAJJEMBA: Thank you so much, honourable members. The issue of refugees is a serious one especially now that we are carrying out a registration exercise for national identity cards. But also that issue reported from Amuru District is a serious one. But as I have said, all these issues fall under the Ministry of Internal Affairs and that of Security since there are reported security threats. I have taken note. I will request my colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs, to come up with a report as far as these issues are concerned.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, at 3 O’clock, we have to start the Prime Minister’s question time and this matter can still be raised. Yes, Member for Aswa.

2.254
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the issue that you talked about in the Communication from the Chair concerning the abducted girls in Nigeria. I think this is a very sad thing. We have gone through practical experiences in Uganda where many of our children were abducted. Many never returned. It is a very sad situation and I would like, together with my constituency, to associate myself with the plight of the people of Nigeria. In any case, some of the people in Nigeria are Luo speakers like I am. They speak the same language like ours, the Luos and sometimes, I feel that this is the most unfortunate thing that has affected the Luo community both in Uganda and Nigeria.

I would like to urge the rebels – I don’t know whether they are rebels or terrorists – to release those girls. They are innocent people who had gone to school to get educated to become good mothers of this world. It is unfortunate that a fighting force or a rebel movement starts to undermine education. I would like to request Parliament of Uganda to associate itself very strongly and condemn that kind of attitude towards the girl child by forcefully abducting and also denying them the opportunity to pursue formal education. That is a sign of backwardness and which is an uncalled for situation in this 21st Century.

I would like to urge the Government of Nigeria to do whatever is within their means to rescue and secure these girls. But at the same time, I urge the international community not to leave Nigeria to fight this alone. Nigeria is bordered by many countries whose borders are not very secure from these terrorists. I just wanted to associate myself with this matter because we have had the feeling here and we know what it means for such girls to be abducted. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, that was reaction to Communication from the Chair and we will leave it at that. I communicated it on behalf of this Parliament.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

PETITION (A) BY RESIDENTS OF NKOMA WEST, MBALE MUNICIPALITY, MBALE DISTRICT ALLEGING UNLAWFUL EVICTION FROM THEIR LAND BY ISLAMIC UNIVERSITY IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will start with the first one. Yes, Member for Mbale Municipality.

2.28
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to present a petition by residents of Nkoma West, Mbale Municipality alleging unlawful eviction from land by the Islamic University in Uganda (IUIU).

Your humble petitioners are residents of Nkoma West, Mbale Municipality in Mbale District, aggrieved by the actions of IUIU in evicting them from their land.

Your humble petitioners were born, grew up and have lived in the said locality throughout their lives and as such have delivered the livelihood from this land.

In 1994, the said land, measuring approximately 218 acres and accommodating over 250 homesteads was identified by the Government and ultimately acquired for the expansion of the university. Your humble petitioners were, before their eviction, promised a full compensation and they accepted to vacate the land to pave way for Government to develop IUIU.

The compensation to your humble petitioners was initiated in 1995 but was later halted and the allegation is that the value of the compensation was not commensurate to the value of the land at the time of the compensation. Your humble petitioners, in 1999 received part payments of Shs 400 million to be shared among 167 families on the premise that the complete payment would be effected in due course but before vacating of the land. 

On 20 January 2014, your humble petitioners were without any prior notice or order of court humiliated when they were forcefully evicted from their houses and homesteads by the court bailiffs, staff from IUIU and a team of heavily armed police officers led by the Operation Officer of Kampala Metropolitan Police Directorate and the DPC of Mbale. 

Your humble petitioners are aggrieved that whereas they have never been fully compensated for the said land as was assessed, the eviction was done in a manner that was inhuman and degrading, leaving several of the petitioners injured as well as buildings and property destroyed, rendering your petitioners landless and homeless.

Your petitioners have brought forward this petition seeking for your indulgence in that case.

The humble petitioners pray that:
Parliament urges the Minister responsible for Lands and Urban Development and Minister for Education and Sports to expedite the process of compensating the petitioners putting into consideration the current market value of the land in the country;
Parliament investigates the circumstances under which the January 2014 eviction by the court bailiffs, staff of IUIU the Police was carried out;
Parliament urges the ministers responsible for Lands and Urban Development and Education and Sports to report back to Parliament the extent of the compliance with the prayers within the time prescribed by Parliament.

Your humble petitioners, Mr Speaker has signed the petition and have attached photographs – terrible pictures showing how their houses were demolished, food destroyed, trees which they had preserved for many years cut down, attached. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition. Hon. Members, the evictions were done in January, did you say?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, hon. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I did not read this petition before I came here but from the prayers, this looks like it is a matter that is urgent. I have heard a prayer where they are asking Parliament to carry out an immediate investigation which may not be possible to deal with considering how the particular situation is unfolding. 

Therefore, under Rule 29 (6), I am going to refer this petition for the attention of the minister so that the minister handles the prayers as prayed and reports back to Parliament preliminary findings and actions taken on 14th next month. I think that would be fair in the circumstances.

So, the Minister for Education who is responsible for the Islamic University in Uganda and the Minister for Lands who is responsible for the land should carry out this investigation and come back jointly to Parliament on the 14th of next month. Their petition is accordingly referred to the ministers.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, I want to give additional information that the Attorney-General’s Chambers in the Ministry of Justice could be equally helpful because I was quite involved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Then accordingly, the Ministry of Lands, Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Justice or the Office of the Attorney-General should jointly handle this matter and get back to the House on the 14th of May. The Clerk should immediately forward the petition to the Minister responsible.   

PETITION BY THE MEMBERS OF BUGISU CO-OPERATIVE UNION OVER THE MISMANAGEMENT OF THE AFFAIRS OF THE UNION
	
2.36
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Mr Speaker, I will not be in position to present that petition because I have got a conflict of interest in this petition. When I looked at the prayers, I found out that these people who are petitioning are the people who had mismanaged Bugisu Co-operative Union and therefore, I am not in position to present this petition. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You should have stated it earlier so that somebody who feels comfortable with it presents the petition. Be that as it may, it therefore, stands deferred until another Member is either prepared to present it to the House or it will never be received by the House.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not yet 3 O’clock so can we go to the next item?

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE HIV/AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, on item five, there are consultations that are still ongoing and we cannot have the Bill handled today. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT SEEKING TO BAN THE USE OF POLYTHENE MATERIALS IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What happened? The motions come before the laying of papers. How did you order it today? I think let us defer the motion because it will require debate and yet we will be interrupted at 3 O’clock for Prime Minister’s Question Time. I think let us deal with item number eight on the order paper.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE 130TH INTERPARLIAMENTARY UNION (IPU) ASSEMBLY HELD IN GENEVA, SWITZERLAND FROM 16TH TO 20TH MARCH 2014

2.24
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on Table a report of the Delegation of the Parliament of Uganda to the 130th Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly held in Geneva, Switzerland from 16th to 20th March, 2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Member. We will find time and have these matters discussed from what they have been able to see in Switzerland. 

DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.38
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay on Table district local governments’ financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General.

Allow me to lay financial statements for Mitooma District Local Government, Oyam District Local Government, Abim District Local Government, Mukono District Local Government, Apac District Local Government, Bushenyi District Local Government, Kasese District Local Government, Jinja District Local Government, Kibuku District Local Government, Agago District Local Government, Masaka District Local Government, Kyankwanzi District Local Government, Lamwo District Local Government. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those 13 districts’ local government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. And they stand committed to the committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling. 

MUNICIPAL COUNCILS’ FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.41
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table municipal councils’ financial statement for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General:

First, I want to lay on Table, Western Division, Eastern Division, Rukungiri Municipal Council; 
I beg to lay Mbarara Municipal Council: Kamukuzi Division, Kakoba Division; 
I beg to lay Ntungamo Municipal Council: Central Division, Western Division; 

I beg to lay Ntwetwe Town Council; I beg to lay Bushenyi – Ishaka Municipal Council; Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Central Division and Ishaka Division. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture those 13 municipal councils’ financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. They are accordingly committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling. 

SUB-COUNTIES’ FINAICIAL STAEMETNS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.44
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table sub-counties’ financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General

First I beg to lay on Table Bulangira Sub-County, Kibuku District; Kagumu Sub-County, Kibuku District; Kabweri Sub-County, Kibuku District; Kibuku Sub-County in Kibuku District; Kirika Sub-County, Kibuku District Katanda Sub-County, Rubirizi District; Ryeru Sub-County, Rubirizi District; Katunguru Sub-County, Rubirizi District; Ruyonza Sub-County, Kyegegwa District; Kasule Sub-County, Kyegegwa District; Rwentuha Sub-County, Kyegegwa District; Mpara Sub-County, Kyegegwa District; Kanyabwanga Sub-County, Mitooma District, Iceme Sub-County, Oyam District; Acaba Sub-County, Oyam District; Abim Sub-County Abim District; Morulem Sub-County, Abim District; Alerek Sub-County, Abim District; Nyakwae Sub-County Abim District; Ihandiro Sub-County, Kasese District; Lake Katwe Sub-County, Kasese District; Kisinga Sub-County, Kasese District; Kitholhu Sub-County, Kasese District; Munkunyu Sub-County, Kasese District; Kyabugimbi Sub-County, Bushenyi District; Mr Speaker, I beg to lay Nyabubare Sub-County, Bushenyi District; Kyeizooba Sub-County, Bushenyi District; Kyamuhunga Sub-County, Bushenyi District; Bitooma Sub-County, Bushenyi District. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those 29 Sub-County financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. It is accordingly committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling. 

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON A PETITION BY STUDENTS OF THE UGANDA ALLIED HEALTH AND MANAGEMENT SCIENCE INSTITUTION ON THE ALLEGED MISMANAGEMENT OF THE INSTITUTION AND UNFAIR TREATMENT OF THE STUDENTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall the presentation was done yesterday on this particular report and the substance of most of the issues had already been overtaken by events. The key issues that were outstanding were those which were recommended by the committee that required additional action. Do we want to carry out a debate on this since it is straight forward or should we just adopt it and task the minister responsible to move forward with the recommendations from the committee? The way the issues were presented was very straight forward; those which did not make sense were rejected by the committee especially that on the students seeking compensation for the monies they used when they went to hospital. 

Honourable members, how do we proceed on this because the issues were very clear of how this matter was addressed? Can we adopt this report and then move? Can I put the question to the adoption of this report? 

Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the petition of students of the Uganda Allied Health and Management Sciences Institution, Mulago on the alleged mismanagement of the institutional and unfair treatment of the students be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister responsible for education, please pick up the recommendations made in this House and I ask the Clerk to Parliament to extract them properly and provide you with them in writing so that you can appropriate action. You will be required to come back to the House to brief us on how far you have gone with the matter. Thank you very much.

REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ON THE STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE ON NON-PAYMENT OF SALARIES FOR PUBLIC SERVANTS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this report ready? We are approaching 3 O’clock which is the time for the Prime Minister’s Question Time. We have only five minutes. Can you present it in five minutes? No, you cannot do it in five minutes.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. On the challenges of NAADS training, I want to raise a procedural matter. Yesterday, as the chairman was making the report about the hegemony between the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Health vis-a-vis training of health workers in this country – it is becoming a routine. Just not long ago, we were told that the surveyors were also saying they cannot be handled by education – and actually in the last Parliament we had a very big battle where the Committee of Education and that on Public Service had hegemony on who should be in charge of the service college.
I suggest that the Leader of Government Business and Ministry of Education and Sports give us that refined policy so that our committees don’t keep recommending that training institutions that – whether it is decided - apart from the Army and Police, if it is the function of Ministry of Education than bringing the battle to the parliament committees. This is because policy is a responsibility of Cabinet. Why don’t you sort out this problem at Cabinet level so that you stop bringing the battles to the committees of Parliament?

I am wondering whether it would be procedurally correct for the Minister of Education and Prime Minister to clarify on that matter. It will save committees from clashing. I am happy tourism training has now gone to Jinja under tourism.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Education and Sports, would you like to comment on that? Are you competent to train health workers?

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysestom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to state that the Ministry of Education has the competence to perform its duties –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, just a second. I can see children leaving the Gallery. I have two pieces of communication with me here. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have Model Primary School in Apac District represented by hon. Akora Maxwell and hon. Ajok Lucy. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them. Thank you for coming to Parliament.

We also have a delegation of children, youth, workers and caregivers from Child Life Network Uganda from Makindye East, represented by hon. Simbwa John and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They have also come to observe the proceedings. Please join me in welcoming them. Minister, you can continue.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I was saying, the Ministry of Education and Sports has the potential and ability to carry its mandate of imparting knowledge and skills to Ugandans. Cabinet approved that Ministry of Education and Sports take over all the nursing training institutions in the country and some others except a few like those institutions that offer agriculture, which were taken back to Ministry of Agriculture. Otherwise, we are ably handling those that are under us. Should issues come up – the most interesting thing is that we are not working in isolation. We are working with officials from the various ministries and working in compliance with the laws that put in place these institutions. But also there is a council where all these professional bodies are represented.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But honourable minister, this issue has come to this House many times – about the competence of the Ministry of Education and Sports to handle specialized training for nurses and so on. Also there have been issues about comprehensive nursing training that was created by Cabinet and transferred to your ministry. These discussions have been coming back to Parliament all the time. Don’t you think it is time for you to go back to Cabinet to resolve this matter by finding a better way forward than keeping it with you? It again features in this particular report.

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 1997, the Ministry of Education and Sports commissioned a consultancy firm to examine professional training in Uganda especially in the medical area. That firm recommended very strongly that medical training goes back to the Ministry of Health because of the lack of capacity of the Ministry of Education to provide for such training. And in one Cabinet meeting, that recommendation was carried; it was also decided so. 

We are running into a very serious issue because the training of medical doctors, for example, requires both the teacher and the practitioner. In Mulago Hospital, the practitioner will go and see the patients and move away without any responsibility for training. So, I would like to urge the hon. Minister of Education to look at this affair very seriously. 

I hope you read a story in one of the newspapers, a story which I didn’t believe about three weeks ago, that said that they had assessed doctors in Uganda vis-a-vis doctors in Kenya and elsewhere and that ours who used to be the cream were found lacking. Although that was a mere story in the newspapers and I didn’t take it seriously, we should look at it and weigh the options. This matter is very serious in the medical area.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I also thank the hon. Prof. Bukenya for that brilliant submission. I would like to think that Cabinet takes decisions on the basis of expert information given especially when Government hires consultancy services to which it spends colossal sums of money for it to get such information. And when such information is given to Cabinet, it is the basis of decision making.

Hon. Prof. Bukenya was a Vice-President of the NRM Government for some time and he has given us this information which means that Government of Uganda spent and it was the basis upon which Government took a decision. Maybe the Minister for Education may not have perused through the previous notes in order to determine whether the Ministry of Education can now have the capacity to undertake. 

I want to believe that unless the Minister for Education now hires another consultancy firm to look into what was looked into previously and therefore take a new decision on the basis of new findings, it is very likely that Parliament would really not be in order if at all we took another decision; if at all information had been generated before, and if there is no new information that has been generated to the contrary, it is very difficult for –(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I was lecturing in the Department of Internal Medicine of Mbarara University of Science and Technology for about 16 years. They got lecturers from Mbarara University and took us to Jinja for some training, and we hired a consultant from South Africa. They found - I can tell you all of us had Masters or PhD in medicine - so they found that some people in medicine didn’t know how to teach, and it was also recommended that we should be taken for further training by the Ministry of Education so that we can be taught how to teach because there are some bright people who cannot even talk in public. 

There are doctors who can just describe for you Harrison’s textbook of medicine from the first page up to the last page. You put him here and say, “Please you speak”, the person cannot talk. How does that person teach? 

So I want to suggest that hon. Dr Bayigga, looks at working in synergy. There is no way Ministry of Education will teach these medical students without the Ministry of Health. Since these are both government departments and they are all ministries within our country, they can still work together. But separating them and you say, health workers teach health workers; trust me some doctors don’t know how to teach. I thank you.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much. Sometimes, of course, some of these professions are trained because when you go into teaching, then you should be talking about primary, secondary teaching and so forth. But in the profession of medicine, it is more of training than teaching or lecturing. So, it is not verbal communication alone that was assisting our lecturers or trainers to teach us in the professions of medicine. 

But I agree with hon. Bitekyerezo that you would need a synergy between education and health. But health should take the driver’s seat when you are doing the training of medical professionals. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. This issue, hon. Minister of Education, has come back to this House so many times. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the issue of who should train nurses and medical personnel has come back to this House many times and even in this particular report it has still come back. Would you take a definitive position on this issue in Cabinet and let us know the best way forward and then we move from there because it has been coming back to the House several times. 

Honourable members, Rule 34 now kicks in, its 3.05 p.m. and for the next 45 minutes, it will be the Prime Minister’s question time. You are proposing to start with questions of last week? How many were they, Rt hon. Prime Minister?

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.05 
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, honourable members, I promised that I would respond in greater detail to a few questions that had been asked earlier. There was a question that was raised by the hon. Benjamin Kadet who asked “When will the Uganda Wildlife Authority lift the ban on preventing locals around the crater lakes in Bunyaruguru or in Rubirizi District from engaging in any form of fishing activity?” 

My response to that, Mr Speaker, is that fishing in national parks is against the law. The Wild Life Act, 1996 under section 21 on general offences in wildlife conservation areas is quite clear on this. 

Secondly, however, arrangements can still be made for sustainable resource access if the necessary studies are done by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Resources and Fisheries and I would like to repeat what I told the hon. Kadet last week that I would be happy to engage him more to get greater detail to see if with the involvement of the experts, we can find a win-win situation. 

The second question which I had overlooked previously was from Isaiah Sassaga, and he asked, “When is Government effectively compensating and resettling communities moved from Mt Elgon National Park on the ancestral land in Sironko District in the sub-counties of Ziswi, Bugitimwa, and Bumasifa”. 

My response is that the substantive issue here is the question of resettlement. The Office of the Prime Minister is due to complete the outstanding resettlement in May this year. Next month is May but next month is more than next week. You may all recall that the government degazetted 60,000 hectares of land from Mt Elgon National Park to resettle communities. Another 2,000 hectares of land was degazetted from Mt. Elgon National Park to allow for the completion of the resettlement process. These 2,000 hectares of land were however mismanaged by the land allocation committee which ostensibly grabbed the land for themselves. 

The Office of the Prime Minister has laid out detailed plans to recover this land and duly conclude the resettlement process. This is expected to be realised next month.
 
On the question of compensation, the hon. Member of Parliament should provide further and better particulars to aid my consultations with the Attorney-General on this issue of compensation. 

Thirdly and finally, hon. Florence Namayanja asked a question which I answered. But it is clear that I had misunderstood and I therefore answered a different question from what she asked. I thought she had asked about automatic promotion of teachers. That is what I answered because I said yes, there is need for making room – but what she actually asked was, why is it Government policy to promote pupils automatically? Doesn’t this affect the quality of education?

My response, Mr Speaker, is there is no policy that promotion is automatic. The learner must meet the requirements for promotion and the following has been the basis for promotion. The education sector has put in place several teacher development programmes aimed at ensuring that teachers are able to give learners adequate competence to pass. There are however some cases where the learner, for some reasons, such as prolonged sickness, does not attend the minimum recommended hours. This learner can then be allowed to repeat that class. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much. There were people who remained - we want to start with them. There were three of them. Please make your question brief.

3.13
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, in the last Parliament, we expected a greater Kampala Metropolitan based on law but out of some situations, we ended up with the old Kampala city law and the implementation is not only having problems in administration but also in infrastructure like roads, water, health services and education. 

When would you want to bring a comprehensive metropolitan greater Kampala City law or other cities law, aware that in the country, soon Mbarara, Jinja and other areas may also want to develop into cities? When would you give us such city laws aware also that where we are moving, it will be difficult to continue planning Kampala alone without Wakiso, Entebbe, Mukono, Bombo as you saw the challenges in the road? Thank you so much.

3.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, Mr Speaker, as my honourable friend knows very well, we have never finally resolved the question of Kampala because in the negotiations that led to the amendment of the 1995 Constitution and particularly dealing with regional governments, we did agree with Mengo that we would create a new municipality of Rubaga and that in the creation of this new municipality, we would curve parts of Kampala central into Rubaga, especially those that had either artefacts or cultural sites or institutions that were connected with the cultural institution. We would then create new boundaries for Kampala, which would take into account that change and a compensation mechanism would be made for the piece that was given to the new municipality.

This process has not been completed and as soon as it is completed, we should be able then to come with a precise law with defined boundaries of Kampala. We have however come up with proposals on Kampala and the greater Kampala and the outlying areas because of course a city expands and it is now beyond the traditional boundaries of Kampala and yet we feel that the central government should plan for these areas. As you know, buildings, residential and commercial, have spread out and maybe Kampala is three or four times what it was previously. So we will be coming with this law. The plan is in advanced stages, I think we discussed it in Cabinet. So as soon as we are ready, we will be able to come and inform this House. Thank you.

3.16
REV. PETER BAKALUBA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In 2008, His Excellency, the President of Uganda visited Mpunge Sub-County where he pledged an electricity power line. When it came to implementation stage, this line was diverted or taken to Mpata Sub-County. The allegation over there is that since the Prime Minister is an investor there and is planning for a satellite city, that is why there was that diversion. The Chairman LC III of Mpata Sub-County, Arthur Blick went to Mpunge Sub-County loaded with money and proudly saying that yes, the line was diverted to Mpata on the orders of the Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi.

It is becoming a big political matter in my constituency and I would like the Prime Minister to answer this and even brief us on the satellite city in the offing in that area. I thank you.

3.17
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, I would like to thank my MP, the hon. Bakaluba, for that question because the extent of the success of our rural electrification programme is clear. We are going to all places, no place will remain unreached. I am not aware that the line that has gone to his sub-county Mpata where he lives and where he has a school and does good business would be unwelcome because the information I have is that it has indeed been welcomed by those people because they are happy with it.

I am not aware that the line that went to Mpata was the one that had been meant for Mpunge and I would like to assure him that this rural electrification is going to spread throughout his constituency as it is going to spread elsewhere including Mpunge. I want to assure him that even Nkome, which is a sub-county in the lake, will at a time when we are ready, get connected to the national power grid. Thank you.

3.19
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Can the Prime Minister tell the House and the country at large about the scandal that happened at the Uganda High Commission in London when Her Majesty’s Force brought accusations against the mission that they were involved in selling duty free items to the public and whether this was the issue that forced the politically appointed High Commissioner to take refuge in the UK.

3.20
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): It is true, Mr Speaker, that there was an incidence where some local staff – staff working in the Ugandan High Commission in London but who were local staff – people locally recruited who happen to be Ugandans – were alleged to have abused their high commission diplomatic privileges by using them to obtain alcohol which they then commercialised – sold. The Ugandan Government did cooperate with Her Majesty’s Government to engage in the investigation of this matter and I am not up to date on whether the matter was fully completed or not. As soon as I know, I will let you know.

3.21
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the Prime Minister following the pronouncement by the President and his firm stand to conserve the environment - are we going to see the structures that were put in the wetlands like the Golf Course Hotel, Nakumatt, Uchumi and many others being brought down so that we can reclaim those wetlands? And if so, how soon? What about the forests that have been cut down? Are we starting to re-generate them like Mabira Forest and other national forests? Should we launch the programme without teargas?

3.22
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabaz): Well, Mr Speaker, as I said, either last week or the week before, Cabinet has taken a decision to take all measures necessary to protect our wetlands in strict compliance with the constitutional command. And we have started and we are in advanced stages of mapping all the wetlands of Uganda – they will be gazetted. We have given administrative orders to the ministry concerned not to issue any more titles in areas that either have been designated wetlands or are on the list of areas being considered as wetlands. 

In so doing, we take cognisance of the fact that there are areas which by act of Government, although they had been wetlands in the past, activities had gone on with the authority of Government. If in the case of such investments, it is found that the wetlands had been extinguished – in other words, the activities on the wetland were such that it is not possible to revive the wetland, then that will be taken into account and we will consider such an area as an area of extinguished wetland.

As far as the wetlands in areas which are under title by private owners, we will use the power of Government to determine usage of land but ownership will remain with private owners with title. These, however, are only those titles that were obtained before the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. We will be issuing a comprehensive statement on this matter to this House and the country to know exactly which measures we are taking. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Samia Bugwe, is your question already answered? (Interjection) Okay, then I will have Nakapiripirit. Your question has already been answered? (Interjection) Okay. Let us have Agago.

3.25
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, can you – because I am very sure that you are aware that Agago District does not have any government hospital and does not have a health centre IV either. Can you tell the people of Agago when Government will upgrade Patongo Health Centre III to health centre IV as we wait for Government to give us a district hospital?

Part (b), the President promised the people of Agago District in 2009 that he would second two doctors – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you ask one question?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: It is still about the same hospital, Mr Speaker. The President promised to second two doctors and six staff for Kalongo not-for-profit hospital to prepare as we wait to get these facilities in place. What is going on because we have not seen these doctors until now?

3.26
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I would like to assure my good friend, hon. Franca Akello – the Leader of the Opposition is looking at me as if I should not have Franca as my good friend –(Laughter)– that Government is fully aware of the state of healthcare in Agago District. We know that Agago District does not have a district hospital and plans are underway to have a health centre IV in Agago. We await appropriation of funds by this House for that purpose. 

We, of course, have a question of health workers which we have discussed before in this House. As you know, we took a decision to raise levels of remuneration for staff of health centres and I am glad to inform this House that the response is quite good. In fact, the danger we are now facing is that some of the health workers in urban centres have preferred to go to the rural centres on account of better pay. But we are determined to do everything possible to create the necessary levels of staffing of health workers in our healthcare system and Agago, like other places, will be a beneficiary of that. Thank you.

3.29
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question is about the land titles that were taken from people during the process of the construction of Kampala-Masaka Road. It is over a year now since the land titles were taken from the owners. When will the land owners get back their titles? They cannot access loans and other things that go with land titles. 

3.30
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I understand that the processing of those issues by the Chief Government Valuer is on-going. As soon as this has been completed, what remains to be done, including the return of the land titles which are needed of course for this process, will be done.

3.31
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister to explain to the people of Toro when they will receive their properties since the people of Buganda got theirs – (Laughter) – because they equally have a king. 

3.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, may I reiterate what I said last week or the other week that what has been done for the kingdom of Buganda which is to return –(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  I think the Prime Minister wants to know why I think nothing was done with those land titles. Our position in Buganda, when the setup of the Buganda kingdom was established, they set up those structures at the lower level to deliver services. There were never rentals; they were administrative units. For example, in Mukono, to return two acres of land when they were eight and there is no administrative unit or services to deliver, it means nothing to the people of Buganda and we are not willing –(Interjections)– I thought I was in Parliament. The only way out – (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I personally watched the President giving out the land titles to the kingdom of Buganda and very many people and members of this Parliament from Buganda were very happy and excited. 

Mr Speaker, is hon. Muwanga - Kivumbi in order to tell the whole country that the President gave them “Byoya byanswa” when they were smiling? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information that was brought to this House by the Rt hon. Prime Minister when a similar question was asked two weeks ago was to the effect that land titles were returned to Buganda. That is the information this House has and interpretation should be left for another occasion. Land titles were handed over to the kingdom of Buganda. 

MR MUWANGA-KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, if God returned tonight and took away sleep, what can you do? Secondly, I am a Muslim, but if you return a mosque and forbid me from praying in it or to call “Azabu”, what good would it be? So the people of Buganda want Federo –(Interjections)– not just titles. 

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, if they have returned a mosque, they will not allow infidels to pray in a mosque because a mosque is for believers. So what has been done for Buganda will be done for other areas which have similar entitlements. A process of identification is on-going. I have been personally involved in the negotiations. It is very intricate. There is the good will on the part of Government to do so and I would like to inform hon. Kivumbi – you know, hon. Kivumbi is not a very old man. So maybe when we started he was not following. 

These cultural institutions were restored by this Government. And all the support they have enjoyed has been on the basis of the support that we give them out of the belief that it is an entitlement for these communities and that support is enduring; it is not about to end and whatever needs to be done will be done to support them. Thank you. 

3.37
MR EDWARD BALIDDAWA (NRM, Kigulu County North, Iganga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister a question that touches on national food security and national productivity. Hon. Prime Minister, you are aware that some time back, we had nation-wide seed banks in this country. I am aware that efforts have been –(Interjections)– seed banks; those big things that keep seeds are called seed banks, Mr Prime Minister. 

Government at the height of privatisation decided to privatise the seed bank practice and many private seed bank companies cropped up in the hope that they will be able to offer sustainable delivery and other services to the farmers of this country. However, in practice, it has been found that these private companies are not giving enough seeds for our people. 

Recently, our colleague, hon. Kasamba Mathias, headed a campaign to give seeds to MPs to take to the farmers for this current planting season. However, we were shocked to find out that most of the companies did not have enough seed. Secondly, the stock they had was not of good quality.

Hon. Prime Minister, this awakens us as a country that we are in trouble. If Uganda, an agricultural country, does not have enough seeds for planting, then we have a problem. So, my question is: When will Government establish national seeds banks?

3.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi: Mr Speaker, this question of seeds is a serious question that Government has looked at. As you know, we have announced a policy and a programme of raising our agricultural productivity because we all know that the population is growing – we are now about 37 million people yet our land remains constant in terms of size.

The demand on the product of our sweat using our land keeps increasing. Uganda is the food basket for the region. We supply food to many neighbouring communities and countries. So, the demand on the produce in Uganda has increased tremendously. Therefore, we have no choice but to raise the productivity of the limited land that we have. And we have said that in so doing, we need to convert more acreage to production of food especially and to raise productivity per acre.

In this, we have said we will do a few things. One is that whereas Uganda prides itself in producing organically, which we do everywhere, it is obvious that for us to raise our productivity, we need to raise the levels of fertility of our land. Therefore, we will be coming here to inform Parliament what steps we are taking to avail our people fertilizers. 

First, we are getting investment in the exploitation of a huge Phosphate reserves in Sukulu Hill in Tororo District. Second, before that begins, we intend, as a Government, to procure fertilizers in bulk so that we can avail them to the farmers at a reasonable cost and thirdly, we are looking at tackling the question of seeds not only in terms of quantity but also in terms of quality.

It is true that this has been in the hands of the private sector but we have been discussing it with them and the investors talk about creating a bigger capacity of storage. The other day, I had a good meeting with a company called Louis Dreyfus, which is one of the three largest commodity companies in the world. For the information of hon. Beatrice Anywar, it a Switzerland based company and –(Interjections)– I will be happy to discuss that with you in private –(Laughter)– you know that their annual turnover – you will recall that in Uganda we are doing very well with our economy, of course under the NRM Government. In 1985, our total GDP was just $1.5 billion. Today, we happily know that it has risen to $24 billion.

But this company’s turnover is $63 billion. It is a huge company. They have been here and we have discussed with them a number of issues one of them being post-harvest losses on our produce. But we are also looking for very serious investment in this field so that we can address the productivity issue and all the other challenges associated to post harvest and storage. These will help us acquire and sustain supply of quality seeds in enough quantities on demand. Thank you.

3.46
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt. hon. Prime Minister, in the last 10 days, we have been having discussions here about caterpillars. Initially, I thought it was a small matter, but this matter has extensively affected Wakiso, Mpigi and Mukono districts ravaging our crops such as cassava, potatoes, maize and so forth.

Last week, a minister from your office indicated that he was in consultation with you in regard to preparing food for us. Will you to tell us what mechanisms Government is putting in place to arrest the multiplication of these caterpillars and subsequently to control the problem?

3.47
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, yes, Government is fully aware of this menace of caterpillars. I would like to inform the House that necessary measures are being taken to control that menace. The ministry responsible, working together with the local government has been distributing pesticides to spread against those caterpillars and to break their cycle so that their multiplications are stopped. We are very confident that this problem will be contained and that it will not cause further damage. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural issue. The question that was raised by the member for Busiro North was about measures but the Prime Minister seems to be saying there are necessary measures. I thought –(Interjections)– before Iam rudely interrupted by my friend, the honourable minister, a professional veterinary doctor and I am told it is only veterinary doctors in the world who eat their patients –(Laughter)– the question: What are the specific measures and by the Prime Minister avoiding that, is he proceeding correct?

DR MUTENDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The veterinary profession is a very highly honoured profession worldwide. The vets prepare livestock and birds for the welfare of the entire globe. And among the livestock, there are edible livestock which are eaten not only by vets, but many other human beings; lawyers, doctors, and hon. Ssegona is one of those who eat those animals. Is it in order for hon. Ssegona to impute that only vets eat animals and yet the vets prepare them for everybody. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there are all kinds of professional references to professions in the world and I am sure the patients for veterinary doctors are normally animals and the human doctors don’t eat their patients. But I am also informed that there is also a motto for the engineers which says … there are all these things so, please stay calm, just eat your patients, there is no problem.

MR SSEGONA: Mr Speaker, I raised a procedural issue whether the Prime Minister is therefore proceeding well in refusing to answer the specific question of what measures are being taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you want to answer the procedural issue?

DR BAYIGGA: No.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then? Complementing on the procedural point? Honourable member, you might be like the engineers. Unlike doctors, they don’t burry their mistakes. The issue is, this matter was raised last week by the hon. Member for Mukono Municipality. The Minister responsible for Disaster Preparedness made some statement. There was no Minister for Agriculture that day. So this issue remained outstanding and it is urgent. So the question is that possibly the Member is not satisfied with what measures have been taken - maybe he did not hear. What I heard was that at the moment they are working with the district local government to distribute pesticides to break the cycle of rebreeding. That is what I heard. Is that source sufficient or it is not there? That would be another matter.

MR SSEGONA: Mr Speaker, it is not true. I am member of the District Local Council in Wakiso. I am a member by law. And I am also a Member of Parliament in one of the areas affected which is Busiro county East. I know they are not there that is why I wanted him to tell us where they distributed these pesticide. I have been calling him for the last two days. He does not pick calls, not even SMS; of course, I could understand, maybe he fears being associated with me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable members, before we go into that, when we had these discussions last week, the minister  who was holding the vote for the expenses for pesticide made an undertaking that the Ministry of Agriculture would come back here with a comprehensive statement on how they are dealing with the situation, so that is the issue. If these issues are handled properly, we would not be having this debate, but because there is this gap that is why these issues keep coming up because the people continue to suffer. That is the issue, Rt. hon. Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The issue is the menace of caterpillars. They are devouring all foliage where ever they go. What measures has this Government taken against this menace? I gave a precise answer. Let me for the benefit of Kojja Sseggona repeat it.
 
My answer which was precise if I may repeat it was as follows: The Central Government of the Republic of Uganda in conjunction with local governments in areas where this menace has been detected are using pesticides to spray against these caterpillars for the purpose of breaking the cycle of reproduction or breeding. That is the way this problem is handled and that is precisely what the government is doing. If this has not arrived in the parts of Wakiso, that honourable Ssegona is familiar with, please be patient, it will arrive in time to arrest this problem.

PROF. BUKENYA: Maybe, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, would it be better if you could inform us of the type of pesticide that you recommended as Government so that as the other one slowly moves to Kakiri, we can take another attempt to start killing these caterpillars because now they are no longer a menace, it is an actual killer of our plants and yet this is a very important planting season. So, it is not a matter for slow decision making. Maybe give us the name of the pesticide and we buy it and spray.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the slow process in Buikwe has yielded 12 litres of Cypermethrin. That is what I am being told that 12 litres were availed to Buikwe Town Council and six of the litres which were used in one day only sprayed less than an acre. Which means that you would need more spray pumps as well as more of these chemicals to enable all the sub-counties to have the chemical and capabilities to spray these dangerous army worms. This is the information I want to put across that the process is slow; the army worms are ravaging gardens and plants and it cannot wait. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am not sure about the name of the pesticide, I can get that if it is a question of supplementing the Government effort, and I think that is welcome. Although in the district, you will find veterinary officers and the people who are involved in this and I am sure they can be helpful in providing that technical information. But I will be happy to get it and pass it on.

I have been reading about the control options of caterpillars and there are really two ways; one is natural and the other is using pesticides. And because of the extent to which this problem had spread, our Government has decided that using pesticides is the most effective way and I am sure that you will find this information at the district level. Nevertheless, we will try and get it and pass it on to you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what is coming out and this is for the Ministry for Agriculture is to intensify this action from now so that the presence of this intervention is felt because what is coming out clearly is that it has not been seen happening. So, you may need to do more action to make it more known.

Hon. Members, it is now over an hour since we started this matter; it is supposed to be 45 minutes. We shall stop now on this matter and continue next week. Please bear with me. Let us go on with the business. You have not made your response, Leader of the Opposition.

4.02
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, thank you for answering the questions. But I have some few issues for which I need more elaboration. You maybe rightly boasted that you have extended electric power to the villages – the rural areas of Uganda. But what I know from the latest information that I have is that just about 10 percent of Uganda is accessing power. 

I am also aware that Government has pledged to extend power to each Gombolola or sub-county in the country and health centre III. What is however not known, is when is this is going to be realized? It would be very useful to Members of this House if we knew, if there is a plan, by what date would you have extended power to every sub-county or health center III because all of us have pressure and we ask for this.

Another point is the question of what we are seeing in the villages where our colleagues from the NRM are involved. This matter has come up here where we see MPs causing instability in villages and conflict and this is particularly in villages of Busoga where people are fighting over little money. 

So far, I have counted about seven incidences that I have seen in the papers. It is not washing well for us as MPs. It is shaming MPs and some of us, of course, are not involved. Some of our colleagues on the opposite side may not care so much about the image of this House or ourselves but some of us do care and we would like this matter handled in a more decent manner than it has so far been done because we seem to be commercialising politics openly – call it bribery - that is how it is being seen – (Interjections) - of course, you will say, “No” but this matter, Rt. hon. Prime Minister, we think should be handled differently and decently.

At a later date, we shall need to know exactly where the source of this money is. We have been adding some of the money from where you claim it is coming from and the figures do not add up. But it is also raising questions like where are we getting this money from that we are giving out? 

On the question of seeds, I am glad that you say it is a very serious issue and Government is very concerned about it because what I never heard you say or comment on is the issue of fake seeds which is a very serious issue. Ignorant people in the villages are cheated, some people just buy maize, put some color and sell it and of course, very expensively. Sometimes it is not easy to access this seed and that is why people create – fill a vacuum with fake seeds. 

Rt. hon. Prime Minister, as you tackle this issue, we hope that you are going to find a way of subsidising these seeds for the peasants. I am glad that you have mentioned fertilisers. There has been a song about a fertilizer factory in Sukulu, Tororo for the last 25 years and hopefully it will come. But definitely, the type of seeds that we are getting cannot grow comfortably with fertilisers and so, it may be a very timely intervention.   

On this caterpillar crisis, from the answers that you have given, this House shows that Government is not adequately prepared and in responding to disaster and even this particular disaster because most of the Members who come from the area that is affected have told you that there is nothing happening there but you have been given information, maybe buy the Minister for Agriculture who is looking at me, and you are comfortable that something is being done. But they have told us that not so much is being done - 

MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI: Thank you so much. The information that I want to give concerns the spraying of these caterpillars. By using spray pumps, we cannot achieve much. I want the Prime Minister to tell us if this Government has any aerial spraying that can be used otherwise the spread of caterpillars is alarming. As I talk now, the districts of Masaka, Bukomansimbi and nearby districts have all been affected by these caterpillars. We need to know this information urgently.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much for the information. So, we think that Government should do a little bit more measurable things which Members who are on the ground can tell us have been done.

On this issue of returning land titles to Buganda, it was a good thing. But if you return somebody’s land on which you already settled people, you raise a question; who is responsible for the people you have settled there? There are encumbrances. If you took over somebody’s land without encumbrances and you return it when there are encumbrances, who is responsible for the encumbrances? That question will have to come and it will have to be answered.

Finally, it is an issue I raised last week on the crisis in South Sudan. We have no sufficient information or detailed reports on what is happening in that country where we are very heavily involved. If nothing can be said to us today on this, I intend next week to make a statement on South Sudan which maybe then solicit a more substantive response from the Government. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt. hon. Prime Minister.

4.06
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Only 10 percent of Ugandans have power. Hon. Mwiru is slightly better informed; he says, 12 percent; actually now, we are very close to 15 percent. 

The honourable member has a constituency which is swimming in power. The problem is that his constituents do not tap it. Yes, Government has promised to electrify the whole of Uganda. This Government did promise in its manifesto that we would raise our power generation considerably. And I am happy to say that Bujagali is on board, 250 megawatts. 

Let me remind colleagues that when this Government took power in 1986, the total production of power within Uganda was 60 megawatts. Today, as we speak, you know the British who had been here for a very long time left an installed capacity on 180 megawatts. When we came, only 60 megawatts was being produced. 

By this year, as we speak, we are producing 853 megawatts. This is a huge lift – (Interjections) – yes, it is a far cry from what we need, but this is demonstration that we are on the move and we are gaining speed in this area. We have now signed a contract to build Karuma; Karuma will produce 600 megawatts. We have signed another contract for a hydro power station at Kisimba; it will produce 183 megawatts. We are about to sign a contract for Muzizi; it will produce 47 megawatts. The feasibility study for Ayago is almost complete. It will produce 600 megawatts. We have two others near Ayago. One is called Kigo and the other one Orama – or something like that; I am not very sure about those two names. One is 400 megawatts and the other one is 300 megawatts. So between those, we will be producing more than 200 megawatts.

We have dedicated two oil wells to production of electricity. We are going to increase the production of power from the sugar cane molasses in Kakira; it will be producing 52 megawatts; Lugazi is going to be producing and this one in Masindi. 

So, all in all, we are determined that at the end of this very extensive work, we raise our power generation to 3,885 megawatts. Because these things follow certain actions; feasibility studies, negotiation of contracts and things like that. I cannot give precise time when this will be done. But I can assure you that things are in motion and of course the Movement is here today and it will be here after 2016 and it will fulfil its pledges. (Applause)

Now, I would like to urge the Leader of the Opposition to desist from interfering in the affairs of political parties which are not with him –(Interruption) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know that NRM is managing the affairs of Uganda; I know that they are driving the vehicle in which we are. I know that the NRM has also gone to my constituency which is not an NRM constituency, and it is my obligation to maintain peace and stability in my constituency. So I get concerned when strangers to my constituency destabilise the peace there. Therefore, is it in order for the Prime Minister to say that if I raise an issue to somebody who is in charge of this country and is causing instability in my area, that I am interfering? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have the government and we have activities that are authorised by this House. We have spending lines that are authorised by this House. As Speaker, I am not aware of any of those processes going on in the country having been either approved by Parliament or any funds approved for those operations. I am not aware. So whatever is happening in the countryside, if it is brought here, it should be handled that way and not as if it is a matter that Parliament has taken a decision on. Parliament has never taken a decision on that matter and it has never allocated money for it. So it is not the business of Parliament as Parliament, but if information has come about insecurity, that could be a matter that could be addressed. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Excellent ruling. May I repeat, Mr Speaker, that the question of seeds is a very serious one because of shortage and because of quality. And what I implied in that is that it is poor quality seeds. Some seed is good seed, but some of it is obviously poor quality and there are fake seeds on the market; that is true. 

So, Government has been discussing this in one of the meetings and we came to a conclusion that we need to establish a mechanism, first of all, of setting standards so that if seed is to go on the market, it is seed that has been certified to confirm to that standard. 

Secondly, to have the capacity to regulate the production of seed, regulate the quality and develop the capacity to check that the seed on the market actually conforms to all this. So, this is the plan we have. We found we had a shortage of manpower to do this work and we are busy recruiting to create that capacity to do it. 

Sukulu phosphates for 20 years – It is not 20 years, but yes, it has been a long time. It is true that the contract to do the exploration was given to a Ugandan company and it took that Ugandan company 12 years to do the work. It was not entirely their fault because there was the issue of acquisition of surface rights. Under the Mining Act, in one of the sections, the mines are underground but Government may not necessarily own the land above the mines; it maybe someone’s land. So the law imposes a duty on he or she that has been granted an exploration licence to acquire the surface rights. In other words, you negotiate with whoever owns the surface rights to agree to allow you to go below. This Ugandan company had not succeeded in doing that mainly because of the question of compensation. Government tried to help, but we did not have enough money to do so and actually, we had a problem with the law in coming in as co-investors. 

When the time of that company expired, a new exploration licence was granted to another company that does not seem to have a problem with money. To the best of my knowledge, they have now agreed with the people on the land to give them permission to use it. I think they have done their work; they have done the exploration, they have submitted their report to the ministry of energy and they have applied for a mining licence. This is a big achievement, which had not been attained previously. So we are quite optimistic that as we go along, whatever obstacles will be overcome. There were a few challenges that you heard about but we are quite confident that we will be able to handle this. 

“Spraying of caterpillars cannot be effective by using pumps; we need aerial spraying.” This may be so; we shall see what happens. We have started spraying and certainly, if it needs aerial spraying, Uganda has that capacity. Uganda is a member of the locusts control organisation of IGAD. We have aircrafts spraying in the region, which are jointly owned by countries in the region, including Uganda. So if it is necessary to do air spraying, we have the capacity to do so. 

“Land titles given to Buganda - who is responsible for encumbrances?” Well, I think I would hesitate to discuss a hypothetical question but deal with specifics. However, I will tell you generally that if people acquired part of that land lawfully, then of course their entitlement is protected. It is only that land, which is available and which had not been curved out in that manner that is available. 

When a piece of land is given away, it is cut off and given its own land title. So when we give title, it means that actually there is land. If on the other hand, there are occupants of that land who are protected by the Constitution and the Land Act, - lawful occupants, bona fide occupants - of course that protection continues. The arrangement we have, like for any other land owners, is that those who are on the land will be adequately compensated and they will leave. However, I am being hypothetical; I would like to talk about specifics, if you have them.

I will wait for the issue of the Republic of South Sudan by my dear friend, the Leader of the Opposition, to be raised next week. I will be more than ready to help him with answers that will satisfy his curiosity about what is happening there. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for the responses. The time is never enough; there are very many issues. I think this is also created by the way in which the system for our questions for oral answer does not work properly. So, all the questions now seem to be addressed in this manner. If only the ministries would reactivate the handling of the questions through that particular method, the burden on the Prime Minister would be less. This is because those questions would be handled in a more systematic way by the respective ministries from where those questions arise. We need to improve on this so that Prime Minister’s question time deals with those issues that are pertinent for the Prime Minister to deal with and the sectoral issues are dealt with by the ministers. 

Honourable members, there are two urgent items; there is item No.7, which is a motion for a resolution of Parliament seeking to ban the use of polythene materials in Uganda by the Member for Rubaga. However, there is also a motion which was the subject of debate yesterday, under item No.10, on non-payment of salaries of public servants. 

I am advised that motion No.7 has been moved twice in this House and resolutions passed, but they have not been implemented. Hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi feels frustrated that motions have been passed and they have not been implemented. So he has brought another motion to try and activate that process to see if it can be implemented. I think let us deal with non-payment of salaries, which is urgent and we are coming to the end of the month – the month ends today. Let us deal with that before we go back to the motion by hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi.

REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON A STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT OF SALARIES OF PUBLIC SERVANTS

4.29
MS FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee which investigated the issues of salary and payroll anomalies in the Uganda Public Service. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You might have to ask the Speaker to do that; you asked the Prime Minister. (Laughter)  

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the report and the committee minutes on the Table. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and the full text of the report of the committee. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: I also beg to lay on the Table the various documents we looked at and analysed from Payment Solutions Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: I beg to lay on the Table the documents from UNATU, which we analysed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS KWIYUCWINY: I beg to lay on the Table the information from the Ministry of Local Government that we analysed. I also beg to lay on the Table the complaints from individuals who responded to our advertisement when we called upon them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those pieces of information from the Ministry of Local Government and also the complaints.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Mr Speaker, for over 20 years now, public officers have suffered payroll and salary anomalies and their number seems to be on the increase. Some of the affected officers have never received reasonable attention from the Ministry of Public Service and thus have tried to approach whoever they feel can be of help including UNATU and other various institutions - the IGG, the Police and Members of Parliament. 

Following a question posed by the hon. Eddie Kwizera to the Minister of Public Service, the Minister of State for Public Service issued a statement that was discussed on the Floor of the House. Subsequently, the honourable Dr Lulume Bayigga moved a motion in accordance with rule 50 that the honourable minister’s statement on this particular issue was unsatisfactory and that the matter be referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for investigations. That is why we are here today to present our report.

The objectives of this committee investigation included: 
1.	To establish the cause of non-payment of salaries to public officers; 
2. 	To establish the scope of the matter, including the number of officers affected and subsequent financial implications therein; 
3. 	To find out the means the Ministry of Public Service and other relevant stakeholders are using to address the problem; and 
4. 	To suggest possible recommendations for the way forward.

Methodology

As part of our methodology, I want to state that we met various stakeholders including officials from the Ministry of Public Service, the Permanent Secretary to Ministry of Finance and Secretary to Treasury, officials from Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Health, UNATU, Kampala Capital City Authority and Payment Solutions. Due to insufficient time, we could not meet officials from the Uganda Police Force and those from the Uganda Prisons Service. However, the Ministry of Public Service’s presentation included information on those two entities.

We reviewed documents - those I have just laid on the Table - and documents submitted by the affected persons. We carried out an on-the-spot visit to Mpigi District Local Government on the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System (IPPS). We did the same for Mukono District Local Government. We also advertised in the print media calling for submission of views on salary anomalies from members of the public.

Findings and Observations

This report highlights the magnitude of the challenges of salary and payroll anomalies from a sample of cases across the country as investigated by this committee.

Observations

The current payroll management system

The current payroll management system has many players. When you look at the table on page 4, you will see the public servants involved. We discovered that while they have a role to play, there are challenges and gaps that need to be addressed: 

For the public servants, we established that there are late submissions made, falsification and submission of incomplete data much as they are supposed to submit it in complete forms.

At the human resource/personnel level, we found out issues of incompetence, incomplete data entry, unfilled vacancies, absenteeism of officers, poor attitude, unprofessional conduct and corruption tendencies.

At the head of department level, for example the district education officers and the district directors of health services, we realised that they had no clear role to play. They have poor supervision and are not always involved in payroll management issues.

At the accountant level, we established that there is incompetence and inadequate budgeting together with corruption tendencies.

At the accounting officer level, we established that most of them are not trained, they are ill-equipped and they sanction recruitment beyond the wage bill ceiling. They are also not involved in the management of the payroll. They also sometimes submit incomplete data.

At the internal auditor level, we established that these officers are sometimes intimidated by the personnel officers and accountants. They also have corruption tendencies and portray a lot of unprofessionalism.

At the Ministry of Public Service level, we established that they have been overwhelmed with the workload and backlog. There is inefficiency in some cases due to over reliance on personnel/human resource officers. There is insufficient budgeting, lack of feedback to public officers, inadequate grievance handling mechanisms and corruption tendencies.

At the Ministry of Finance level, we established that there are inadequate budget provisions and lack of feedback on salary and payroll issues to the relevant stakeholders.

Payroll and salary anomalies

The committee established that payroll and salary anomalies are caused by a wide range of factors including incompetence, lack of integrity, understaffing, untrained staff and an accumulated backlog as already highlighted above. 

The payroll anomalies identified by the committee are also highlighted on page 6 in that table. I would like to emphasise the fact that a lot of districts have suffered. The most affected districts are: Kasese with 1,442 cases of which 906 are unpaid salary cases; Kabale with 900 cases of which 750 are unpaid salaries; Mbarara with 829 cases of which 303 are cases of overpayment and 115 are unknown – we called them ghosts in this report but we do not know whether they are or not; Kamuli with 804 cases of which 435 are arrears claims; and Tororo District with 512 of which 408 are unpaid salary claims. The committee established that the teachers, to a tune of 4900, and health workers amounting to 1378, are the most affected category of the public servants. I want to reiterate that these figures are from the documents we analysed.

Table 2 shows the anomaly cases. We tried to attach financial figures to them but for some we could not readily ascertain the amount of money involved. I beg that you look at those. The data above adds up to 11,772 cases sampled out of a total workforce of about 330,000 public servants. This is only about 3.9 per cent. We have figures from this table that we tried to add up; for example, there is that amount of Shs 5,764,370,359 - these are cases where the affected persons would be paid. We also have Shs 59,080,408 – these are cases where monies should be refunded. This was from the cases analysed. You can refer to annex 1.

Non-accessibility to the payroll 

The committee observes that for one to access the payroll, a pay change report form must be duly filled accompanied with a copy of the appointment letter, acceptance letter, deployment letter and notification of assumption of duty. While in service, there are changes that require update of the payroll such as promotions, demotions, interdictions, changes in personal details and transfers, among others. This information is supposed to be submitted to the Ministry of Public Service by the 13th day of the month so that the public officer can access the payroll within 30 days. However, experience shows that officers have waited for a minimum of three months or more than 12 months.

The committee observes that accessibility onto the payroll is affected by the following: 
i) 	Incomplete submissions; 
ii) 	Submissions for accessibility where there is no vacancy on a vote; 
iii) 	A mismatch between the officer’s rank and the grade of the school where he or she is posted. 
iv) 	Lack of a vacancy or in cases where the recruiting authority recruits more than the staff ceiling; 
v) 	Lack of explanatory notes and data on transfers, demotions, promotions and deaths not submitted in time; 
vi) 	Poor ethics and integrity on the part of officers manning the payroll; 
vii) 	Erroneous deletion from the payroll. 

From the data collected, the committee established that a total of 126 records have not accessed the payroll to date. In some cases, staff appointed in the same month access the payroll at different times. A total of 24,275 records were not paid due to submissions being effected after the payroll closing deadline; this was to the tune of Shs 5,938,949,371. Refer to annex 2. 

Non-payment of salaries

The committee observed that non-payment of salaries has been as a result of delays in observing deadlines for submission; insufficient funds; backlog especially in the Ministry of Public Service; and incomplete migration of data from the Legacy Payment System to the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System. The committee found out that as at the end of February 2014, a total of 4,494 records were not migrated to the IPPS, representing a sum of Shs 4,359,583,734. Annex 3 refers. 

The committee compiled complaints from the various affected officers and established that there are grave cases of non-payment. A case in point is that of Okello Thomas, a health assistant, who failed to get his salary for 20 months because of transfer of service from Nebbi District to Zombo District. Annex 4a explains. 

Another case is of Mr Bagoole Patrick, a teacher of Namilyango Boys’ Primary School in Mukono District, who had not been paid for more than nine months during 2012 while someone in Kamuli with the same name but in a different school and different account number continues to receive Bagoole’s pay instead. Below is what Bagoole went through; this is a case which could apply to others, so I beg to read this: 

“I complained to the personnel officer and the town clerk of Mukono Municipality about lack of payment of my salary. From July 2012 up to February 2013, I started receiving half salary payment. From March 2013, I was completely deleted up to now. I filled computer forms several times but the Ministry of Public Service failed to rectify this problem. Then on 2 September 2013, I went to the Ministry of Public Service to find out the root cause of the non-payment. The officer in charge of teachers’ salary, (Alex) in room 12, confirmed that my salary is paid every month. When I checked the payslip issued to me, it had my name but being paid to Kamuli District Local Government with a different school name, Namatovu Primary School, and with a different account number in Stanbic Bank. I informed him that the payslip issued to me is not mine but he insisted that it belongs to me because all particulars I presented to him are the ones reflected on his computer. 

I travelled to Kamuli District and found the school and the physical person who claims my names. I went back to the Ministry of Public Service and I informed Officer Alex in room 12 about it. He referred me to Madam Deborah, his senior officer, in room 29 upstairs. Deborah referred me to another officer called Jessy in data centre. I travelled several days to see officer Jessy but I could not find him until I decided to go back to Officer Deborah in room 29. She then advised me to write to the Town Clerk Mukono requesting him to re-instate me on the payroll and then take a photocopy of the letter to public service. I went back to officer Deborah, room 29, and then she referred me to room 12. From room 12, I was referred to officer Grace, data centre, who first told me that she had no assistance she can give me because I am already on the government payroll and I am paid every month. Later, she told me that the computer forms have Mukono District code (542) and the contact telephone found in her computer belongs to Dorah Namala who claims to be a resident of Mukono Town. 

Officer Grace advised me to go back to the personnel officer for assistance. The personnel officer told me that she had played her role of filling and forwarding my computer forms several times and she has no more assistance she can give. I decided to consult the Police for assistance. I made a statement recorded on 25 October 2013. The officer promised to give me assistance, but up to now nothing has been done because the officer says there is need for some little transport facilitation. I consulted the IGG officers in Jinja on 26 October 2013 and up to now nothing has been done. Whenever I ring him, he tells me that his bosses have not yet given him permission to handle my issue.”  

Mr Bagoole’s case depicts the high bureaucracy, red tape and corruption tendencies among officers without necessarily solving the salary/payroll problem. There is no clear mechanism for solving such problems in the ministries, departments and local governments. An example is the Ministry of Education, which could not readily exhibit any case of payroll salary anomaly, neither could they show complaints handled. The full story of Mr Bagoole is in Annex 4b.

Over/Underpayment of Salaries
The committee noted cases of overpayment and underpayment. Overpayment results from instances where an officer is given a higher salary grade than he or she actually qualifies for due to errors in data capture. There are 169 sampled cases in this report where officers have been paid even, in some cases, three times their salary amount and this goes on for more than a month without correcting the case. A case in point is Ms Kapisa Agnes from Katakwi District who continues to receive Shs 1,569,750 per month and yet her expected gross is Shs 359,757. Refer to annex 5. Such cases have caused shortage in the budget, resulting in non-payment of other officers and, therefore, leading to false supplementary budgets to bridge the gap. 

For underpayment, there are 177 sampled cases identified. A case in point is that of Mr Aluma Loius, a teacher of Muni Girls SS in Arua District, where his salary has been cut for the last two years. Annex 6 shows that. Underpayments result from promotions not captured in the system or where an officer is transferred to an institution of a lower grade. This commonly affects teachers. Refer to annex 1. 

Deletion from the payroll

The committee noted that under normal circumstances, deletion from the payroll is authorised with reason, for instance upon death, transfer or retirement. However, there are cases that are poorly justified as the committee found out in some bizarre cases of sexual harassment commonly affecting female teachers and nurses, and some genuine cases not being resolved. A one Ms Miriam Sabiti, a teacher from Jupumwoco Primary School in Zombo District, is one such case. Her name disappeared from the payroll for 82 months now and she has never been paid. Refer to annex 7. Another case is that of Ms Kongo Proscovia, a teacher from St Mary’s Girls SS in Soroti District. Her name was deleted from the payroll and she has not been paid for 34 months, an amount totalling to Shs 17.5 million. Refer to annex 8. 

Unknown names

The committee established cases where a payroll of a given ministry, department and local government contains strange names with payments not known to the accounting officers. A case in point is Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital with 115 ghost cases. As explained in annex 9a, Buyende District has 12 such cases and Agago District has five cases. These unknown cases are not quickly corrected, causing a shortfall of the institutional and national budget.

Non-payment of salary arrears 

The committee found out that whereas the Ministry of Public Service claims that accounting officers do not submit arrears for clearance, these are rare cases and in most cases, submissions are made but arrears are never paid. In addition, there is a problem of lack of funds to clear the arrears, hence unnecessary domestic arrears. The accumulation of salary arrears has been mainly due to:
a) 	recruitment of officers not budgeted for or recruitment beyond the ceiling provided; 
b) 	deletion of names from the payroll intentionally or in error; c) underpayment of some officers; 
d) 	Non submission or late submission of arrears accrued; 
e) 	salary arrears that are not budgeted for but only paid as and when Ministry of Finance finds some money.

A specific case to highlight is that of Ms Umikuru Constance Jane, a nursing officer in Zombo District, who missed her salary for eight months from November 2010 to June 2011, amounting to Shs 4.3 million. The Ministry of Finance last cleared salary arrears of Shs 10 billion in the financial year 2009/2010. Since then, a total of Shs 33 billion has accumulated in salary arrears. This was revealed by the Ministry of Public Service. The committee, however, got an assurance from the Secretary to the Treasury that they now have enough funds to clear all the outstanding arrears before the end of June 2014, as long as they are verified and ascertained.

Cumulative salary shortfalls 

As at February 2014, 20 institutions, districts and municipal councils had cumulative salary shortfalls totalling to Shs 1,084,745,961. This was due to insufficient balance. In the case of Buliisa, Tororo Municipal Council, Hoima Municipal Council and Busia Municipal Council, the budget for salaries was not authorised. In another scenario, 17 agencies and district local governments were not paid November 2013 salaries to the tune of Shs 552,009,748 due to insufficient funds. Annex 11 provides details.

Double deduction

The committee saw cases where the teacher has more than four codes for deductions. These deductions include statutory deductions like NSSF, PAYE, UNATU subscription and loans. However, there are cases of deductions which are not explained and at the end of the day the teacher is confused as to which monies have been deducted. 

Poor feedback and information flow

The committee noted that there is lack of feedback from the Ministry of Public Service to the submitting ministries, departments and local governments. In case submissions contained any error, Ministry of Public Service officials and staff of the Computer Service Centre in the Ministry of Finance simply put them aside. The submitting entity will never know what happened until a follow-up is made. This, in effect, escalates the accumulation of arrears.

Introduction of the integrated personnel and payroll system

The committee was informed that the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System is an automated human resource management information system, which Government is implementing with the aim of strengthening accountability, integrity and clear responsibility among public servants. Under the IPPS, the entire government payroll is supposed to be managed centrally at the Ministry of Finance but through semi-autonomous automated decentralised IPPS sites. The Ministry of Finance told us how they have moved in rolling out this payroll system. Under 5.1, they gave us the benefits of the IPPS because they are changing from the legacy system to the IPPS.

On page 16, we still give you some challenges of this new good system that is going to be introduced. The introduction of the IPPS does not mean that the system is without challenges. All the challenges experienced under the Legacy Payroll System such as non-payment of salary, underpayment, erroneous deduction and network challenges, among others, can as well be experienced under the IPPS if not carefully monitored. The following are some of the challenges:

Migration from the legacy payroll to IPPS 

The committee was informed that the migration process started in April 2011. However, whereas the central payroll records at the Ministry of Public Service have been migrated to the IPPS, - with the exception of 4,494 records at the end of February 2014 - only 13 sites have so far been developed countrywide posing a challenge of accessibility. 

On top of that, 4,494 records were not yet migrated to the IPPS by February. This means that Shs 4,359,583,734 was held up in salary arrears at the end of February 2014. Another 24,614 officers were not paid because their transactions finalised after the payroll update deadline, totalling to Shs 6,258,602,557. The details are given below. In ministries, departments, district local governments and municipal councils, there were 458 officers affected, totalling to an amount of Shs 353 million. We have 23,817 teachers who were affected, totalling to an amount of Shs 5,585,952,540. We also have traditional workers, and this includes agricultural extension workers, police and health workers; there were 339 workers who were affected. The grand total in this table is Shs 6.2 billion.

Data migration errors continue to manifest leading to non-payment of some public officers, underpayment, anomalies in payroll details, delayed payments, among others. The committee established that non-migration of the above records was due to the fact that updated excel sheets generated by the Ministry of Finance were not returned to the Treasury in time. This is because the forms had not been signed by all the respective employees under the given vote and hence, they were neither validated nor were salaries effected. 

In some cases, signed returns were fewer than the number on the payroll. During the month of March 2014, for example, out of 1,847 payroll records under Bushenyi, only 1,647 records were fully signed. Out of 4,000 payroll records under Wakiso District, a mere 2,023 records were fully signed. I need to let you know that Bushenyi and Wakiso are in the pilot phase. The IPPS has been rolled out in these districts.

Accounting officers attributed the delay by individual public officers to sign off the excel sheets to the fact that the officers, especially teachers and health workers, were widely scattered. However, the Uganda Police and Uganda Prisons, which fall in the same category with bigger and scattered numbers, have already submitted information for March. It is not therefore certain whether the excel sheets will be signed by all the individuals therein or there will be gaps, indicating the possibility of the presence of unknown persons or ghosts on the payroll.

The committee observed that the accounting officers, especially the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs), as was the case of Mpigi District, were neither involved nor trained in IPPS techniques and yet they are expected to supervise, report and be accountable for the human resource payroll. The Chief Administrative Officer in the case of Mpigi did not know what the person manning the system was doing. This compromises the CAO’s role of supervision, verification and approval. The committee noted that personnel officers with such absolute powers may be tempted to engage in malpractice.

Generally, the local governments have limited capacity to do the human resource management function. Out of 217 human resource officers’ positions in local government, only 40 were filled as at the end of February 2014. Besides, many accounting officers both at the ministry and district local government levels are in acting positions for periods far beyond the statutory requirement. This affects the efficient implementation of the IPPS.

The committee also noted that there is poor internet network in remote local governments, affecting electronic transfer of information. 

The committee observed that some local government workers receive payslips without money on their accounts. In other cases, there are no payslips and thus there is lack of information as to whether payments have been effected and how much money was remitted. The committee, however, found out during the investigation that the Ministry of Finance has made provision in local government releases of funds for printing of salary payslips. The committee could not ascertain whether these funds have been put to their intended purpose by the local governments.

The Ministry of Public Service’s capacity

The committee noticed that the Ministry of Public Service is overwhelmed with salary and payroll management issues as is reflected in the challenges above. The Ministry of Public Service is also responsible for deducting subscription fees for UNATU from teachers and public servants’ loans due to commercial institutions. This has increased the workload of the ministry and the staff have on many occasions complained of backlog and heavy workload in processing salaries and the payroll. In one case, the ministry had to contract the services of Payment Solutions Uganda to manage the payment deductions for loans. 

During the investigation, the committee received complaints related to pension’s management. The Ministry of Public Service could not explain how the IPPS is interlinked to the pension payroll. The committee was also informed that a consultancy firm owned by Fagil Mandy is now responsible for processing pension benefits at a fee of Shs 500,000. Once the fee is paid, processing of one’s pension can be done and payment is effected instantly or in two days.

The above scenario confirms that the Ministry of Public Service is overwhelmed with the function of their mandate. That is why they have resorted to outsourcing services such as in the case of Payment Solutions Uganda.

Recommendations

1. 	It is envisaged that the decentralisation of the payroll will be a great solution to the salary and payroll anomalies. The Ministry of Finance should fast track the decentralisation of the payroll sites of all ministries, departments and local governments in Uganda, in any case not later than 30 June 2014. However, there is need for a regulatory framework for mentoring the technical personnel and monitoring the IPPS to ensure efficient implementation of the system. The framework should clearly spell out the role of the central government and ministry departments in supervising the IPPS implementation.

2. 	The Ministry of Finance should involve the accounting officers in all aspects of IPPS. As such, accounting officers should be held liable for any shortcomings in the system where they are responsible. Punitive measures should be documented in Treasury Memoranda and circulars for every kind of shortcoming in the management of the system for purposes of correcting the errant officers. 

3. 	Accounting officers and other officers in the management of the payroll should be trained and empowered to manage the IPPS sites. The finance officers and human resource officers should also be trained in IPPS operations and should all be able to work together with accounting officers. 

4. 	All the 217 human resource/personnel officers required in the district local governments should be recruited and immediately trained to enable the take-off of the project and ensure IPPS effectiveness. 

5. 	Information regarding unpaid arrears and the reasons thereof should be communicated to the accounting officers of the affected workers in time by the Ministry of Finance. The Shs 33 billion outstanding arrears as at December 2013 should be verified and paid immediately. This figure was given by the Ministry of Public Service.

6. 	Now that the bulk of salary and payroll management has been taken over from the Ministry of Public Service by the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Public Service should restructure and reorganise in order to concentrate on policy issues.

7. 	The IPPS should be interlinked with the pension payroll so that an employee is automatically switched off from the IPPS to the pension payroll at the time of retirement. In the same vein, the Ministry of Public Service should upgrade the IPPS to integrate the statutory and other deduction functions currently being carried out by Payment Solutions Uganda.

8. 	Money should be recovered from public officers who have been over paid. 

9. 	Cases of erroneous deletion of public officers should be corrected and all outstanding arrears should be verified and paid immediately.

10. 	Monies lost in form of unknown payments as in Mbarara Referral Hospital, Buyende District, Agago District and other districts should be recovered immediately and the responsible officers be held accountable. 

11. 	The Ministry of Finance should pay salaries by the 28th day of every month and ensure access to the payroll of all public officers within 30 days of appointment as per the statutory requirements.

12. 	The complaints desk established in the Ministry of Public Service should be rolled out to all IPPS sites to enable timely resolution of complaints.

13. 	There should be a regular review of salaries and payroll management in order to strengthen the implementation of the IPPS. This could be a function taken up by the salaries commission once established. Government should therefore expedite the establishment of the salaries commission.

In conclusion, the salary and national payroll has proved to be complex and dynamic and its management requires a lot of concerted effort, vigilance and commitment. The committee established loopholes with each of the stakeholders at various degrees. These loopholes need to be addressed if the IPPS is to succeed. The decentralisation of the IPPS is, therefore, envisaged to improve the current challenges being faced.

However, there is need for a regulatory framework for mentoring the technical personnel and monitoring the IPPS to ensure efficient implementation of the system. The framework should clearly spell out the role of the central government and ministries and departments in supervising the IPPS implementation. I want to thank my colleagues, members of my committee. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records show that the Chair is extremely impressed by the quality, depth and width of this report and the way they have covered this subject. (Applause) Congratulations, committee chair and members who made this possible. This is the quality of work we need for this House to get into proper discussions of matters before them. Thank you very much; I am really impressed. 

Honourable members, the motion is for adoption, so I now propose the question for your debate. We will have to limit our time because the issues are fairly clear and the recommendations are very clear. We should guide the issues in that manner and not bring in extraneous matters to disrupt the flow of this very systematic presentation of this report. Please, let us not dilute it by bringing in debate that will make this issue look like it is not important. 

5.11
MR DEUSDEDIT OGWAL (UPC, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee and the chairperson for the report they have given. 

I would like to make two general comments. One, the report we have received I think points to some significant facts. In this country, there is a general tendency for all the institutions to be at the verge of collapse. The Ministry of Public Service is nearly collapsing; we have just seen the Institution of Public Health at Makerere is nearly collapsing; we have seen Makerere University visiting lecturers are not being paid. It all points to the fact that institutions are collapsing. As a parliament, I think we have to refocus and see that all these government institutions are resurrected. It is for this House to debate on how this can be done. 

Secondly, I think our problem in this country is not money. Whenever we receive a report, there is an issue of insufficient funds but I think the problem is the endemic and entrenched corruption. All the incidences, including the example the madam chairperson put forward here, tell a story of deeply entrenched corruption in all the systems. The problem is not legislation. Mr Speaker, you know how many laws this Parliament has passed regarding corruption. I think we have one problem in Uganda; policies are made and debated - we have excellent policies - but our problem is implementation. They are never implemented. 

As my colleagues are saying, either we have incompetent people who are supposed to implement these policies or because of corruption, they intentionally pretend not to know how to implement these policies. Mr Speaker, I urge Government to take these two problems seriously and see that competent and honest men of integrity are appointed in the right places. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.14
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have just a few comments to make. I thank the committee for the good work. 

Salaries have the first call on the Consolidated Fund account, so one would wonder why public servants do not get their money. The committee has identified things like delayed submission, falsification, corruption, inadequacies and lack of personnel. There is need, in my opinion, for Government to identify a competent firm to go and restructure and streamline this particular ministry. 

The other point I want to look at is pensions for local governments. Local governments have a law; they are supposed to pay their own pension. There has never been any legal framework that came to the Floor of Parliament to legalise central government to pay local government pensions. This is an issue, which we should address. 

Those are the few comments which I think the ministry and the technical officers must take note of. Unless these are clearly identified and a relevant competent technical specialised team takes over that particular institution, whatever things that are being done, - transferring money from central government to local governments – all this money is going to disappear. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.17
MS EVELYN LUUKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the quality of the report submitted by the committee. However, I need clarification from the minister. 

Currently, there is verification going on in the Ministry of Public Service. On Monday, when I was leaving my constituency, I was called to the district headquarters to go and meet officials from the ministry who are carrying out verification of the payroll. So, I am wondering under what terms this verification team is working under. I thought we would have to discuss this report first before that team goes to the districts because you cannot be the hunted and then you become the hunter. I would expect a different body to carry out this verification instead of that ministry verifying the anomalies it has committed. 

Secondly, when this matter came to the Floor of the House sometime last year, we were told there was a proposal to restructure the ministry and commission. What happened to that proposal? I think the ministry is rotten; let us have a total overhaul of the ministry so that we can know who is doing what and what is going on. It looks like we have a problem. Can we restructure so that we can have a proper system working? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.18
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to add my voice to those of my colleagues who have thanked the chairperson and the committee for this detailed report. 

Mr Speaker, when the chairperson was reading the report, I felt like shedding tears. We do not have service delivery partly because of failure to pay remuneration to the public officers. It is even more disturbing for a graduate, say a district engineer, to be paid the salary of an office messenger; that is happening in my district. This officer has been paid such an amount for almost the whole year. When he tried to bring his documents to the Ministry of Public Service, the situation worsened. 

I think the Government needs to take a firm position and hold these people accountable. At one time in this Parliament, there was a proposal which I have not seen in the committee, that we need to put in place an established body that will handle issues of payments to public officers. Hon. Jack Sabiiti talked about it but I think this needs to be entrenched in the committee’s recommendations. The Ministry of Public Service might have a workload that is beyond their capacity, so we can divide that work, like it is done in other countries; in other countries when they find such gaps, they put in place such bodies to specifically handle the remuneration, the salaries and pensions. 

Mr Speaker, outside there the pensioners are suffering. I thought that after a person has served this country for 30 years and above and they retire, it should be automatic for the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that by the date that officer retires, their gratuity is ready. However, it is so unfortunate that when you go out there, these pensioners take about five years without even getting gratuity and yet I thought gratuity is the payment that one must get immediately they retire – (Interjections) - It is not NRM Oyee; we just have to correct the situation because from what we are hearing and what is happening outside there, it is a bad story out there. Even for the teachers, it is a bad story. There are so many deductions from their accounts, which the committee has talked about. It is everywhere throughout the country –(Member timed out.)

5.22
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a good report. 

The committee has really highlighted the issues related to payments and the payroll. In the morning, we had an induction workshop with the Auditor-General and the issues that have been highlighted by the committee were highlighted by the Auditor-General in his report. I actually wanted to ask this question to the Prime Minister but he did not give me the opportunity – on the issue of arrears. 

The Auditor-General told us that the debt associated to arrears is actually running out of hand; it now stands at over Shs 1.2 trillion, which is 10 per cent of our national budget. They reported that all efforts by Government to clear the domestic debt are almost failing. He expressed fears about what Government plans to do to solve this problem. So, when the committee highlights that there is a problem of salary arrears, it just emphasizes what the Auditor-General has been saying.  So, I would like the Minister of Finance to come and allay our fears on whether Government will be able to clear the domestic arrears debt.

Secondly, the problem of civil servants accessing the payroll has become a very big problem. Whenever we get back to our people, we are always surrounded by civil servants who are working but they cannot access the payroll. What is the problem? When you report it, they will tell you it will be worked on. However, day in, day out, there will be no response. Something should be done.

I also would like to urge the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Education to work together in sorting out this problem. Recently, I went to the Ministry of Education at around 10 O’clock and I found a teacher, a lady, who had travelled from Kitgum with only transport to bring her to Kampala and go back to Kitgum. She had a young child of about one and a half years old who was crying. When they introduced me as an honourable member, the teacher approached me and said that the child was crying not because she was sick but because she was hungry. She had not given her any food because she had arrived in Kampala at 3.00 a.m. –(Member timed out.)

5.25
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The first time I heard about the word “computer” was in relation to the Ministry of Public Service and the payroll, and at that time I was still young. The issue then was that people could not access their salaries because of the computer and that there was need to computerize that system. The Ministry of Public Service has been computerizing the payroll since I was young to date; I now have grey hair but the Ministry of Public Service is still computerizing the payroll. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I think with this report, it is the right time for us to act. Like my colleague from Luuka said, maybe we need a total overhaul of that ministry for us to have something tangible. Last time the Auditor-General gave a report that there are 40,000 ghost workers but the Ministry of Public Service went ahead to again audit the Auditor-General’s report. Where do they get all that money? It seems that the Ministry of Public Service has got a lot of money at its disposal because if the Auditor-General does work within their mandate and you, from the Ministry of Public Service, insist you are going back to the field to audit – This is the time for us to do a total overhaul of the ministry by making changes that are feasible and tangible such that these public servants stop suffering.

There is the Ministry of Public Service, there is the Ministry of Finance and when it comes to teachers, there is the Ministry of Education and Sports; which ministry is really responsible for these issues? Because of that confusion of responsibilities, every ministry is denying. The Ministry of Finance says it is the Ministry of Public Service; the Ministry of Public Service says it is the Ministry of Finance that is delaying; the Ministry of Education will say it is the Ministry of Public Service that is responsible. So, we need to come out clearly and say which ministry is responsible to ensure that the civil servants get their salaries. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.27
MR EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for a thorough report. 

I would like to join my colleagues to decry the situation of our public servants. First, I would like to propose that we have a deadline because the complaints that we have today are the very complaints that we received in the Eighth Parliament, and the minister always has an explanation here to do with the IPPS. As my colleague has said, it seems that when the work was being done manually, there was better performance than when we have the modern computers. The impression I get is that the people handling the computers indeed are not properly trained, and this is reflected in her report. I think it is important that we quickly train and also quickly recruit where we have big gaps.

Secondly, she mentioned something about Mbarara Hospital. There is demoralisation among the staff and there is always a quiet sit-down strike because of these irregularities in their payments. Although we are talking about ghosts, I think they are intentionally created. Every year we hear about ghosts being deleted and in the same year, more ghosts are born. So, there must be a deliberate effort to find out about the birth or the genesis of these ghosts that never die because they keep getting reborn. 

I would like to propose that we quickly recruit, retrain and set up a whistle-blowing mechanism at the Ministry of Public Service. There is a lot that the staff know but they cannot tell anybody because they fear losing their jobs. 

Thirdly, as we talk, if you asked the minister, they will heap the blame on the Ministry of Finance. The last time I talked to hon. Ssezi Mbaguta, she washed her hands and heaped the blame on the Ministry of Finance. This blame game cannot go on. We need our people to perform in the field. As long as they do not get their money on time and as long as they are denied their rights, we surely cannot have performance in the public service. 

Mr Speaker, I would like that we quickly put a deadline and have all these recommendations that the committee has put across actualised as soon as possible. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.31
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tororo appears as No. 5 on the list of the problem districts; out of 512 people, only 104 have been paid and 408 remain standing. Two weeks ago, it was alleged that nine people lost their lives in one health centre IV called Mulanda because of the uncooperative working attitude of the health workers there. A mother died and about seven children died because the health workers have not been paid. 

The head teacher of my own village primary school, Mr Luutulu Peter, sent me a text, which I have here, that he has not been paid for 18 months. He says, “Honourable, I feel like leaving”-(Interjection) - personal primary school? Hon. Minister, you should not take this lightly. You are getting your salary and are happy when you do, but we are talking about people who are suffering and serving this country even better than us. You are pocketing there and saying “personal” and I feel insulted. We are talking about people who cannot come and speak here, people who are suffering, people who have not been paid for long and we have a minister here showing us that he has had a little good lunch and – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have not heard any comment on record on anything. What are you talking about? (Laughter)

MR OBOTH: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the payroll, I think we should find an appropriate name for it; it is no longer a payroll. It should be something else. 

Overhauling the system may not work. What is the attitude of our people? People want to get money. People are corrupt and this is the truth. When you go to these people, they tell you to fill in the pay change forms and they will need money. A teacher who is suffering or a health worker who is suffering needs to pay money. I have gone through this. I have gone to the Ministry of Public Service myself. The only time that the 104 were paid is maybe because I intervened through hon. Fred Omach. In his good wisdom, he intervened and the Secretary to the Treasury wrote a letter. Thank you for having such a good heart. Must we all –(Member timed out.) 

5.34
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chair for that extensive report, which really highlighted most of the issues that our people face down there. 

One of the issues is that the people in the Ministry of Public Service, especially the desk officers who handle the issues we are talking about - the salary, the payroll – and those in the Ministry of Finance are not properly supervised. That is the first point that I want to make very clear here to the people that should supervise them. A case in point is Kalungu District. The names on the payroll were properly listed and sent to the Ministry of Public Service. When that list got there, a desk officer somewhere deleted some of the names and kept them somewhere else. He then got an agent in the districts of Kalungu and Bukomansimbi who looked for these people whose names were kept somewhere and asked them to pay money so that their names are reinstated. 

There is the desk that has been talked about on page 21 under recommendation No. 12. If that desk was properly working - I know that what is happening is that the complaints desk that is being mentioned is manned by very small men or women who cannot get these big officers who are handling the payroll in the ministry to answer queries. If a deputy minister, for example, is in charge of the complaints desk then these people would really be answerable. However, if you get somebody who is junior and you make him sit on the complaints desk, he cannot do anything. This is exactly what is happening. These people get agents there and they start looking for those people whose names appear on those lists that they have kept behind so that they pay money to have their names put back on the payroll. (Member timed out.)

5.37
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I do not intend to lament about this process because I tasted it myself. While in my constituency, a lady approached me and offered that we should fight this government and I wondered where a woman would get these guts. I went to the Ministry of Public Service as a Member of Parliament and I followed up. They can toss you until you give up even if you are a Member of Parliament. So, I decided to reduce my complaints to writing and to have a file on this, and I want to concentrate on the way forward. 

Mr Speaker, as a member of the Public Accounts Committee, I discovered a puzzle; when you go to Ministry of Education, for example, the Auditor-General can raise an audit issue and say Shs 2 billion was paid to ghosts or to people who were not actually doing any work. When you ask the Ministry of Education, they will tell you no, it is the work of the Chief Administrative Officers (CAOs) to make pay change reports and then you are at a loss. 

When you read the Auditor-General’s report for 2012/13, it shows that Shs 1 billion was paid out to ghost people yet there are those who have not received their pay. So, the question is: how do they first disappear from the payroll? These people that we are talking about were once on the payroll but they disappeared and are now in the hands of the Fagil Mandys of this world, to whom we have heard you have to pay Shs 500,000 in order for them to help you expedite the process.

Mr Speaker, I have heard in the report that again we shifted from Ministry of Public Service to Ministry of Finance. They also have no capacity. We have a decentralised system of government; we would rather decentralise this payment system so that I can actually walk into the office of the CAO in my district and ask, “Why are you not paying these people?” I would rather do that other than going to the Ministry of Public Service and talking to another young boy or young girl. 

I am about to believe that actually, once these ghost people are in the system, maybe they benefit these people paying. That is why you see we are oscillating from Ministry of Public Service to the Ministry of Finance. We should decentralise this payroll system so that the responsible officers in the district are actually held accountable for these payments because they would know whom they are paying. If the Auditor-General’s report says Shs 1 billion was paid out to people who actually left the service, then the question would be, “Who was responsible for detecting this?” We actually see more and more coming up. Actually, this Shs 1 billion is only for local government but there is also the central government. 

Mr Speaker, in my honest opinion, without decentralising this payroll system, it is going to become very expensive for one to move from Kotido or Abim to come to the Ministry of Public Service and now to the Ministry of Finance. One moves from Kasese to come to Ministry of Finance to actually deal with the same issue. Since it is –(Member timed out.)

5.40
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I want to appreciate this report, the quality and specificity with which it has been presented – (Interjections) - of course, a woman from West Nile. 

Mr Speaker, this report points to criminality. There are people who should actually be hanged; there are people who should have been on the firing squad – (Interjections) - yes, because when you see the state in which a police officer has gone without salary for four months; when you see a primary school teacher whose child has failed to sit promotional exams because he or she has not been paid salary; when you see an old man begging on the streets of Kampala for transport to go back because his pension has not been remitted on his account; you will feel the pain because some of these people have actually committed suicide in Kampala here.

So while I speak on this report, I am at pains because I have hosted elderly people in my home, I have helped some with transport because some individuals in the Ministry of Public Service are conniving with district staff to solicit money from these people. I just want to give one case –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, for the record, you talked of hanging or shooting them by firing squad. Would you like to advise on the law that would help us to do this?

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, I was just expressing my pain. I know that our laws do not allow hanging people. But at most, I would be happy if they are prosecuted and given the utmost punishment because they have made people to die and, therefore, they deserve the same fate.

Mr Speaker, I had a case that happened in Arua where one personnel officer connived with a teacher – actually not conniving but used the teacher’s ignorance to inflate his salary and at the end of the month, this teacher was bringing the excess money to this personnel officer and this happened for almost one year. The personnel officer was claiming that he was the one going to remit the money back to Ministry of Finance. In the end, when this teacher got tired, the teacher took this personnel officer to the IGG and the case is being handled. This attests to the case Mr Patrick Bagoole is undergoing and there are many of them. I am happy that the committee has brought this up. 

I just want to associate myself with the recommendation of decentralising the payroll management system - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that we are going to reduce the time to two minutes each now to accommodate the Members who want to speak at this time. The hon. Member for Obongi will not speak since you have just entered. (Laughter) Two minutes.

5.44
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Mr Speaker, thank you. The issue of salary delay and non-remittance really affects our voters, for example, the teachers who take the effect back to the children and the parents; the health workers take their annoyance to the patients and this happens. 

I want clarification from the Minister for Public Service on the issue of pay slips. Those days when I was still an active teacher, we used to sign the pay slips but unfortunately these days, there are no pay slips and people do not know what they are getting. Some teachers go to banks and they get Shs 4,000. Honestly, how does this person survive? 

I was recently in my constituency and the headmasters have been tasked to come out with lists because they are the ones going to be in charge of entering the data. Some headmasters do not even know computer, do not have internet services in the area that they are operating in down there in the village but they are being told to come up with a staff list showing when they were born and all this. But every year, we are doing verification. So, I am just wondering why we task these people to do this lot of work and yet you are not giving any allowance to do this, and they are busy moving up and down looking for computers to do the work and there is no payment or allowance for these poor head teachers.

I also wanted to think that the issue of loans has ever come to our notice that teachers’ salaries are being taken for loans that they have not applied for, and yet somebody is taking this money and the poor teachers have nowhere to get information. So, when they bump into you as a Member of Parliament, they need answers and yet we do not have the answers. 

So, at the end of the day, there is a lot of corruption in the Ministry of Public Service and the teachers are being deceived. I heard that one teacher from Manafwa District was called by somebody who said she should give something if they had to put her arrears into the account. She was asked to give some money – (Member timed out_)

5.46
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of salary payment has become a security matter and I want the government to take it seriously because even if some of us delay to get our money for five days, you see people running around and you cannot concentrate in Parliament. How about those ones who spend months and years without getting their salary? We need to get serious.

I am giving a way forward. We should really closely examine the kind of staff that we have in the Ministry of Public Service. Some of them probably need mental rehabilitation. We need to find out how many years the staff have spent working on the payroll and if they cannot measure up, can’t they be transferred? Can’t we bring fresh blood to handle the affairs of the nation? We need this done seriously.

Mr Speaker, some time back - and I do not remember the exact year when payroll management was centralised. The reasons given were that districts were failing to manage the payroll; there were a lot of ghosts and also the staff were not getting their salaries in time but I think that centralisation has even worsened the matter. The amount of money that Government is losing is more than even that which was lost during the time when payroll management was at the district. So, I thank the committee for the recommendation that they have given; at least let them decentralise management of the payroll again.

And then there are some as to why some names disappear from the payroll; it is because of misspelling. A lot of teachers in my district, including health workers – you find someone who is called “Adong” is written as “Adongo” and then – (Member timed out_)

5.49
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I do not know if you are now evaluating Government performance because when we look into Government and we find that there are gaps, it means that Government is not performing to the expectation of the people and the people holding that performance in trust in the Ministry of Public Service are ministers. So, in 2007 Government came to Parliament and said that if we gave it Shs 200 billion, it would do away with the issue of public service pension. Todate, they need even more money than what we gave them last time. 

Now, the people who were supervising the pension –I do not want to be misunderstood - all these ministers should have been dismissed because they failed in their duty to supervise. And if I was a minister there, I would have resigned. Moreover, if we had the Minister of Ethics who was serious about his job, he should have taken it up with them. But we are coming here to lament and yet we are Members of Parliament.

Secondly, there was a project called Public Service Reform Programme; it was supposed to do some work but to-date we do not know what they are doing. In 2011/2012, erroneously or through connivance, Public Service budgeted that public servants would be paying NSSF amounting to Shs 44 billion. But immediately that money was appropriated, it was swindled. So is there any public service ministry which is functioning? How does the President evaluate performance of ministers and permanent secretaries? Why should these problems be there continuously - (Member timed out_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You missed the information from Bufumbira North.

5.51
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for the comprehensive report. But just to add on the five cases that you have, I will be able to provide to this House more cases that have suffered - especially teachers and health workers –the anomalies because I know they are more than five. So it is important that they are also included.

Mr Speaker, LC III chairpersons in my district have not received salary for the last six months and others even longer. Others, like the LCIII chairperson of Patongo Town Council receives salary for a parish chief and that has happened for the last six months or more. So actually these anomalies are very common and it makes people to lose guts of working. I wonder whether the people who work in the Ministry of Public Service also experience this kind of challenges; if they do, that would have woken them up to do some work.

I also wish to comment on the matter of ex-civil servants. It is appalling that when you move around the ministries of Public Service and Education, you will see a number of old people moving up and down from one office to another looking for ways they can be assisted to access their retirement benefits. I am glad that the Bill to liberalise the pension sector is coming on board. My wish is that it is expedited – (Member timed out_)

5.53
MR DEO KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee chairperson and Members for the good work they have done in writing this report. This government employs about 380,000 workers and I remember that in the Seventh Parliament the Minister of Public Service presented a request of about Shs 247 billion to clear all the arrears; the following year, the same person presented another request asking for more money. But all this money has since disappeared.

Mr Speaker, I have a feeling that either this government does not have the money and is only using tricks to dodge around by paying half salaries and then changing people from the payroll – So we also need to verify this. 

Mr Speaker, because of the magnitude of this problem, I would propose that we decentralise the payroll system so that it goes to the district level because each Member of Parliament here knows all the public servants. Secondly, I also propose that the salaries of the minister and all his technocrats concerned with the issue of payroll be suspended until such a time that they experience the pinch and get to understand that everybody needs to be paid on time –(Member timed out_)

5.55
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson for this report. The issue of the payroll, salaries and pension of workers in this country is becoming a nightmare. I have heard of head teachers, primary school teachers and health workers who have gone for more than one year without salaries! There are pensioners who have even died without getting their pension and for the case of gratuity the widows and orphans are there disturbing us, in our constituencies.

This makes me imagine that someone somewhere is doing this deliberately and it is high time we went for self-evaluation, especially the head of government; he should do self-evaluation. As a human being and a Christian and a Ugandan who loves his people, self-evaluation is necessary because all other people are working under him. If the head is not seeing this and yet I see my brothers from the NRM moving around talking about “sole candidate” when he is failing – because this is what he is supposed to be doing! If you are a performer, you qualify to talk about being a sole candidate or ask for another term because things are moving on well. But if people who have served this country diligently for decades are starving, cannot take their children to school – there are many children who have abandoned university or secondary school because their parents have failed to clear tuition as a result of lack of salary - (Member timed out_)

5.58
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It was last month when I was in my constituency and I happened to meet one of my former primary school head teachers. He had walked for over 8o kilometres to reach Kasese town because his name was missing on the payroll. I looked at him and almost shed tears – someone walking 80 kilometres to the district headquarters and then 80 kilometres back home, it is such a big punishment!

Salary is not a privilege; it is a right. But unfortunately in this country even when Government is not the biggest employer, it still fails to manage the payroll. In the private sector, the moment one is recruited, they simply fill one form to acknowledge the terms and conditions of that organisation and at the end of the month, the salary will be on the account. You can see organisations like Save the Children, World Vision and GOAL employ a good number of people but you will never hear any complaint that their staff are not being paid. So where is the problem?

I know, the hon. Prime Minister, who is also the Leader of Government Business, the challenges he is going through in this country are nobody’s –(Member timed out_)

6.00
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA LULUME (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In human behaviours, people always respond to about two stimuli: either somebody does something due to conviction or because they fear to be reprimanded. And the two of them can work concurrently. 

We have heard from this good report that ethics are lacking in many offices in this ministry; but the report run short of naming and shaming some of these culprits who have plagued this ministry for a long time and have caused untold suffering. 

We are very glad that this report has come, but I would like to add to the recommendations that we need to name and shame the incompetent, the non-ethical and corrupt workers who fail to do what it takes to ensure that people get their salaries. I can assure you that even with the automated system, there are these kinds of human beings who will be manning them. Once they continue, people will still not be paid because of them. They need to be named and shamed. 

Secondly, we need also to interest the Inspector General of Government to investigate some of these anomalies: how they were initiated, how they have been propagated in view of weeding out the bad elements in the civil service. 

The other issue is to hold the minister politically accountable and the PS administratively accountable for the suffering and loss of salaries. And also for the insensitivity of Government – this Government should not be insensitive but some human beings within this Government are insensitive. And that reflects very badly on the governance of this country. 

Mr Speaker, if the Members of this committee are agreeable, those are some of the issues that I feel should be brought out very strongly –(Member timed out_)

6.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The ministry of finance is already decentralising the government payroll system. So, phase I, as the report has indicated was in January 2014 which, covered 27 votes. Then in phase II, which was February 2014, it was 36 votes including all referral hospitals, and two districts, Bushenyi and Wakiso. Phase III which is March 2014, covered all public universities, police, prisons and KCCA. Phase IV, which is April, 2014 covered 37 votes – one and two - and mainly local governments. And phase V, May 2014, this will cover municipal councils 20 of them and then phase VI, as the report has indicated in July 2014, we will cover all the remaining local governments. 

These are 72 in number and as far as we are concerned, going forward, salaries have been paid and there are few which are remaining which will be paid by Friday, 2 May 2014. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

6.05
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Mr Speaker, I have listened to the report with interest and I would like to explain something and what has been happening. First of all, in our set up, money is entirely controlled by the accounting officer. You might be a minister, but they do not have to refer to you before they spend money –(Laughter)– we have asked for change where at least the ministers can come in. But no money may be spent without the authority of the accounting officer. 

There was one accounting officer and you know he has been suspended. And other people have also been suspended. Secondly, you should also appreciate that many of the people who work for these investigative agencies also want money. So when they come to inspect – (Interjections) – are you suggesting that they do not?

Now, on teachers’ pay, in most of the cases, the money is sent to the CAOs. The CAOs pass it on to the headmasters and in the process a lot of money gets lost. People think it is public service which losses the money. When you people at the top ask an investigative officer to be sent there, invariably, the report is always well because they may have been compromised. Unless you use arbitrary means; but with these machines, some of us do not know how to operate them. So they will tell you that the money has been sent to everybody. 

It is true some people have suffered in this process and a solution has been found by decentralising payments. 
As and when we receive this report, we will try to follow up on those who are guilty and take action against them. But I do not want you to believe that senior people have access to that money, we do not – (Interruption)

MR KAMARA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Prime Minister for giving way. I have a brother who is a headmaster of a primary school. It was difficult for him to look at his payroll. But eventually, he saw it accidently in the office of the personnel. On his payroll, there were three headmasters getting as much money as his. He inquired from the personnel officer and the DEO but they all said they did not know. He went on to ask his teachers how that had happened - they were getting about Shs 600,000 – and they told him that they only got Shs 100,000 of that. Their salary is about Shs 300,000 - the extra Shs 300,000 – and they are given Shs 100,000 and they remit the other Shs 200,000. This money is remitted right from the personnel officer at the district back to the Ministry of Public Service. That is why your people who work in the salaries section are very rich. 

That is the information I wanted to give you, Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister.

MR KAJURA: I wish you had reported this matter in time and to me. Anyway, the system is such that accounting officers are the ones that handle the money. They are the ones who know where it goes –(Interjections)– Why are you blaming me? All this time, why haven’t you been supervising me? (Laughter) 

MR KAMARA: Mr Speaker, this matter is very serious. We have patients dying in hospitals and health centres because they lack someone to attend to them because those health workers are not being paid. This is an issue where Government must be serious in giving an answer to Ugandans. 

Last time when we were here, the Minister of Finance told us that they were requesting for a supplementary budget to pay civil servants though they had not recruited additional civil servants. So, this means this was a deliberate issue. It is something intended.

Mr Speaker, is it in order for the First Deputy Prime Minister representing Government to continue behaving as if things are normal, as if he does not have authority over those civil servants he is talking about? Are you giving us political accountability? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow is International Labour Day and that is why this debate is so critical. As we go to make big statements tomorrow about the labour force of this country – (Applause) – we should know that people are suffering. We should know, from the committee report, that there are hundreds of thousands of public servants who have not been paid for years. This matter is serious and urgent. Let us treat it like that, please.

MR KAJURA: Thank you for the advice, Mr Speaker. All I would like to say is that when we receive the report - and I hope it will be made available - we will see what can be done –(Laughter)– about implementing. Yes, we will take action. 

One of the things I have said is that some of the investigating officers that have been hired have sent in reports telling us that they were – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you very much, Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister. Honourable members, this report is as result of the statement made here by the Minister of Public Service on non-payment of salaries of public servants. This is what this committee came out with during their investigations. 

The bottom line is that this investigation came out of the statement made by the minister. It was because of the inadequacies in the minister’s statement that this House found it necessary to ask the committee to inquire more into these issues, and they have given very serious revelations about what is going on.

The stage we are at now is about taking a decision because those issues are here and they are clear. When we take this decision, how do we process it going forward to have those issues handled comprehensively? All the issues have been very well raised in this report. They have been very well presented to the House. So, how do we go forward? Do we adopt the report and task the two ministries – the people who are now in charge of the payroll situation - the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Finance? Can we adopt the report and decide on the way forward after that? Can we do that? At least, we are satisfied with the content of the report of the committee. Are we?

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can I put the question to the adoption of this report before we take a decision on how this matter will move forward? We will have a discussion on that.

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee of Public Service and Local Government on the statement by the Minister of Public Service on non-payment of salaries of public servants be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This report has recommendations; how do we move forward from now? 

6.18
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is not the first time this House is handling issues to do with workers not being paid. The Ministry of Public Service has failed this country and workers are frustrated and demotivated and giving poor services to this nation. Teachers, for example, are not teaching and health workers are not treating our people because they are not being paid. 

At the district level, we have tried to follow up salaries of public servants who have not been paid with the Ministry of Finance. I have been to Mr Kenneth Mugambe, the Head of Budget at the Ministry of Finance, several times. I have been chasing up salaries for health workers that were missing from the payroll or those that have worked for a long time without being paid and those that have been disorganised because their salaries go to other districts like Kaberamaido and so on. 

In this age of automation, in this age where data can be managed centrally and efficiently, really, we cannot let the Ministry of Public Service to manage the payroll anymore, Mr Speaker. Let us put it under Ministry of Finance and then –(Interjections) - Where else can it be?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, can this Parliament put it under finance? Let us deal with the things we can handle.

6.20
MR JOHN KAMARA (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the Minister of Finance has reported, decentralisation of the payroll is going on. When I was in my district, I even heard the CAO making announcements to this effect. However, Uganda has reached the extent where even salaries can be posted back to the central –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, can we deal with the way forward?

MR KAMARA: Yes, the way forward is that the decentralisation process can continue and the payments be made at the districts but under serious supervision. 
I thank you.

6.21
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want the Minister of Finance to inform this Parliament whether the entire payroll system has been messed up, if the accounting officers have messed it up. He was sending to you lists of payees, some of whom do not exist and some exist. You have decentralized and your duty will only be to send money to districts. Now, will that sort out this problem? I want you to tell us, will this solve the problem? 

This is because you will continue sending money to districts but there is already a mess-up of the payroll. So, I want you as the minister to really go further than that because if you just do that, you have not sorted out the problem. This committee can prevent this problem. 

6.23
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I can see the gap between the employed and the employer. We need to put these people on the same board. There are a lot of accusations - you have ghosts, you are corrupt – and we need to at least create a board, commission of inquiry, or an association. Under education we have PTA, where parents and teachers come together identify the gaps and find solutions.

In the public service, however, you can see the employer is on the one side and the employees are on another side. You have even heard the testimony of the minister, that he has no access to these people manning the salaries. Why don’t we create a commission of inquiry to find out exactly what is happening in the ministry because our people are suffering. Let us have a monitoring team to discover the challenges on each side so that we can move forward. That is my suggestion.

6.24
MR JULIUS BIGIRWA (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The House has already adopted recommendations of the committee, now we have another challenge. We all appreciate challenges associated with salary and in fact, last week I was in my constituency - we are talking about teachers, health workers and the rest of the traditional workers but even the political elders, including chairmen of LC III, are affected. Some of them have spent three months without earning salary. So, the matter is bigger than that.

As a way forward, I would propose that this House asks the Prime Minister to constitute an inter-ministerial committee, which should study the recommendations by this House and give a way forward on the mechanisms of implementing the resolutions that this House has adopted. If we are talking of centralising the policy –(Interruption)

MR BESISIRA: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to inform my brother and the entire House that Government does not know how many employees it has and it is paying. This is what came out - I am a Member of the committee. They do not know how many people they are paying. That should be the beginning point. 

MR BIGIRWA: Mr Speaker, you can really see how bad the issue is. That is why I gave my humble proposal, because we now seem to be in a mix of what to do. The Rt Hon. Prime minister has explained issues and to me, this goes back to the very debate we had with Umeme. 

The point I want to raise in particular is about the many centres we have created for this payroll. We are talking of Ministry of Public Service, the districts where DEOs and personnel officers are also kings, Ministry of Education and Ministry of Finance. That is why in my proposal I suggest that this House asks the Prime Minister as Leader of Government Business to constitute an inter-ministerial committee that will bring together all those ministries responsible for this. We can task him within a time frame, say within two weeks’ time, to come up with that committee which will report back to this House in a period of about one month on the way to implement these resolutions. These are good resolutions but the question is how to implement the resolutions.

We also must study the issue for decentralising the payroll system. We have had decentralised systems in this country which have been abused. What safeguards have you put in place to implement this? We are decentralising corruption. Thank you very much.

6.28
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a proposal, which is really going to be a very small item to deal with. However, before I get to my proposal, I think it is important for Parliament to remind itself that this is not the first time the payroll is going to be decentralised. That is where we came from - the decentralised payroll, which had thousands and hundreds of thousands of ghosts.

This Parliament over the years has passed loan upon loan for the Ministry of Public Service to change payroll management, and I think even last year we did it. So, even as I make my proposal, I just want to say that this problem is the most complex form of corruption and societal mismanagement this country has ever witnessed. I think that even if we try, the same ghosts, the same systems problem, the same corruption that has plagued the pension sector, the salary sector, is going to be replicated. 

Actually, Mr Speaker, instead of watching Ministry of Public Service alone, we are now going to watch over 2,000 entities who are going to mess themselves up. So, as we go on, as we turn to the proposal of Ministry of Finance, let us keep that in mind. Now that they have started - it is already working - people are not being paid; people are being paid on the basis of a telephone call. They call and say, “One officer” for this and this and they say, “Go, they are going to give you money” and that one goes and they give him. The other ones they tell them, “Your money has not yet come.” So, there is already a problem.

For me, before the Ministry of Public Service walks away as if we did not fund them all these years, I would like to propose something. That is why I said mine is only a very small thing; it is not the solution. I would like to propose that this House asks the Auditor-General to do a forensic audit into the payroll –(Interjections)– Already done? That was pension; I want something about the salaries and the payroll.

Maybe, let me be told if it has been done because it would be imprudent for the Ministry of Public Service to just fold their hands and we think they are clean; even where we are going, there will be the same problem. So, please, educate me if it was done and if this audit is somewhere with somebody, because I understand the work that was done was about pension, but help me. Thank you.

6.32
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of this committee. I have been listening to the debate and there is a contribution that was made regarding the establishment of a body that would manage the salary and pension schemes. I think that would be part of the lasting solutions, but in the meantime we have a situation that needs urgent attention.

The committee had recommended to the Ministry of Finance but the Ministry of Finance is saying it has started decentralising the system again. This is the point, which hon. Alaso is stressing - that is where we came from to centralising the payroll system. I think if the government thinks of establishing a body to oversee the salary and pension schemes, this country will be saved from a lot of corrupt tendencies. Thank you.

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond to the question raised by the hon. Jack Sabiiti. We are using a decentralized system. Let us take the example of a school employing 100 teachers and the accounting officer is the head teacher. He knows the teachers who are in his school, so each of them fills a form indicating what their salary scale is and the head teacher is the last to sign on that paper. He signs last, indicating that yes, these 49 teachers and me, the 50th, I know all of them and what they have put here is correct. We then send the salary in accordance with that listing. What now remains thereafter is to come and do the audit, but the salary is sent direct to that accounting officer, who is the head master. So, the decentralisation system we are using now is following that procedure -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there are a number of Members seeking clarification. You need to guide me, which one you are taking - 

MR OMACH: I will take the one from hon. Franca Akello.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving me way to ask for clarification. I want to know if this head teacher, who is going to be the accounting officer, receives the money on his account or it is sent to the school account. 

Secondly, you are also aware that the very head teacher will be able to create more ghosts – most probably, he will even use his sons and daughters as teachers. So, this will actually make matters worse. I would like to get clarification.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I know you are a very hardworking person. There are two issues here: One, the issue of missing names on the payroll and the other one is under payment. Even when names are given to you, the money sent is less than the money prescribed. So, I would like to ask you, honourable minister, after the Ministry of Public Service has sent a list of people to be paid, why does the Ministry of Finance send less money and people get paid less than the amount of money they are supposed to have got as per the salary bill for the month?

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I would like the Minister of Finance to clarify if it is the system, which is bad or it is the people who are managing it. The system could be clogged and it does not shed off inefficient people and those too old to perform. A system that does not shed off inefficient people, who are too old to perform definitely, must get clogged.

MR NZOGHU: I would like the Minister of Finance to inform this House as to how often his ministry, together with the Ministry of Public Service, does payroll validation.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable minister. I was quite convinced about decentralising the payroll. So, I would like to find out what monitoring techniques you have put in place to confirm that the particular head teacher is submitting the real names of the teachers in that particular school. How are you going to monitor and confirm? The moment you strengthen the monitoring tool, automatically that programme is the best. Thank you.

DR BAYIGGA: Mr Speaker, you have seen how this issue – the new system - is generating a lot of interest from Members of Parliament. They are the arbiters between the ministry and the people they represent - the workers. I can see a barrage of questions, which have been put to the Minister for Finance and he may not have comprehensive answers maybe.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for the Minister of Finance to prepare a document, which will help educate this Parliament and the rest of the people about how this system is going to work - how it is going to answer many of the queries that are under question today?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is a procedural point. Would you like to handle a procedural point? (Laughter)

Honourable members, arising from the difficulties we have had with the pension systems, I think there has recently been established the Uganda Retirement Benefits Regulatory Authority. Actually, the interim chief executive officer was in my office today to explain to me why it is very important for the Retirement Benefits Sector Liberalisation Bill, 2011 to be discussed by this House and passed with modifications that the House may deem necessary.
 
The other ongoing process is the registration of citizens; it is hoped that when this is done, all the individuals who are registered will have specific numbers. It might, therefore, be difficult for somebody to use another person’s number or a non-existent number if the system captures a person’s name and number. And, therefore, this could be a solution to this kind of thing. So there are process going on and which could provide some kind of solution to this. 

Now, in line with what has been proposed to deal with the retirement benefits regulatory system, wouldn’t it also be something to think about in line with what has been proposed by the Member from Rukiga – that there should be some kind of independent authority to handle these processes. The way these things are being handled, it is all the time going left or right and never following the central rule which benefits everybody. So we might have to start thinking creatively on how we are going to deal with this. This is because it is not the first time we are debating this issue. But each time either we get it wrong or the people who manage it find a system of managing it to disadvantage everybody else. I think we should think creatively about it. Now, what process of creative thinking can we engage in to enable this House come to some reasonable proposals about the way forward?

6.41
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is not the first time, second or third time this House has debated this problem. I think it is high time we put our feet down and said, “Enough is enough.” We know the people who are concerned with the processes and putting out the information regarding the civil servants and their pay and when they are supposed to be paid. Isn’t it time for us to stop these people and maybe suggest that we hire another group to do this work on a temporary basis while these ones step aside and feel how it hurts to go six to 10 months working without a salary? Even the minister himself – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proposal you are making is that there should be a cut-off point where we should create a new system with new people, and we give them a period of time to deal with this situation comprehensively? I think that is what you are proposing; do not put it into many words because will lose the core proposal.

6.43
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will support your argument by giving a simple example – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Speaker does not argue. (Laughter)

MR KAKOOZA: Okay, let me address the House. I faced the same problem when I had “ghost” health centres all-over the country. I asked the technocrats to give me the inventory but that inventory was not in tandem with an independent research which had been carried out. What I did was to write to each to all MPs to give me names of the health centres they had in their constituencies. When they submitted the data, it was the accurate figure that the independent research had carried out. But the people in the Ministry of Health had given me a different figure. So I support the proposal that we get an independent entity to deal with that and it will take just few months for us to get accurate figures.

6.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): I thought hon. Kakooza was going to propose that since we have a crisis, this House should also be part of the solution; that we should be given a task to go and do roll call – we know people who work in our constituencies and we know those who are not getting their salaries. We could call all the workers in our constituencies to report to us with papers and those who are not earning salary. Then we can bring those papers to the minister concerned. I believe that can take a week but we shall have had accurate information. Then thereafter we shall need to overhaul the public service ministry. Most of the people who have been involved all these years should be sent back home and new people employed to start a new system. Thank you.

MR FRED OMACH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 21st of March, the PS/ST wrote to all accounting officers to give information on people who have got arrears but we have only received feedback from 21 accounting officers – indicating the people with arrears. And this is even after giving another reminder that they send this information so that these things are confirmed, including the Auditor-General and the Ministry of Public Service to ensure that they validate this so that we can pay the outstanding arrears. So these efforts are already being made and we still expect the rest of the accounting officers to also send this information so that we pay the remaining people.

But so far, the decentralised payment system is working well going forward, save for these that are remaining behind, that have not been validated by the Ministry of Public Service and the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we possibly task a few Members here to go and do some minimum research and then come back to the House with something on this? This is because we know what the problem is; we cannot comprehensively decide on how we are going to get where we want to be. So can I ask the different whips to identify Members to be put – I do not know what number is appropriate. Five would be okay, I think. 

The different whips can supply these names by Tuesday and then we shall announce on Tuesday and the period given for them to come back to the House. But it will not be too much time because it is just for the purpose of processing what has happened today and what happened yesterday. So there will be no need for benchmarking and things like that. (Laughter) It will only be some internal consultations; phone calls and then you come back in a few days just to guide this debate so that we can conclude comprehensively. Would that be a proper way to do it? 
So we have agreed that a team of about five Members should sit down together, make phone calls to a few people and then come back – and of course the committee chairperson who brought this report would be ex-officio to this team to keep tabs on the advice based on what they have found. Would this be appropriate? This is because we need to find a really good way to finalise this issue because it is a big problem; we all face these problems. Do not think that the Speaker sitting here does not face them; we all face these challenges each time we go back to our areas of operation. So this would be a good way to process this so that we see how to bring this matter to a conclusion. 

Thank you, honourable members. Can we stop here for now? Tomorrow is the International Labour Day; the main celebrations will be in Ntungamo and many of you would like to travel this evening and stay around there and join the national celebrations in Ntungamo. It is now coming to 7 O’clock; we will not be able to do any other business. 

 (The House rose at 6.50 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 6 May 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 
