Tuesday, 9 April 2013 

Parliament met at 3.03 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Before we begin, please join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Kiira College Butiki in the great land of Busoga represented by hon. Migereko and hon. Nabirye. You are welcome. (Applause)

Secondly, about one and a half months ago, I had indicated that we shall have a meeting relating to gratuity. I would like to inform you that we shall have that meeting next Monday at 10 O’clock here in the Conference Hall. So, I am giving you advance notice that we shall have that meeting on Monday, 15th.

We have some sad news. We have received the news of the death of Brig. Patrick Kankiriho, who was aged 54. He died yesterday at Nakasero Hospital. He has been a senior officer with a distinguished career. He served since 1982 in the liberation struggle of the NRM/NRA. He fought against the ADF in Western Uganda. He was a commander at brigade level in Northern Uganda during the fight against the LRA. He was a Third Division commander based in Moroto and made a significant contribution to the disarmament of the Karimojong warriors. At the time of his demise, he was a Second Division commander based in Mbarara. I will invite you to stand for a one minute of silence in his memory.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Funeral arrangements will be announced later. I also want to apologise for the breakdown in the internet services here. We have had some difficulties from before Easter up to now but we are doing our best to rectify them so that you can go back to the dotcom era.

I also want to say something about certain utterances made during the weekend, and these relate to what transpired here last week concerning the questions for oral answer. I want to really remind Members to read the Rules of Procedures and familiarise yourselves with them. This is because under rule 42(7), there is no debate on a question. So, please, address yourselves to rule 42(7).

I also want to remind you that under rule 43, a supplementary question arises from the following terms: It arises out of an answer given from the original question. Its purpose is to further elucidate on any matter of fact regarding the answer given. You should not introduce new matters not included in the answer to the original question. All these rules apply to the supplementary.

It was against our Rules of Procedure for hon. Nambooze and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi to address a press conference here and give false information about what transpired in the House on that day. Their interview was published in the Sunday Monitor of the 7th April on page 3 under the heading, “MPs criticise the Speaker for suffocating them.” But hon. Nambooze asked her question, asked a supplementary and all the other Members who asked questions were treated in the same way. 

No Member is superior to another in this House, honourable members. The rules that apply to Member No.1 also apply to Member No.10. So, I advise Members to maintain the dignity of this House and not give false information about the proceedings of this House. I advise that if you have issues, you bring them up in a formal manner, but leaving the House to go and address a press conference, go to radio stations for the whole weekend is not right. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, I want to amend the Order Paper to permit the laying of a supplementary request. I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance is here. They are not here.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.11
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES (Mr Odonga Otto): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the government assurances made on the Floor of this House from June to December 2012, Volume III.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The report is sent to the committee for perusal.

Honourable members, I had forgotten but during the weekend we lost a very powerful woman, the late Prime Minister of Great Britain, Mrs Margaret Thatcher. I pray her soul rests in eternal peace. Let us stand in honour of Margaret Thatcher.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I think there was a small matter from hon. Wamakuyu - he has an emergency – and hon. Ssewungu.

3.11
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, honourable members and colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance. You may have watched on TV that last week on Friday mudslides befell part of Bulambuli in the subcounty of Namisuni and they cleared three villages.

Madam Speaker, this issue has been going on for a long time and we have correspondences. First, the district leadership met the Committee on Presidential Affairs last year on October 31st together with the Minister for Disaster Preparedness. He gave us assurance that the matter has been discussed in Cabinet and the issue of relocation was going to be handled, but up to yesterday we had not got any feedback. 

We have signs, not only in Bulambuli but the entire Elgon region; we have heavy rains. I read in Sunday Monitor that Government said they are relocating 500 people from Mt Elgon; but where are they going? We do not have a plan for that. We got correspondences; there was a request for supplementary by the OPM from Ministry of Finance for Shs 24 billion. There was a letter from the PS, Office of the Prime Minister, to Ministry of Lands to look for land to relocate these people but up to now we have not got any feedback. 

Madam Speaker, I scanned through the first schedule of the supplementary which was tabled but I do not see any vote for that. So, I want Government to tell us what plans they have for the people of Elgon. What can we do now because we are stuck? My request to the OPM is to avail those people with relief items because now they are confined in two health centres, Namisuni and Gamatimbei.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Prime Minister wants to advise us on how to assist Bulambuli.

3.14
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, this is a very common problem. Personally, I led a Cabinet committee to the area, came back and made a report to Cabinet. As the speaker was saying, the matter has gone very far; the Cabinet has even passed some Shs 34 billion to handle this matter. So, Government is fully aware and efforts are being made, much as it may not be in the paper every day. Government is doing everything to see that such things do not happen again in that area.

That is what I could say. We are not enjoying what is happening in Bugisu but if people think we are enjoying, that is their mistake. We are very serious and all efforts will be made.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the distinguished strangers gallery, we have MPs from the National Assembly of Zambia and members of staff. We have hon. Moses Muteteka - leader of delegation, hon. Gary Nkombo, hon. Howard Kunda, hon. Mighty Mumba, Hon. Geoffrey Lungwangwa, hon. Dora Siliya, hon. James Kapyanga, hon. Ruben Mtolo and Mr Sibeso Sianga, the assistant committee clerk. You are all welcome. (Applause) I saw the name Kapyanga; I think the people of Budaka may have an interest in that Member of Parliament. (Laughter)

3.16
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern and this is about a story that ran last week in the Daily Monitor, one of the prominent papers here, indicating that there is no pay for primary college lecturers until July. This includes national teachers colleges and primary teachers colleges.

In Uganda, we have 54 PTCs and five NTCs of which 10 PTCs are privately owned. Since January tutors in NTCs and PTCs, on top of other problems they have within the institutions, are not getting any payment. The reason is that the Ministry of Education underestimated when they were budgeting and they never included them in their budget. These are 1,217 teachers in PTCs and 300 teachers in NTCs.

Madam Speaker, when I got this information, I took time to check in the policy statement of the Ministry of Education and also in the approved estimates of revenue and expenditure of 2013. What I discovered was that in 2011/12, the ministry asked for the same amount of money which they asked for in this budget. They also indicated in their budget that they wanted some money for recruitment, which was also given plus any other development. Now we hear that they underestimated; where does this come from? 

According to them, they are trying to ask for a supplementary but there is no evidence. I am going to lay this document on the Table indicating the analysis of the NTCs teachers’ wage budgetary allocations.

We cannot run institutions or teachers colleges and improve UPE when you are not paying primary teachers and the tutors training them well yet we have new programmes coming out like the teaching of Swahili and the thematic curriculum. So, who is doing this? This is very unfortunate. We cannot keep tutors this way. It is only their salaries that they use for transport, house allowance, accommodation and all other things; then you say that for seven months you will not pay them at all! It is unfortunate. 

There are four ministers in the Ministry of Education but none of them is here, but of course, the Leader of Government Business is here. Let me come in front, if allowed, and lay this paper on the Table. It is derived from the approved estimates of revenue and expenditure and also refers to their policy statements on what they laid to Parliament, which was approved by Ministry of Finance. 

THE SPEAKER: Come and lay it on the Table.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I took time to check the approved estimates of revenue and expenditure, recurrent and development, of 2012/13. This is on page 284, vote 013 Ministry of Education and Sports.

According to this analysis, the total wage bill as pertains to the general staff salaries for the teacher education colleges in FY 2012/13 was Shs 3.266 billion. This was the same allocation for FY 2010/11. Also, the ministry planned to recruit a total of 274 staff, both to teaching and non-managerial positions, in all PTCs during financial year 2012/13 upon a budgetary provision of Shs 1.76 billion among the planned activities. 

The ministry planned to recruit 97 staff for the NTCs, which translated into an additional Shs 753 million. My question is: were the recruitments undertaken as programmed by the Ministry of Education or not? If so, why were the recruitments not synchronised with the budgetary provisions as they were no matching increments in general salaries as indicated by the revised edition? Finally, when did the ministry realise the shortfall in its wage bill and what did it do until we saw them in the newspapers? Did the ministry raise the shortfall with the Ministry of Finance for redress?

I beg to lay the document on the Table. This issue of teachers should come to an end; we are tired of crying for teachers all the time. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can the Prime Minister assure us that the tutors are or will be paid between now and July?

3.21
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I will only make sure the Ministry of Education comes and replies to this question raised. We cannot guarantee the accuracy of the information but all the same, since it has been given we shall ask the Minister of Education and Sports to come and answer. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.23
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Ms Florence Namayanja): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the following local governments for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General:

1. 	Kagadi Town Council accounts 
2. 	Kyegegwa Town Council accounts
3. 	Nansana Town Council accounts 
4. 	Kakiri Town Council accounts 
5. 	Mpigi Town Council accounts 
6. 	Pallisa Town Council accounts 
7. 	Kibuku Town Council accounts 
8. 	Kigolobya Town Council accounts 
9. 	Arua Municipal Council accounts 
10. 	Rubona Town Council accounts 
11. 	Hoima Municipal Council accounts 
12. 	Amuru Town Council accounts 
13. 	Kibito Town Council accounts 
14. 	Butunduzi Town Council accounts
15. 	Kasese Municipal Council accounts 
16. 	Kigumba Town Council accounts 
17. Pader Town Council accounts 
18. 	Adjumani Town Council accounts 
19. 	Pakwach Town Council accounts 
20. 	Kanoni Town Council accounts 
21. 	Alebtong Town Council accounts 
22. 	Kole Town Council accounts 
23. 	Nyakuha Town Council accounts
24. 	Lamwo Town Council accounts 
25. 	Oyam Town Council accounts 
26. 	Kibaale District Local Government accounts 
27. 	Hoima District Local Government accounts
28. 	Pallisa District Local Government accounts 
29. 	Butambala District Local Government accounts 
30. Nakaseke District Local Government accounts 
31. 	Kabarole District Local Government accounts
32. 	Moyo District Local Government accounts 
33. 	Buliisa District Local Government accounts 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay all these documents on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson of Local Government Accounts Committee.

MS ROSE AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week I stood here on a point of procedure. This Parliament allocates a lot of resources to the office of the Auditor-General to perform this work, to produce reports on these local governments and other government entities that the Act mandates him to audit. It is two years down the road, the reports we are seeing in this House so far are from the Committee on Government Assurances and from the Public Accounts Committee. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament, through your office, allocates a lot of resources to the accountability committees to perform their duties, to look at these reports and bring reports to Parliament for debate so that action is taken timely. These committees, especially the chairpersons, are about to be reshuffled, two years down the road - just about a few months to come - and Parliament is yet to see reports from the various accountability committees.

Madam Speaker, the guidance I am seeking from you is whether at this point in time we should not get a statement from the Leader of the Opposition as to what is happening. Perhaps, there is a problem either in the leadership or in the amount of work that these committees have before them. What is the problem? We need to look at these reports. We are contravening a constitutional provision of the six months’ deadline within which to debate and come up with recommendations on these reports. 

Shouldn’t the Leader of the Opposition give us a statement on the way forward on how we should proceed with these reports in a timely manner and in accordance with the provisions of our Constitution? I beg to seek that guidance. Thank you.

3.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I wish to give information to the hon. Rose Akol and to the House about particularly, COSASE and I think it does apply to the other accountability committees. Most of the accountability committees have a challenge of handling a huge backlog spanning the last 10 years for entities and some departments. As a strategy, we in COSASE decided that the best way to go around this is to clear the entire backlog. Once we get to deal with an entity, we do the backlog as well. Otherwise, if we had to report on an annual basis, we would be presenting reports here almost on a weekly basis. 

In the circumstances, I would like to appeal to hon. Rose Akol, and all the others who think in the same way, to be patient with us. We are up to this task. We are not sleeping as we do this work; we are going to deliver. I am sure all the accountability committees as we talk have presented at least one report to this House. I want to speak for COSASE that already presented two reports. You will recall that we also presented a report on the Uganda Investment Authority for 10 years, and that is the equivalent of ten reports if we are to do it on the basis of one year after another.

Madam Speaker, we seek your indulgence because we know that there is also a period when accountability and other sessional committees are kept in abeyance. During that time, it is usually very difficult for a committee report to find its way on the Order Paper. I can give an example of the Uganda Investment Authority report, which was produced and signed in August last year but was only able to find its way to the Order Paper last month.

That is why at a certain point in time, a request was brought here to create a new committee that would handle specifically value-for-money audits but that request was flatly defeated here, courtesy of our friends on the opposite side of the House. So, I think we should be here to make things easy for each other. In that regard, proposals that are brought to the Floor of the House should not be seen with suspicion. Usually, they are for the good of –(Mr John Ssimbwa rose_)– I will give way to one of the members of the committee –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think what we want to know is when you are presenting the reports but you are now giving a lecture on this and that. When are the reports coming?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, we really need to be understood because the tone that the hon. Rose Akol used was meant to negate whatever we are doing and to portray us as non-performers, which we reject straightforward. 

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, hon. Amuriat, my committee chairperson. Madam Speaker, I am a member of COSASE and I would like to make it clear that the committee is as concerned as Parliament about this situation. Because of that, we went ahead to have a meeting with the Auditor-General. That meeting was intended to see how best we would consider the backlog as well as the presentation of reports on the Floor of Parliament.

What the chairperson of the committee is saying is that as COSASE, we have already handled and produced two reports that are ready for presentation on the Floor of Parliament. These two reports are the one on the Uganda Revenue Authority, for 10 years since 2001 to date, and the other one is on Uganda Development Bank.

So, the issue here is about the backlog. Yes, we are working hard, but from backward to where we are now. I want to assure the House that COSASE is moving and we are ready to present two reports if time is given to us in the coming two weeks.

3.38
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Florence Namayanja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As far as the Committee on Local Government Accounts is concerned, I can report that two reports are ready. This is evidenced by the content of page 4 of today’s Order Paper where there is notice of business to follow. You realise that the first item is the report of the Committee on Local Government Accounts on the report of the Auditor-General on the local authorities’ accounts for the financial year ended 30 June 2009. The report for 2010 is also ready and just awaiting a slot on the Order Paper.

The Committee on Local Government Accounts has also made efforts to deal with the backlog. I can assure the House that we are proceeding steadily. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Committee on Government Assurances and that of PAC were commended for having presented reports. There is no problem with those two committees.

3.39
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I have just seen the Committee on Local Government Accounts lay here over 30 reports. This means you need 30 days, on average, but also remember that there are other reports that they have been laying previously on the Table.

Yes, we can blame the committees, but I do not think that is right because the problem is Parliament’s. You will recall that some time back, we made a proposal here to have one Member serve on only one committee, but that idea was not bought. Madam Speaker, if you visited these committees while they are transacting business, you will be shocked to find only about three to four members there. What happens is that members go there, sign the attendance and move from one committee to another before they run away for other business to places like Imperial Royale Hotel, to Entebbe.

You cannot blame the chairpersons of these committees because the problem is about the working of the entire Parliament. We need to address this issue via our Rules of Procedure. The chairpersons cannot account for the members because the members will tell them they are at another committee meeting and yet they are at Imperial Hotel or Entebbe. That is something we must adjust.

On the backlog, I have heard Members say that it is stretching right from 2000. This means that even the Parliaments that existed before this one could have had problems. I agree with Members who are saying we need to present these reports. I agree, for example, that from COSASE you want to know how much dividends we have got from those parastatals, and you are right to ask for this. You want to know how much of the money that we send to local governments has been used, and you are right to ask for this. However, we should all put in effort to realise this. 

Like other Members have pointed out, the backlog for COSASE stretches right from 2000, but how many entities are those? They are 143 of them. When you multiply that number by 11 years – do you understand? Every entity has 11 years, so you will have more than 1,000 reports. So, if they are to sit every day, the committee will need 1,400 days to be able to finish its reports.

But you also have to talk of the budget process during which operations for all standing committees are suspended and members instructed to get into that process. We are good at asking for budgets, but not good at allowing committees to look at what we have spent through the budget process – (Interjections) – and of course, corruption. So, Madam Speaker, we will need your office to help us on this issue because somehow, we need to do some amendments in our Rules of Procedure.

On the value-for-money reports, I would like to say that we have now discovered that reports of this nature are over 100 in this short period, which is good performance by the Auditor-General because they show how money was used and what we should do. I recall that at one moment we wanted to create a committee on value-for-money audit but I remember that my brother, Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, is one of those who fought that idea. Initially, I had agreed with him, but later I discovered we had erred. The value-for-money audit committee is necessary for now and you know that many committees are being formed in that manner.

Accountability committees are trying to split into groups. However, assuming you are only three members – the chairman and two other members - if you split it means every committee will have only one member so that they can handle work. Madam Speaker, attendance is the issue here. It is good to split the committees to do work but they are right to cry for help and I want to tell hon. Rose Akol that it is not the chairpersons but the entire Parliament that should be blamed. 

I think we need to get a solution to this issue. In fact, when I was the chairperson of PAC, we had to strike a compromise and that is why we are up to date. We were allowed to sit and when we sat, we completed the backlog. I believe that we are also going to ask that these committees be allowed to sit and do the work. Failure to do that, we shall come here and cry.

These same committees have many petitions. I will give an example; almost every committee is handling land issues and when there is a land petition, until you resolve it there is a big problem. Of course, you know what it involves and because of corruption, it is a big problem. I think we should also find a way for these petitions not to go to these accountability committees. We could maybe create another committee to deal with petitions whenever they come to the House. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think those who have proposals should write to me and then we shall formalise and send them to the rules committee to examine and we see what changes we need to make now, after this one and half years of struggling with our rules. I refer all those reports from the Auditor-General to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. 

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your indulgence. When you look at the Order Paper, the next item is the Public Order Management Bill. When I look at our Rules of Procedure on form, publication and introduction of Bills, - I am referring particularly to the one on which you sent us to consult in the next 90 days - as a whip of the Democratic Party I seek your indulgence to guide me on how we are going to proceed. 

It is in the Hansard that you sent us for 90 days to at least interface with our constituents regarding the Marriage and Divorce Bill. I want to know at which stage we are because I am confused. Last night, I heard over the Central Broadcasting Service radio station that the Bill has been stopped and nobody should talk about it. It has also appeared in the print media. Money has been given to us to do the needful to consult the constituents. So, we would like to be guided on how we are going to proceed because there are very many pronouncements coming in. They are saying that the Bill should not be brought to Parliament, that they should stop talking about the Bill, which my colleague here one time said was being referred to as the “Kadaga Bill.”

As whip of the Democratic Party and member of the Opposition and Member of Parliament representing the people of Kawempe Division South in Parliament, I would like to know what the real position is. We are getting contradictory statements regarding the Marriage and Divorce Bill. How should we proceed and what about the money?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is not on the Order Paper. Secondly, when the minister was last here, he asked for three months and that is what I know. Let us proceed with the next order of business. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I recall last week or the other week, when I raised an issue here that we were going to get money, hon. Rose Akol, who is very educated in budgeting, said it was speculative and she said it was not right. Of course, since it is speculative, we need to look at it in that manner. 

Just a few minutes ago, I picked a document from the Table entitled, “Addendum to Schedule One”, which I expected the minister to lay on the Table but he has not. It says “Programme 104: Shs 1.9 billion - funds to facilitate Parliament to undertake consultations on the Marriage and Divorce Bill.” - (Interjections) – Yes, we were consulting. Even right now, we are consulting. 

Madam Speaker, I think hon. Akol now has the evidence. We know, as Members of Parliament, that we are paid to do work and the work we are paid to do is to consult. In our initial budget, we never had Shs 1.9 billion and that is why we are asking for a supplementary to facilitate Members. There are many Bills which we handle in Parliament and the Bills have never had a supplementary to handle them. 

In that regard, Madam Speaker, since even the NRM leadership says that this Bill must be withdrawn, the Shs 1.9 billion is to facilitate an exercise, which is perhaps futile. So, we are saying that we should pass a resolution that Parliament recovers this money from Members of Parliament to – (Interruption)

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it procedurally right for the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to speculate on documents that have not been properly laid on the Table and start discussing the contents of these documents before they are properly laid on the Table? Is he procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had amended the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Finance to lay that document on the Table, they did not do so. So, it is not here. Let us go to the next item. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thank you very much –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure are very clear about the ruling of the Speaker and you have ruled that we proceed with the next item. Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to continue insisting on the microphone after the ruling of the Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that matter will be discussed after the minister lays the paper on the Table, it goes to the committee and the report is brought here. That is when it will be eligible for discussion but now, we cannot. So, hold on.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. We were taught that if you see something foreign especially in your account, you must report it and all of you have seen something foreign in your accounts, Shs 5 million from the Parliamentary Commission. So, you must report and if you have not reported, it is criminal. (Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Speaker, we are all aware that the Leader of the Opposition has got official transport from Government and we are all aware that the Leader of the Opposition received Shs 103 million for his car. Is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition, having not declared the Shs 103 million on his account, to come and inquire about the Shs 5 million? He received Shs 103 million and he did not come to declare it. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us move to the next item.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much. I stand under rule 70 of our Rules of Procedure. Madam Speaker, you have made a ruling that we proceed to the next item. The honourable Leader of the Opposition has persisted in disobeying your ruling. I want to move a motion that hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition, no longer be heard in this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, anything to do with the supplementary will be debated when the report comes here. It is premature. Let us go to the next item.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am raising a procedural issue. A colleague mentioned my name and that is why I am raising a point of procedure. I am not talking about the other money. He says I got Shs 103 million as the Leader of the Opposition. I do not think he is right. First of all, hon. Nandala-Mafabi was elected from Budadiri West as a Member of Parliament and the Speaker was elected as Woman MP for Kamuli. They are both Members of Parliament and they qualify for all benefits attributable to Members of Parliament-(Interjections)- I want to make my case. That is why I am begging, Madam Speaker, that you need to take these Members for further training. 

If I qualify as a Member of Parliament, the Constitution says – (Interjection) - We are going multi party and in Parliament, there will be two sides, the ruling party and the Opposition, which Opposition will be led by the Leader of the Opposition. The Leader of the Opposition will be entitled to the following - It is in the law. So, when you see those cars, they are in the law. They do not belong to me. Is it procedurally right for somebody to come here and say that the Leader of the Opposition or the Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi, or the Speaker got Shs 103 million illegally, yet you know that we are Members of Parliament? Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is why I did not rule on his point of order and I said we should proceed because it is clear you are an MP and the Leader of the Opposition. Let us proceed.

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a Committee of the Whole House to consider the Public Order Management Bill. I beg to move on.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we had asked you to do something. Can you update us on how far you have gone with your consultations before we move down. 

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, we carried out consultations and considered a number of issues that the honourable members raised. We think we have come back with an improved text that takes into account their concerns. We have prepared this in note form, which I am ready to circulate. So, I beg to move that the House resolves itself into a committee of the whole House. I beg to move.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. Last week, the House asked the minister to go and make further and detailed consultations as to the content of the Bill. I think it would be very dangerous to go to committee stage before the minister has told us, as you directed in the last meeting, what he has actually brought to the table. This is because the issues may be very substantial to the extent that they may recommend cutting my right hand, which cannot be debated at committee stage. As such, we should first find out what he has come with before we go to committee stage because it may not attract much debate at that stage. I seek your indulgence. 

The minister should tell us how he has come and he should circulate that document. If it amounts to an extensive overhaul of the previous provisions, which Members unanimously agreed to stand over, then that motion to go to committee stage may come in. Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence, as it is for our own good.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as you recall we disagreed on what constitutes a public place and a public meeting. I think those are the areas we asked you to go and harmonise.

MR JAMES BABA: That is right, Madam Speaker. The document I am going to circulate includes those elaborations. It also includes some of the clauses, which we think do not have much of a problem. With your permission, can I distribute the paper and we move to committee stage? I beg to move.

MS NABULYA SSENTONGO: Madam Speaker, I vividly recall that we got this disagreement during the Committee Stage. So, coming back to the Committee Stage to handle the minister’s differences and whatever compromise he would come up with would be appropriate. That is what I think.

THE SPEAKER: But where are they?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the law we are making is for all of us and that is the most important. These consultations were supposed to include us and he should have shared the information. Up to now, we have not got any information from the side of the minister or the committee. I am sure I would have got –(interjections)– No, I was not invited.

Madam Speaker, if that is the spirit in which we should operate, don’t you think that we should first share this information and discuss it? Going to Committee Stage is not very far; the Speaker will take two steps and she will be at Committee Stage. There is no problem. But let us do this in harmony so that we move together. We are not breaking the law.

I get very surprised that when we want to make laws, for some laws we say we want it this way and for others, we want to do it the other way. I do not think that is the best way. We should do it in the right manner. So, I request that we get the document and look at it.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I remember very well that when you made that ruling, you made it in your capacity as chairperson and you were seated here. You made a ruling that we should go and consult and later come back to the same stage. Now, I want to be guided; if the ruling was made at the Committee Stage and we were supposed to consult and come back, why would we not come back to the same Committee Stage in which the ruling was made and we proceed from there? I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposals have now been circulated. Earlier, they were not here. I also did not have them and I did not know what he was going to say. So, let us go back to Committee Stage since we are going clause by clause and then you can present and speak to them.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we adjourned we had passed clause 1, stood over clauses 2 and 3, passed clause 4 with amendments, deleted clause 5 and stood over clauses 6 and 7. We were about to go to clause 8 when we asked you to go and consult.

MR JAMES BABA: Thank you, Madam Chair. If we went to clause 2, the interpretation clause – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall do that last.

MR JAMES BABA: Okay, we can now move to clause 3, which we stood over. We have still come up with the draft for clause 3 to read as follows: “The underlying principle of managing public order is to regulate the exercise of the freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition in accordance with Article 29(1)(d) of the Constitution.” I wish to propose this amendment. So, we have re-drafted the existing clause 3 in the Bill. The justification we gave last time was: to clearly provide for the purpose of the Bill and the constitutional spirit in which the Bill is made.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are deleting part of that clause and substituting it with your amendment? 

MR JAMES BABA: That is right, Madam Chair. The entire spirit of the Public Order Management Bill is to regulate demonstrations, assemblies, – whatever is described in this Bill. That is the spirit of this Bill. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, the issue of “regulate” came up and basing on the information given by hon. Franca Akello, we realised that “to regulate” was also the same drafting used in the Police Act. So, to me, that is not so much an issue. 

What bothers me is this: The Constitution, under Article 29(1)(d), states “(1) Every person shall have the right to- (d) freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others – under which condition? – peacefully and unarmed...” The Constitution already provides the requirements to assemble and to demonstrate as long as you are peaceful and unarmed. So, what is the minister trying to do here? 

The Constitution is very clear; you need to be peaceful and unarmed. That means that if you are peaceful and unarmed, my interpretation is that there is no requirement for regulation. The only problem is when you are not peaceful, – maybe carrying stones and knives – that is when the requirement for regulation would come in. So, why is the minister trying to achieve a futility? In other words, they are attempting to amend the Constitution which provides that you are free to assemble and to demonstrate with others peacefully and unarmed. So, what should only bother us is the aspect of breach of peace and being armed. So, this amendment at the face of it, to me, is unconstitutional. In other words, if I need to assemble peacefully, I do not need permission from anyone on earth.

MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I will read verbatim Article 43 in relation to what hon. Otto has said and what I will add later. It says, “In the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this Chapter, no person shall prejudice the fundamental or other human rights and freedoms of others or the public interest.”

I know this law we are trying to put in place has come as a result of many demonstrations we have had, whereby some people have been killed or injured and property destroyed. So, this Article hon. Otto has talked about is well observed. Therefore, I think it is prudent that – (Interjections) - it is very clear that this law is coming to cure and reconcile both Articles 29 and 43. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Chairperson, the answer to that question is clear because Article 29, which hon. Otto read, is clear, that you are free to assemble or demonstrate peacefully and unarmed. However, when you look at Article 212 of the Constitution, the question is, whose duty and responsibility, under our constitutional arrangement, is it to ensure that those exercising that freedom exercise it in accordance with the law. The answer to that is in Article 212 which talks about the Police. It says, among other things, that the functions of the Police are to preserve law and order, prevent and detect crime and so on. 

In the Police Act, section 32 was challenged and the Constitutional Court has given interpretation to these provisions. Section 32(2) was nullified because it sought to give power to the Inspector General of Police to grant or deny authority for people to exercise these freedoms. In the Constitutional Court ruling in the Kivumbi case, the Constitutional Court was very clear that the role of the Police is to regulate, not to grant permission or to deny it. 

In this amendment, therefore, what we are seeking to do is to clarify the authority of the Police in performing its functions in relation to those who are exercising the freedoms. It is simply to do what the Constitution commands them to do. So, the word, “regulate” is a product of the Constitutional Court in its interpretation of the Constitution vis-à-vis the Police Act. Therefore, this amendment seeks to spell out what that regulation is, which is that the Police cannot deny you permission to demonstrate; they cannot deny you your rights. But for you to exercise those rights – and this is where hon. Karungi’s point comes in very pertinently - you must do it lawfully and it is the job of the Police, as I have indicated under Article 212, to do that. 

MR MWIRU: I seek clarification from the Prime Minister. Isn’t it right that we define what regulation amounts to? From what our colleague, hon. James Baba, was doing the other time, we argued and drew his attention to Article 92. Now he is trying to run away from it by putting this indirectly because he cannot do it directly. So, wouldn’t it be proper for us to define what regulation amounts to? 

The Police is going to use this and claim they are regulating; we might write to them and they claim they are regulating. Let me give you an example. I saw on TV an activity of DP and the officer was saying, “I want a letter from the IGP”. So, was he regulating or simply stopping the activity? These people paid for Namboole and yet the officer was asking for a letter from the IGP. Therefore, we need to define what amounts to regulation so that the Police confines itself to the meaning in the definition section. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Article 29 confers the right. Article 43, which my colleague from Kanungu made reference to, puts a caveat or condition on the enjoyment of the right under Article 29. So, wouldn’t it be prudent to regulate under Article 43 as opposed to under Article 29?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chairperson, I have looked at the drafted provision from the minister and it appears to me that the use of the words, “regulate the exercise of the freedom” is, even by drafting standards, unusual. 

When you organise a meeting, there are many things you are supposed to do. One of them is the choice of who will speak. Some of the rights, which are a preserve of the individual, are not stated here but they are stated under Article 45 of the Constitution. By the minister’s proposals, it means he wants to wash away all the rights and freedoms that an individual who calls a meeting should have and I am opposed to that. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I do not know whether hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi was asking a question or exhibiting his understanding. My response to hon. Mwiru’s point is that, of course, we can define the word, “regulate”; nothing stops us. It is the practice of this House that we always come back to the interpretation clause at the end after passing all this. If we have not done it at the end, you are free to make that proposal at the right time. (Interjections) That is standard practice here and I believe that clause 2, which is the interpretation clause, has not been handled yet. 

You quote in your answers Article 29 or 43. Article 29 itself has a limitation. The mere formulation of that paragraph “d” has an inbuilt – it says, “peacefully and unarmed”. That means it is not open. It means that in exercising your rights, you must do it peacefully and unarmed. The point I am making is, who in the institutions of State has the constitutional responsibility to ensure that demonstrations are peaceful and unarmed? Of course, it is the Police. You do not even have to make a direct reference to the article because that is inherent in the formulation of that particular paragraph. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Prime Minister has tried to defend this but I think he has not done it well. First and foremost, there are very many amendments here being proposed by the minister which show, comparing this with the report of the committee, that they are completely changing the report of the committee. When they came here, they said they had agreed. 

We passed clause 4, which stated that the IGP would regulate all meetings; we did it. Now, when you see this one even bringing in constitutional amendments and my sister from Kanungu saying read Article 43, I want to refer you to other laws that will assist you. If you go to the Penal Code, it defines unlawful assembly and riots- sections 56 and 65. If somebody unlawfully assembles, the Penal Code is there to handle them – seven years. The riots are also handled there. So, you cannot make this public order management law and again say “regulate”.

I even want to agree with the Prime Minister when he said that through Article 212, the Police will regulate. If they are going to regulate, why are you again bringing this clause 3 in this format? It is not necessary. Madam Chair, I want the minister to explain to me what he wants to achieve with this. Just come in as a lay man and if you can, speak in your language and I will understand. What do you -

DR OMONA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification from hon. Nandala-Mafabi, having heard the quotations and citations of part of the Constitution from hon. Karungi and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and of course, following the submission of the minister. In 2007, I watched a scenario in Kampala and I think that is the first time that I smelt teargas, very innocently as a student. The Constitution here was already in place and the Police Act that they are talking about here also existed. 

What I remember very well in that situation was that there was a demonstration and it was actually a lawful demonstration. During that demonstration, I remember very well that people lost property and lives. I remember an Indian, who was not even related to Mehta, unless it was the beginning of genocide, was killed. So, there are those who were leading the demonstration, those who got involved or participated and other bystanders. First of all, there was the inconvenience, loss of life, loss of property but it was a lawful demonstration.    

In this case, were there any measures or laws that would put responsibility, first of all to the organisers of this demonstration, and to those who would volunteer to participate, and also the extent to which the Police would regulate or keep law and order of those who would participate in this? So, probably, this law that we are talking about here could try and harmonise the rights we are talking about like the right to demonstrate and also protecting the rights of other people while others enjoy theirs. Are there any other provisions of that before? I seek clarification from you and I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank Dr Omona for asking that. Even with the teargas, they were using the law. Even when a demonstration is lawful and it becomes riotous, the law is here in the Penal Code Act. You know, if you want to be a good student of law, you must know where the law is and then you will understand these things. That is what I am trying to quote for you under assembly and riots. For one which was lawful but then it became riotous, the law is here. 

What we are trying to ask here is: what is this section trying to address? The Police has power to regulate. Are you getting it? They have power to regulate. The law that you are making here is for the Police. If you believe that the sections in the Police Act are not strong enough, then why don’t you amend the Police Act? 

If you go any further, you will discover that most of the clauses here - I hope you have been in Parliament to follow what we have been debating –  were pulled from the Penal Code Act and Police Act and brought here. We said that the person who wrote the Public Order Management Bill should be arrested for perjury – (Laughter) - 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chair, I want to thank the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. Actually, when I listened to hon. Karungi, she was straightforward. The matter dealing with the Public Order Management Bill was as a result of demonstrations. Now, I want us to refer to our Constitution and the preamble of the Constitution that I will read verbatim: “…RECALLING our history, which has been characterised by political and constitutional instability;

RECOGNISING our struggles against the forces of tyranny, oppression and exploitation;

COMMITTED to building a better future by establishing a socioeconomic and political order through a popular and durable national Constitution based on the principles of unity, peace, equality, democracy, freedom, social justice and progress…” I can add in as many more. 

When you look at the preamble in the Constitution and you think of limiting people to practice their democracy, you still face another problem of amending the preamble which cannot be done by this Parliament because this is the peoples’ voice done under the Constituent Assembly. So, if you deny us  democracy or to practice our freedom as a result of what we saw, then we have to go back to a referendum – no, to go back and bring the Constituent Assembly so that we go back and amend this preamble so that we bring limitations to the people of Uganda. That is the information I want to give. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chair, the honourable member had earlier asked for the minister to explain why, because I think that this will give us proper understanding. We need to know why - why regulate exercise of freedom? From a rights’ perspective - of course, this is a very sensitive matter - when we are talking about fundamental rights, at one point we are talking about God given rights. So, we need to know clearly such that we are not really held accountable; we need to know to why regulate exercise of freedom. If the minister answers that, then I can go back to my constituency. 

Personally, without the Shs 5 million, I also consulted on the Public Order Management Bill in my constituency. I have been consulting on these Bills without money. So, I still think that this is a culture that we need to adopt, to learn how to consult on these Bills without giving a burden to Government to give money to consult on Bills. (Applause) So, it is important that we get a clear answer. It would be very important to get the minister to really explain such that I go back and explain to my constituents. I thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I thought it should be the minister and not the Attorney-General to explain because he is not the owner of this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Attorney-General is the legal advisor to the minister. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add onto the voices of the Prime Minister and those that have spoken before me on this important issue. We canvassed this debate prior to this meeting because even during the debate, we actually touched on most of these issues.

I would like to start from hon. Ruhunda’s worry, whether really we have freedoms that should be regulated. Let me start from here because the Prime Minister touched the other most important aspect. Article 44 of our Constitution gives us the freedoms which are non-derogable, which you cannot derogate from. These are: freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; freedom from slavery or servitude; the right to fair hearing; the right to an order of habeas corpus. These are non-derogable. The other freedoms in the Constitution are derogable, they are not absolute. 

If we come to the right we are talking about under Article 29, certainly by reading Article 43 you can see that Article 29 is not an absolute by operation of Article 43. The problem is that we actually single out one provision after another without regard to the other relevant provisions of the Constitution or even of the statutes that we interpret. (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chair, I have listened carefully to the submission of the learned Attorney-General relating to the derogable and non-derogable rights. He is aware as much as I am that provisions relating to fundamental human rights and freedoms when being interpreted are given purposive and generous interpretation. When you seek to exploit the provisions of Article 43, the burden is on you actually to prove to this House that the clause or Article he is seeking to use falls within the limits that are permitted as derogable under Article 43. Would you please clarify that what you are saying is within the acceptable limits under Article 43, bearing in mind the generosity and purposive nature of these interpretations.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to thank the honourable Attorney-General. Perhaps my colleague, hon. Mathias Mpuuga, put it a little more technically. Let me try to say it in lay woman’s language. I would like you to prove to this House, honourable  minister, that under the word “regulation”, the imposition of the text of the Constitution in the Bill in your proposed amendment, you are going to demonstrate beyond any reasonable doubt that: you are not seeking to create room for political persecution, which is prohibited under Article 43(2); you are not seeking to create room where people will be detained without trial; you are not seeking to create unnecessary limitation on the enjoyment of the rights and freedoms prescribed in this chapter beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society or what is provided in this Constitution.

Madam Chair, I think the ball is in the court of the minister to prove to this House that what he is calling regulation actually safeguards these provisions as enshrined in the Constitution. Once we have that, we probably will move. If he has opted the path of picking every word in the Constitution, we also would like to seek that he picks up this limitation - that this is not what he is seeking to do - and we plant this one also in the Bill. That will create an assurance for all of us. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, would it help if we agreed to define the word “regulate” so that we can move and put it in the interpretation section, so that it is clear? 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, before we think in terms of a definition, I would agree with the proposal made by the Prime Minister that let us first go with the Bill –(Interjections)– Please, let me make my submission. Let us first go on with the Bill and then at the end, we shall assess whether we even need that definition. That is one.

Two, hon. Alaso has a good point but I believe that is why we are here to scrutinise this Bill clause by clause. If there is any provision in the Bill that you see will not protect and safeguard the rights you are talking about, then we are free to debate that one and see how to handle it. (Interjections) Let me first finish my submission, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members! 

MR RUHINDI: Let me first finish my submission, then they can come in. We still have time here. 

Now, let me address hon. Mpuuga’s worry. Are we giving this Bill a purposive interpretation? Let me first of all refer you to a case, which is actually a common and tried case. (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I think if there is willingness to define that, it does not matter at which stage we do it; we could as well do it now. We do not want a situation where you are going to make us pass it and then at the end, you dupe us because we have already passed what you want to get. 

Secondly, while we are expressing this fear, it has already been done. The actions that are implied in this Bill have already been practised by the Police even before the Bill has been passed. Meetings have been prohibited, venues have been denied to Ugandans to conduct public meetings; how much more is this Bill going to add?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I was not suggesting that you define “regulate” now. If we can agree in principle, we can do the rest and then when we are doing clause 2, we can bring in the definition. 

MR RUHINDI: Take an example, Madam Chairperson, of the Muwanga Kivumbi case; when Section 32(2) was annulled by the Constitutional Court, Section 32 (1) was saved and that deals with regulation. Court went further to say that the power of the Police to regulate - Hon. Odonga-Otto was here submitting that in the entire Police Act, there is the element of regulation. Now, what are we actually going to define? There are words which are defined from the context of the law on the subject matter at hand. (Interruption)


MR NSEREKO: Madam Chair, I would not like to envisage a scenario where the Attorney-General abdicates their duty and Parliament also abdicates our duty in not providing ambiguous laws. Let us define the word “regulation.” It is not universally known to mean something to a given extent; for example, some people will define it to mean the rate, others might say it means the number of times someone is allowed to demonstrate or the number of people that a person is supposed to move with. Can we also define the extent of that regulation as envisaged within this law that you want to pass? In any case, what is it that you want to cure in using this law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, even if the law is being made for the Police, it is also made for the consumers. I think the people who are going to organise need to know their boundaries.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think for purposes of proceeding, why don’t we, like we have always done, decide that two or three people go out of this Chamber and redraft it. What is failing us is the lack of a proper definition of the word “regulation.” Is it possible to choose two or three people who are in the know of the law to go out and redraft this clause as we process the other clauses? They can report to us later. Since we are all here, it will be up to us to either agree or disagree with what they will have drafted. We can subject that provision to an amendment before we proceed. I beg to move.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, our understanding of the word “regulation” appearing in clause 3 relates to balancing Article 29 (1) (d) and Article 43 of the Constitution. I would, therefore, go along with the proposal to pick from Article 43 in addition to Article 49 in order to create this balance. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I seek clarification from the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. Hon. James Baba, I appreciate the fact that you are an ex-officio Member of Parliament and that means you do not participate in the politics of Uganda. But for us who are in active politics – (Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, the issue about my being just an ex-officio Member keeps coming up again and again. You do not know what I went through during elections. Even the Leader of the Opposition, if he had gone through what I went through - You would have been the President of FDC now if it was not for hon. Epetait and the others. So, do not over drum this thing. Let us put it to rest because we are capable of winning elections.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chair. What I was saying is that the definition of the word “regulation” in this Bill is very fundamental because it has an effect on all the other clauses. Once we get to know what “regulation” is, we may not even oppose the remaining clauses because we will be working on the principles of the meaning of that word.

What the minister is not telling you is that they have read the court judgements and the Constitution and they are now doing it in a subtle way so that they can trap us from another angle. When you define that word “regulation”, we will not oppose the remaining clauses because we will know what it is all about.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, hon. Mwiru. The information I would like to give is that the proposed amendment is actually on the object of the Bill. Without telling us what regulation means in the object of the Bill, we will not understand the intention of this Bill. No other clause in this Bill gives us direction on what we intend to do apart from clause 3, the object of the Bill. It is clause 3 that gives us the direction and what we intend to achieve. Without unpacking it, the rest of the clauses and amendments to them will be a big gamble.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to restate that we have no problem with defining the word “regulate”. As I said, and as the Attorney-General has just said, this is the standard practice of this House; you go through the Bill – (Interjections) – I am telling you because I know this very well. As you know, I have been around for a while. As I was saying, the standard procedure is that we go through the entire Bill -(Interruption)

DR LULUME: Madam Chair, you have already guided this House and directed that the minister defines the word “regulation” in the context of this provision but I can see the Rt Hon. Prime Minister scoffing and going around your directives trying to circumvent them. Is he in order to do that?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we are all discussing the same thing, the need to define the word “regulate”. The only question is at what stage do we do that?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As I was saying, we have no problem with defining that word and we will define it when the time comes - (Interjections) - I am telling you the position we have.

Secondly, to respond to what hon. Ssewungu said, my answer is what the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, my good friend, stated. He said that we have already passed clause 4, and clause 4 was amended and the word “regulate” was introduced. We have already passed it. So, we have already used the word “regulate”. I am only agreeing that it is reasonable to define it, when the time comes.

When you read the Constitution, hon. Ssewungu, you have to read it all; you do not just read bits of it. In addition to what I said earlier and to what the Attorney-General has just said, I just want to refer Members to the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, XXIX. When you look at the duties of a citizen, it says, “The exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations; and accordingly, it shall be the duty of every citizen - (f) to promote democracy and the rule of law.”

The whole essence of having regulations and rules is to have the rule of law. As I have said many times in this House, the measure of civilisation of any given society is the extent to which the rule of law applies to that society obviously. Therefore, when we talk about exercising the right to demonstrate or to assemble peacefully, unarmed, it means lawfully. We are simply saying that regulating that is simply to define what Police can do in order to fulfil its constitutional obligations in that situation. That is all and there is nothing hidden. Hon. Alaso, you cannot fear to drown when you are on hard ground, when there is no water. So, do not fear anything. (Interruption)

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, from the submission of the Prime Minister, it would appear that without passing this law, there is no rule of law in Uganda. I would like the Prime Minister to clarify that without this law, hitherto there is no rule of law in Uganda. 

“Regulate” is the most important word in this whole thing. It is in the object. We want to regulate freedom and peace; if I may read, “Regulate the exercise of the freedom to assemble, demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition in accordance with Article 29.” Why do we want to regulate that? If you want to regulate that, will you then, therefore, define first what exactly you want to do? There are already laws, which you can use or which we have been using up to this day. Why is it that we cannot define this before we move forward?

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This Bill was presented to us and you ably referred it to the committee and we are discussing the committee report. The committee report was duly assented to by the Members of the Opposition who sit on that committee including the Shadow Attorney-General. 

We are trying to define what type of law we are trying to put across but if you look at the explanatory notes, memorandum 1 of this Bill, if I may be allowed to read, it says,  “The object of this Bill is to provide for the regulation of public meetings, the duties and responsibilities of the police, the organisers and participants in relation to public meetings; to prescribe measures for safeguarding public order without compromising the principles of democracy, freedom of association and freedom of speech.”

I need clarification from the Members who are worried. What is your worry? Is it regulating the meetings – (Interjections) – Madam Chairperson, I need your protection. The interest of Members here should have been why they need this law. We need this law because we want to regulate the public meetings. Secondly – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, Members are responding to the committee report. Allow hon. Iddi to say what he thinks about the report.

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, this law is needed because – (interruption)

MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Earlier on, you asked the minister to define what he meant by “regulation”. The Member holding the Floor continues to tell us whether they will not regulate freedom, speech etc. It is like you are trying to lead us to a certain destination and when we ask you where we are going, you should be able to tell us that we are following this up to this destination. For you to say that we should go, we shall define the word “regulation” later, is wrong. We want to know, is the Police going to regulate numbers or places? What is the Police going to regulate? 

So, is the Member in order to continue telling us that we should accept because he does not see any problem yet we do not understand what kind of regulation the government is referring to? Is he in order, Madam Chairperson?

MR ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, from the mere fact that the Shadow Attorney-General assented to this report, he must have defined what “regulation” is in this Bill. Secondly – (Interruption)

MR OMONA: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. Honourable members, with due respect to the murmurs, this is the information I would like to give and this is my short experience with the Bill here. Madam Chairperson, I think the practice of defining or going back to the definition clause after the entire Bill meant that the exposure and experiences within the Bill would enrich the definition of the words. Words are defined in about three ways: They can be defined metaphorically, in the context in which you use them and you can also define words in an elementary manner depending on the way in which they sound in that language.
 
In this case, I think we need a contextual definition of “regulation” and I think that having gone through this Bill, this would enrich the contextual definition of “regulation” that we are talking about here. I want to give a very quick example. Hon. Bitekyerezo and hon. Lulume, who belong to the medical fraternity, will agree with me that every wise medical doctor begins with what could have caused the problem and then carries out the examination so that when he or she identifies the problem, it is enriched by what he has gone through –(Inaudible). Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from the chairperson of the committee.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I just want to say one or two things. First of all, why has it been the practice that we go to the definition clause last? What has the rationale been for considering the definition clause after passing through the Bill? It is because we want to understand the contextual application of those words and the way they are used so that when we go back to the definition, we have this at the back of our minds. 

Two, as it has been pointed out by the learned Attorney-General, the word “Regulate” has been passed in clause 4 and I remember hon. Odonga-Otto, my learned brother, was at the forefront of advocating for its passing. He cannot now say, at this moment, that he did not know what he was passing or what he was advocating for.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: We have defined “Inspector-General of Police” and we have defined “Public meeting” in a clause of its own. Wouldn’t it be prudent - Madam Chair, we have now spent 20 minutes on this. The Attorney-General and the draftsperson should have brought a working definition because we are not going to go where you are taking us. We are not willing to go there. We want to know how you are going to take us there. So we need a working definition for the word “regulate” before we proceed to what is going to be regulated.

The information I am giving is, just like we have defined “Public meeting” in a clause of its own; why don’t we define - in fact, if you are having problems defining the word “Regulate” then I would even submit that we take the word “Direct” which is in the Police Act.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am a bit puzzled because the word “Regulation” has been used in many laws we have passed in this Parliament. We have formed regulatory bodies and I can name many of them: Diary Development Authority, Forestry Authority, NEMA and so many others. The spirit of regulation in this Parliament and in our laws is to bring fairness to parties involved. This regulation - (Interruption) - Madam Chair, I think we have a right to be heard.

The spirit of regulating public meetings is to enable one to enjoy his or her fundamental human rights or freedoms; you should not infringe on that of others –(Interjections)- if you know it, why are you curtailing the law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, can I propose that we stand over this matter and go to clause 6?

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, as per our discussions last week, we did adopt clause 4 as recommended by the committee. Subsequently, we dropped clause 5 in view of the definition of the word “Inspector-General” which we also agreed on.

On clause 6(1), meaning of the word “Public meeting” and in view of the discussions and consultations we held, we have now come up with the definition on page 2 of the circulated paper as follows: “For purposes of this Act, “Public meeting” means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration of persons in or on any public place or public premises.” We have dispensed away with the requirements of the numbers two or three and so forth. 

Madam Chairperson, furthermore and in view of the concerns honourable members raised about meetings they may be holding out there and even for ex-officio members who go outside Parliament, we have added 6(3) to say, “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group or a body or a leader in a group or body at the ordinary place of business of that body or other place, which is not a public place in the ordinary course of business of the group, body, or leader is not a public meeting under this section.”  

So the words, which are added in the second line from the bottom, “… business of the group, body, or leader is not a public meeting under this section,” form the amendment we are proposing in relation to public meeting in which Members raised concerns. I beg to move.

MR KYANJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I object to the definition – (Interruption)

MR JAMES BABA: Just a minute, honourable member. Later on in the paper, we shall also handle the issue of spontaneous demonstrations, which the honourable members raised. When we come to that clause, we will bring it in. I do not know whether I should handle it now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is in another clause.

MR JAMES BABA: Yes, it is in another clause.

MR KYANJO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 6, the meaning of the word “Public meeting” and at the end of the bolded words – “… of persons in or on any public place or public premises” - my argument is that some individuals have big homes which are private; what about them? Since we are talking about a public meeting and you are defining public places - what I am saying is that some places are not public but are big enough to accommodate meetings of sizeable crowds. Why do you have to say “public place or public premises”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want him to regulate private meetings?

MR KYANJO: No, I want him to show me how he is going to work around a meeting which is going to take place at Kyanjo’s house – which is big in size – but Kyanjo’s home is private.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is not a public place.

MR KYANJO: I want the minister to explain.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are thinking that the Minister can raid your compound when you are holding a meeting with many people?

MR KYANJO: Yes, they will find me with many people in my home and they will say, “This is a non-regulatory meeting.” 
I want a commitment.

MR JAMES KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think hon. Kyanjo’s concern is already addressed. If he looked at clause 2, it says, “a public place means (a) a highway or any road within the meaning of the Traffic and Road Safety Act. (b) A place which, at a material time, the public or a section of the public has access on payment of a fee or otherwise as of right or by virtue of express or implied permission,” and so forth.” Now, your home is none of those; it is not a highway and neither can people come to your home after paying to get access. So you are already covered by the definition.
 
MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, the last time we were debating, I think our concern was that as MPs – like you said last time that when you are on your way to Kamuli, people come and gather around you. And such a scenario could be caught up by this section. But according to this, this public place is exempting a leader. I think that was our concern. If the minister says that as a leader who belongs to the institution of Parliament, I can go to do my work and I am exempted, the motive of this - here he says, “For avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group or a body or a leader in a group at the ordinary place of business of that body…” which is not a public place. The ordinary place of business of a body is not a public meeting under this section. It means that if I were passing through Kyengera and I joined a meeting, as a leader in this body, I am not part of this section. That is what it means – I am exempted. 

MR LATIF SSEBAGALA: Madam Chair, when you look at the definition given to a “Public meeting”, it shows that the cardinal objective is to regulate these public meetings. So we are going back to square one because before we get the definition of “Regulation” we cannot continue because it will give us a hard time debating this public meeting without knowing what it is. And yet the intent of this law is to regulate these public meetings.

Secondly, Madam Chair, when you look at how it has been defined, as Members representing urban constituencies, it becomes very difficult because wherever you go, it is a public place. I am looking at a situation whereby as I move around Owino Market doing my ordinary shopping and the traders say, “Hon. Member, please tell us about this and that.” - (Interjections)- okay, let me take it from hon. Mwiru.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chair. The information I wish to give my colleague is that the framers of this Bill know what they are doing. Actually this section limits you to your ordinary place of business. And when it talks about a place not being a public place, you have to go back to the definition section and see what a public place is. For example, (b) says “A public place is one which at a material time the public or a section of the public has access.” That means you will be limited to a place where the public has no access. The section says in effect that you have to operate at your premises just as a body. The meaning of this therefore does not do what hon. Kakooza was saying -((Interjections)- but I am also giving information. 

Madam Chair, even when you go back to our rules of statutory interpretation, the literal rule of statutory interpretation is very clear that when we move from this legislation and go to court, we shall be told that the way the statute is, you give it the ordinary meaning, irrespective of the consequence. The consequence here, honourable colleagues, is that this clause is restricting us to our offices. In other words, it is re-introducing Article 269 which was repealed in our Constitution. Even when it allows us to operate, it says, “… at any other place which is not a public place”. And yet the definition says that a public place is that which can be accessed by the public. That means that if I am not at my office, then I should not meet any other person. That is exactly the meaning of what has been drafted here.

That is the reason we are saying that you need to come out very clearly because you are restricting us. In this section the operating words are these – (i) at the ordinary place of business which is not a public place. And when you trace what is meant by this in the definition section, it shows you what it is. And I think the Attorney-General is doing this intentionally – you thought that your people here are charged to pass the Bill then it starts to work on us. But I think you should do it in a fair way -(Interjections)- I know you have understood and that is why you are now leaving it to hon. Katoto alone.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That was a very lengthy submission. Hon. Ssebagala, please conclude.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, hon. Mwiru, for that very useful information. Madam Chair, it is my humble appeal, especially to our colleagues on the ruling side, that we try to ensure that this Bill is a little bit friendly to you because we are used – with or without it, we have been at it. So we are trying to make a law which is friendly so that in case you happen to be under that category, you are not treated the way we are being treated. So the earlier you studied and analysed this Bill, the better for you because for us, it has been the order of the day.

MR KATOTO: Madam Chair, it is clear that wherever you are, even if it is your home, you need a rule or directive that you maintain, which is fair to everyone. For example, when we look at the word, “Regulation”, that is its definition: “A rule or directive made by an authority to fairly regulate its activity -”. So there is no need to worry because if you are not in water - why would you fear to drown. We are not making this law for today or for some of the people but for the future generation and the whole of Uganda. So let us respect the law and regulate for this country. 

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Chair. The last time we were debating this Bill, the concern of the Members was on how an innocent person conducting their meeting, like when going to the constituency and people gather around you on the road – that is catered for in clause 6(3) it now states, “A leader in a group or a body at an ordinary place”. That was supposed to be 6(a) but now they have made it 6(3) and it states, “For the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group or a body or a leader”. The word there is “Leader”, which caters for that query. So this law is for all of us and we are all concerned about it. When I saw this word, “Leader”, I thought I am catered for even if I meet people on the road – (Interruption)

DR BAYIGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and hon. Ayepa for giving way. Hon. Ayepa ought to have listened to hon. Paul Mwiru when he was analysing this proposal. You are restricting leadership to a Member of Parliament. That is why there has been constant reference to a leader as yourself being catered for. However, I want to inform you that Members of Parliament are leaders in their own respect. But there are other leaders that are sought to be restricted by this clause. That is why they are talking about ordinary places of their business. As a Member of Parliament, you may not have an ordinary place of your business; but for other leaders, they have ordinary places of their work or offices. Those may include their headquarters, to which they would want them to be restricted. You may need to analyse that and make another submission having defined other leaders in this context.

MR AYEPA: Thank you, colleague. Even in the Church, the church is a body and there is a leader. So if a priest is going to offer sacraments somewhere and the Christians gather, he is also a leader and he is covered in this. We are all concerned about this; at the beginning they were not covered, but when they said, “A person in a group, then we felt covered”, not only Members of Parliament but any leader in a group. If you are moving and people come to you as a Member of Parliament, then you are the leader in that group. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I think the problem we have here is that we tend to read the clause in bits. When you read this clause carefully, you find that a group or body, say a group of my friend Nandala-Mafabi – at the ordinary place of business of that body. Which means that may be your headquarters at Najjanankumbi. Then it goes on to say, “Or other place which is not a public place”. That means, even now – (Interjections) – do not rush. It means all other places which are not public. That means you can even go to Entebbe or anywhere as long as you are conducting the business of FDC, then you are exempted – (Interjections) – yes, that is what it means to say, “The ordinary course of business of that body”. But you are trying to distort the whole thing. 

MR KYANJO: Madam Chair, for me to be comfortable with the statement of hon. Byabagambi, I want to hear it from the Attorney-General.   

MR RUHINDI: First of all, I know this is a very complex Bill and it concerns all of us. But we are at committee stage. We closed debate and came to committee stage, where a Member who is concerned about a provision and a proposal is free to move an amendment and we proceed. I thought we should be mindful of that. 

Now, on this concern being raised, to me it has been taken care of by the minister in two proposals: “This provision, for the avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened by a group or body or a leader in a group or body at the ordinary place of business of that body, group or leader – or other place which is not a public place -” –(Interjections – I will come to that. “In the ordinary course of business, of the group, body”, those words are missing - he was actually saying that you should insert them in, “Of the group, body or leader is not a public meeting under this section”. Now, let me proceed. You see, he made those clarifications –(Interjections – let me first finish. You are seeking clarification on something I have not finished submitting on – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you asked the minister to satisfy you, I think that is what he is doing. Let him finish and then we will see whether you are not satisfied. 

MR RUHINDI: The course of business, for instance, for a Member of Parliament is – you know, sometimes I need to orient you in this. What is your duty as a Member of Parliament? The representation role, the law making role, institutional role and the oversight role; four functions of a Member of Parliament. When you are in your constituency, you are handling your representation role. That is the ordinary course of business for a Member of Parliament.

Now let me proceed. For instance, I did not want to jump and this is why I was saying that we are at committee stage and we would be going stage by stage. Now in clause 8, (1)(a) and (2) shows – [HON. MEMBER: “You are jumping.”] I am not jumping because I am clarifying to you the rationale for ensuring that if you are in a public place, you need regulation because a public place is a place accessible to the public. 

First of all, we are even seeing this Bill in the negative form. We should see it in the positive form that even you who is peacefully demonstrating in a place that is accessible to the public, you should be protected. There should be some mechanism of ensuring that there is law and order - [MR ODONGA OTTO: “Counsel, speak the law.”] – that is the purpose. In that public place, for instance, there could have been another group that could have booked the same place and the Police would have to actually tell you that it may not be possible for you to hold your meeting in this place and you can either hold it in another place or you can come to this place at another time. That is the purpose and thrust of this meeting.

Now you come to these other concerns raised, for instance, by hon. Latif Ssebagala of our usual business. The minister has provided an elaborate provision on spontaneous meetings and it will be coming at a later stage and that takes care of that. So, Madam Chairperson, I beg that this House considers this Bill in a positive mode and we proceed. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Just clarification - Senior Counsel, this is important.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Odonga-Otto and then hon. Bako. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chair, I want the Attorney-General to help hon. Byabagambi to come close to interpreting this section 6(3). But Attorney-General, before I submit, the draft reads, “For avoidance of doubt, a meeting convened…” Let us stop there. Now this drafting presupposes that someone has called for a meeting. It does not cater for spontaneous meetings –

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is there on page –

MR ODONGA-OTTO: On what?

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a new clause 9 –

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Chair, our legislation does not allow speculation. You are advising me to go ahead before we have reached there? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He has already said that he has provided for “spontaneous meetings” which is ahead. There is a new – on page 4. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Okay. I have taken note of that. Now let me raise another argument. (Laughter) I am never left wanting. The argument raised last week by the MP – I think we should just define for purposes of this Act – a public meeting means that we remove “gathering” or “assembly”. The intention of this legislation should be to regulate demonstrations and processions. The moment you want to put your nose into people who want to meet somewhere – like I can be in Nakawa which is not my ordinary place of business but I am known all over the country. Hon. Nsereko is even known in Pader and now you are saying that if hon. Nsereko stops and greets people at Acholi-Bur Sub-County, he can now be summoned at a police station because that is not his ordinary place of business. 

So, I would really think that the amendment that I would move right now is that we delete “Gathering” and “Assembly” and we regulate “Processions” and “Demonstrations”. That is the amendment I wish to move. My debate was prejudiced because I have not yet addressed my mind to the other clause behind and so maybe I should sit down and read it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Odonga-Otto, you are saying that “Meeting” is different from “Gathering” or “Assembly”? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Pardon?

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are saying that “Meeting” is different from “Gathering” or “Assembly”? 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Suppose you want to use Naguru Community Centre for a meeting and then other people also want to use the same place for the same meeting on the same day at the same time. What do you do about that meeting?

MR ODONGA-OTTO: That makes it interesting. But what I am thinking of – I wonder where the ordinary course of business for a Speaker is and ordinarily, it is within the precincts of Parliament. Now what this drafting means is that other than here or in Kamuli, in case you have presidential ambitions, you are not allowed to talk anywhere else because that is not your ordinary course of business – (Interjections) - that is what it means. Like for those of us who want to switch constituencies, we are not allowed to talk anywhere else because it is not our ordinary course of business or normal place of business. My normal place of business is Aruu County and Parliament and the rest of Uganda is not my normal - now where is the course of business for Dr Besigye? 

MR RUHINDI: I think that to me, hon. Odonga Otto has not got it correctly. Ordinary course of business for Member of Parliament – because if you are an elected Member of Parliament for Aruu County and you come here, you come here in this House as a legislator for the entire country. You become a national legislator and there is nothing to stop you from going to Nakawa or Rubaga and discussing constituency matters – (Interjections) - nothing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Bako and then hon. Lubega.

MS BAKO: I thank you, Madam Chair. As a Member of Parliament, I am an individual first, I am a national leader and I represent the people of Arua; I am a member of the FDC and therefore, by this definition, to define where I work becomes complex.

And to even suggest that I have an ordinary place of business is even more atrocious. Why? I can start a journey here, go to Entebbe and consult on the Marriage and Divorce Bill among the people of Entebbe, including my own people from Arua who are residing there. That is my ordinary place of business but Gen. Kayihura’s boys will have me picked up and they would ask me how I migrated from Arua to consult on marriage and divorce there. 

Now it becomes very complicated because you have first of all not defined to us what “Regulation” is and then you want to assert that I already know what an ordinary course of business is and what an ordinary place is. So, it becomes very complicated. 

Madam Chair, why is this piece of legislation so divisive? It is because the intention is bad. Everyone who has talked here has talked about demonstrations. Demonstrations that have tilted towards challenging state power is the reason that the Executive has occasioned this piece of legislation. It is not in the interest of the ordinary person who is not scared about genuine demonstrations. 

Now the Prime Minister raised a fundamental issue that we should not be contradicted when we are talking about promotion of democracy and the rule of law. What is democracy? If it is that the majority rule, does it mean that we will have to have a piece of legislation that can easily be okayed by the majority just to suffocate? What I would be doing as an individual, as a Member of Parliament, as a family leader, as a clan leader, I think this is getting too far. 


And just like the Attorney-General was saying, there can be double booking and then the Police will come in to prevent. I want to give this House information. The last day of the last campaigns in Arua, I was scheduled to address people in the park in the heart of town and I was informed that Gen. Saleh was coming to address the NRM right there, yet it was known by the Electoral Commission that it was my day. They brought the blue boys and they gated the entire place. I said, “Fine. Since you have gated it, we shall show you the people power.” I blocked all the entries and I started addressing the rally in the middle of the road. Why? This is the contestation; this is what will happen. As soon as Abia books this place, there will be another booking in order to prevent me from addressing my electorate and this is the intention of bringing this piece of legislation: to suffocate the voices that are not supposed to be heard.

Madam Chairperson, prior to demonstrations that proved to challenge state power, had they originated such a piece of legislation? No. why is it coming at this point in time? It is because contesting state power has become something that the Executive and the President cannot deal with. And so I presume that is why it is even very difficult for them to define what it means for the Police and the powers that be to regulate. And so I think at this material time, unless the definition of “Regulation” is given to this House, it becomes very difficult to gloss over these things and even understand them.

MR GODFREY LUBEGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. My concern is to define other words like “Leader”. To me, when you refer to a leader, every organisation has a leader. For example, a demonstration may have a leader who is leading the demonstration. So, there are funny words that we also need to define because we do not refer to a government leader. A leader is something that is confusing so I beg to have a definition before we consider this law.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have sat here and quietly listened to the debate. Particularly in respect to the clause that we are dealing with; I want to give reference to Article 212 of the Constitution. I also want to accept what the learned Attorney-General said, that we are dealing with a very complex piece of legislation which touches on fundamental human rights and regulating fundamental human rights must be done very carefully. 

If we are putting all these provisions as provided for by the clause in question, and also giving exceptions, then we are holding Article 212 of the Constitution which the Police has been applying in the circumstances, redundant. Two things have to apply here: whether we agree that we have Article 212 of the Constitution and it is active and once we accept that it is there like we do, then it is meaningless to provide for those provisions under that clause.

Further to that, there is even the Penal Code Act. There is a whole chapter, chapter 8, which deals with assemblies, riots and any offences related to the disturbance of public peace or tranquillity. I would want the Minister to tell me, what does he really seek to cure here which has not been addressed? Because if you are now giving exemptions to homes, to churches, to other places which are not public, under Article 212, the Police have the mandate to even come into Church and disperse as long as there is no law and order in the Church. Even in your home, if the Police detect or suspect that a crime is about to happen, Police have the mandate to enter and stop whatever you are doing there. This is in Article in 212 of the Constitution. 

So, these exemptions that you are giving are almost redundant. Under the Penal Code, it is very clear in section 56 - in fact a whole chapter under the Penal Code Act, Chapter 8, dealing with all these unlawful events and it is clearly defined - lawful assembly, what it is, then the offences there under. So, when we bring forth this provision which is now seeking to give exemptions, what are we really seeking to cure? In any event, under the Article which I have mentioned, functions of Uganda Police Force - can I read verbatim?  

The functions of Uganda Police Force shall include the following: 
    (a) To protect life and property. Even when you are in your own home and you are having a meeting and that meeting turns rowdy and is likely to cause loss of life, which is a private place, Police will come in. 
    (b) To preserve law and order. If you are in a Church which is not a public place but there is no law and order, Police have a duty to crash in that Church and preserve law and order.
    (c) To prevent and detect crime. Madam Chairperson, you cannot tell me that I am going to make a formal application to the Inspector-General to hold a meeting in a road. It cannot apply. 

So this Article 212 is holistic in nature which is also beefed up by sections 56, 57 and the other attendant sections in the Penal Code Act –(Interjections)– I can take the information.

MS BAKO: Thank you, honourable friend, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that by the time this Constitution was made and amended, Police was Police. Now, Article 211 about the Uganda Police Force states clearly this - and this is the contradiction in our Police Force - that “The Uganda Police Force shall be nationalistic, patriotic, professional, disciplined, competent and productive and its members shall be citizens of Uganda of good character.” But my dear brother, what is happening in this country is that this is the exact opposite of what the force is. By the time this Constitution was made, Police was Police and it was professional. Now, this piece of legislation is coming in to confirm that aside from the provisions in Article 211, something has gone drastically wrong that there must be another piece of legislation within legislation so that the Police can succumb to these traits that they no longer have.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you for the information. Madam Chairperson, I am still on the Floor - that was information. The minister can hold on; he can come in and wind up. I would also like to cite section 56 of the Penal Code Act. Whereas the minister is suggesting in the Bill that they are removing issues of numbers, the provisions for unlawful society in the Penal Code Act are still suggestive of numbers. So does, the minister intend to mean that the proposition in this Bill now seeks to amend the provisions of the Penal Code Act? Because in his submission, he is not dealing with numbers whereas in the law which is still operational, in the Penal Code Act, numbers are still there as far as unlawful assembly is concerned. 

Madam Chairperson when you go to Article 17 of the Constitution, it gives you duties of a citizen. Every citizen is demanded by the Constitution to cooperate with law enforcement agencies in preservation of law and order- (Interjections) - no it is a question of enforcement now. Then that is not; we observed that the Marriage and Divorce Bill was not in harmony with a number of legislations and it was given a rest. Looking at these provisions, Madam Chair, I see a lot of conflicts between the proposed legislation and the Constitution. I also see a lot of disharmony between it and the Penal Code Act. Therefore, why can’t we instead seek to amend the Penal Code Act, the Police Act and also seek to enforce – because the problem seems to be the lack of enforcement – other than coming up with the different pieces of legislations that are likely to complicate matters. Just look at the explanation that you are providing – a leader or a group of leaders in ordinary places of work – what about the extraordinary places of work? Somebody has just given the example of the Rt hon. Speaker. Really can we define the ordinary place of work for the Speaker?

Much as you are seeking to provide these exemptions for spontaneous meetings under clause 7, you are not curing anything by keeping the phrase “ordinary” when you leave out the phrase “extraordinary.” I believe this is going to complicate our lives. And, Madam Chair, you will agree with me that in our day-to-day life as Members of Parliament, we are the biggest victims because we deal with spontaneous meetings in public places much more than in our ordinary places of work. 

The other day while I was going home, I heard Boda-boda riders were rioting. I definitely could not call the DPC or the Inspector- General of Police. I just called them and asked them to hold the strike - I was on the way there and I assured them that we would have the matter sorted out as soon as I got to Busitema. On arrival, I met them at the road side for a few minutes and the matter was amicably handled. In doing that, I prevented deaths, injuries and the breakdown of law and order. So, when you give me these limitations or when members start to say that as a leader, when they reach Kyengera, they can talk to people, they have forgotten the fact that they are not being given any exemption.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I beg to submit that just like we observed for the case of the Marriage and Divorce Bill, which was also in conflict with so many provisions and touching people’s lives and culture, can we advise Government to go back and just return with a request for the amendment of the laws that already exist like the Penal Code Act and others? This will help us to stop – because a good law must be simple. If you want to have an enforceable law, it must be simple. But when you look at the provision of this law, which give exemptions to leaders – all of us have different interpretations of it. Hon. James Kakooza, for example, has interpreted it different from the way my brother from Kaboong did. So, where are we going? It is not good for us to pass a piece of legislation, which is going to lead us to the Constitutional Court and bring a lot of disrespect to this House. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Minister, just following up on what hon. John Mulimba has said, I see a situation where on Sunday, the police can use Section 56 of the Penal Code, which talks about numbers. But on Thursday, they can use this law, which does not talk about numbers, you know, to regulate a similar activity. So, are we going to use both laws depending on what we want to do on a particular day? This is because you are not repealing the Penal Code.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chair, last week before we broke off, you asked me to go back and address the issue of these other meetings by a body, a leader and a group of people that would not require notification. This is my response to that request. But now we seem to be getting into general debate again, when my response is just about a specific question. We have said the meetings you hold in your ordinary places of business or any other places, which are not public places, do not require notification. Referring us to the Penal Code and other laws is okay, but we have said that while those laws exist, we are trying to assemble a specific law to address public order and management. If it requires amending other provisions of the different laws, that will be done later. Otherwise, we need to have a law under one roof.

So, Madam Chair, I would like to again point out that this is my specific response to that request. It is intended to address the concerns of Members of Parliament and other groups, where you will not be required to give notification when they want to hold meetings. I beg to submit.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, thank you very much. I would like to do a follow up on the question that you asked. If there are serious and glaring discrepancies in the provisions of what is called regulation – in the Penal Code Act, it is explained differently from the way the Police Act defines it. Now in the Public Order and Management Bill, we are seeing a different definition. Can we get the answer to your question on which law will the police use – because on all these occasions – the Penal Code Act, unlawful assembly, preventive detention, public order management, unlawful society – the key actor is going to be the police. Let us pursue that question and get an answer.

In that regard, allow me repeat the question that the Chair asked. Which law will the police use on Fridays, if we don’t define the phrase “Regulation?” Two, if there are such glaring inconsistencies, wouldn’t it be acceptable to this House to take on the proposal that hon. John Mulimba has fronted that this Bill be withdrawn so that we can just have amendments to the other laws if Government is finding difficulty – let me first take that information –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chair. The information I want to give to the House is that when you go to the Trial of Indictment Act, there is a provision that says that someone convicted of an offence – it talks about the sentence as being that such person shall suffer death. When you go the Prisons Act, Section 47 (6), you realise that it states thus: “Death sentence under admission shall be 25 years.” And there has been that conflict and as we talk, courts have had a problem when awarding sentences. And now they have even gone to the extent of imposing a 50-year sentence because the Constitutional Court has outlawed life sentence. So, that confusion, likely to get into this law, is what we are trying to run away from.

Yes, the minister is saying that it is true these laws exist and that they are just picking sections from the different laws – Mr Minister, in the Law School, we normally talk of law that is applicable. And so the Constitution, the Indictment Act, the Penal Code Act – that is how things are done. Otherwise, we don’t just accept the fact that because the laws are scattered, therefore you legislate another one. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Paul Mwiru, for that information. Of course you are making the assumption that I and the minister went to the Law School, but which is wrong. Anyway, thank you for educating us.

But, Madam Chair, I find it very contentious that the Police would like to ascertain payment for venue as if they are the proprietors of venues. We have experience. Let me give you the case of the Usuk by-election. We entered Usuk before the Police and the people who were brought in to enforce whatever it was and we were in hotel rooms and they intimidated the owners of all the hotel rooms in Katakwi and they refunded all the money that we paid to them. So, at what point do I know that this is not being used to persecute me politically? I think it would be wrong because a matter of contract between the proprietor and a person who is buying the service should not be a matter of the Police unless the proprietor himself or herself complains. 

The other thing the minister is attempting to do with this amendment, which is making me uncomfortable is, in clause 6(2) he proposes no change. Of course I know the slogan “No change” but “No change” here means that we are going back to the position which even the committee had suggested we amend. The minister is attempting to regulate the content, the very words we say in meetings. For your information, initially there was a proposal that we delete those other words at the last sentence of 6(2)(e) “… held exclusively to discuss the affairs of the party or organisation.” It means the Police are going to veto. If we call a meeting in Namboole for the National Delegates Conference, the Police have to tell us and to prove that what we need to discuss is the real content of the National Delegates Conference. I find this very outrageous and I find these very prone to abuse if we don’t define “Regulation” or if this Bill is not withdrawn. 

The reintroduction of public premises which we had told the minister the other day not to bring is also a very suspicious matter. The general guidance actually moved by the colleague from Iganga was that we confine ourselves to procession and demonstration but you want to regulate what we do in Naguru Community Centre because it is a public premise. You want to regulate what we do in Namboole. That is what happened with UYD. If you go on like this, to use the words of hon. Paul Mwiru, we are going back to the provision of the then Article 269 which confined political party activities to the headquarters and offices of political parties. In a situation where we have adopted the multiparty dispensation, we should be allowing parties to go and recruit whether from markets or wherever, as long as they do it without necessarily having these encumbrances and having to hurt other people. I think there is no problem. So, without those definitions, Madam Chair, I would like to pray that this Bill be withdrawn. 

6.07
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I just want to inform the House that there is courtesy for this Bill and there is no intention to withdraw this Bill. I want to make it clear but propose, make amendments, just don’t go talking. What do you want us to do? If you talk of regulation, what is the definition? 

THE SPEAKER: Order, members. Allow the hon. Minister to talk.

GEN. MOSES ALI: Allow people to talk. I have been here listening to you. I don’t want the information. 

MR ODONGA- OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order on the culture developing in this House where members seemingly don’t want to listen to each other but most interestingly, when a General and a person as massive as the size of the Third Deputy Prime Minister and counsel addresses an honourable colleague on this side without going through the Speaker, he looks very intimidating from this side. I wish you could sit this side for one minute and look at yourself. So, is it in order for the Third Deputy Prime Minister to talk so robustly that it makes us feel like war is about to begin? Madam Chair, we need your protection and advise him to be a little civil.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is also out of order to interrupt other Members while they are on the Floor and that is what you have been doing to the Prime Minister. Allow him to speak. 

GEN. MOSES ALI: So, I want to repeat, Madam Chair, that there is no intention to withdraw this Bill. Talking like you have done all day today without even proposing a single amendment, I think, is unfair. There is no amount of talk that can stop this Bill, if this is the intention. You must make proposals and amendments. What does regulation mean to you? What is the definition? Tell us. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Chair, this assembly is known as Parliament, a place where people talk and discuss other than fight. Knowing that a number of Members have raised issues which negate a number of constitutional provisions, is the hon. Member, a whole General, in order to talk as if he must force the law to pass? We have a right to reject that law. Are you in order to enforce your order as if we are in the battle field? Is this a battle field? Is he in order to speak in the way he is talking to intimidate people? We are supposed to talk peacefully in a loving manner. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, he is a General that is why he speaks like that. (Laughter)

GEN. MOSES ALI: First of all, Madam Chair, I am sorry that I am a General. If my being a General hurts most of you, sorry for that but I cannot help it. But I want to appeal that let us join hands to amend. Give us your amendments. I even fear - I wanted to advise my friend hon. Hussein Kyanjo not to involve himself in this unending debate because he is not as healthy as some of you. That was my fear. I was actually crying; if you want him to collapse – (Laughter) 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I know the Parliament is meant for talking that is why we must talk but also, we must talk through our rules and regulations but I have been here for some time and the procedure of enacting these laws - (Interjections) - now that is where you go wrong. Anyway, I know that heckling is also part of debate. I do not mind but the procedure of enacting laws, which I know very well, has been to have the general debate, do away with it then go to Committee Stage. Once we reach Committee Stage, we debate clause by clause and propose amendments on a particular clause as we move on.

Madam Chairperson, the way I am seeing things now, we are no longer following clause by clause but we have opened the general debate again - (HON. MEMBERS: “Order!”)– I am on a procedural point, which is above the order. Please I am a paralegal, I know my rights. I am on a procedural point so hon. Mwiru, I am right. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether it is procedurally right to open up the general debate when we are supposed to be considering clause by clause and proposing amendments to a clause, if you want to. Is it procedurally right to proceed like this?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I called for clause 6 and the minister brought an amendment. That is what the Members are addressing.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am rising up to talk about the new insertion under clause 6; that is clause 6(3). Having looked at this new insertion, I find it of no value at all for several reasons. One, where is the concern about how leaders and Members of Parliament can interact with their people outside there? When you look at what this provision is trying to cure, it is not exactly what we feel it should cure. To me, this provision is just recycling words because even when this body or group or a leader in this group wants to have a meeting, he should go through the procedure of going to Police. There is no exemption in this provision because when you read it well, it talks about a situation where a meeting is not in a public place. What does it mean? That even if you go to Serena and pay, it becomes a public place and you must go through the other process of going to Police for regulation. 

My proposal, Madam Chairperson, is that if the minister cannot tell the House what this particular provision is trying to cure, then we delete it and move ahead. That is my submission, Madam Chairperson.

MS ASAMO: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I want to make an amendment that we remove the issue of a gathering or an assembly in clause 6(1) for the following reasons: I am a Member of Parliament who has 32 districts. My meetings are either conducted in a school or hotel because I do not have offices that I can define as my areas of operation in all those districts.

Madam Chairperson, I need to be guided - somebody is standing and competing with me to speak - hon. Sebunya. I am saying that for those of us who do not have defined constituencies like a region, it becomes very difficult to go to Police and get permission every time I want to hold an assembly or gathering of people with disabilities. The moment we pass this Bill, it will mean that I have to get permission to have people gathered at a venue. Therefore, I would like to propose that we delete “Gathering” and “Assembly” and begin from “The concourse, procession or demonstration of persons in any public place.” I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, hon. Asamo has reminded us. When hon. Kiboijana was submitting last week, she asked the minister, are you regulating assemblies and processions or meetings? No one has answered that question yet.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, it is good to make laws that will stand the test of time but the way I look at this Public Order and Management Bill, it is actually taking over the mandate of Parliament and other politicians. I do not know why the learned Attorney General cannot look at the Police Act, the Constitution and the Penal Code and solve this problem.

As a Member of Parliament for Bufumbira East, I will never support a law that is going to regulate public meetings because I am supposed to deal with the public. How shall I deal with them? If you are going to deal with people who are demonstrating or rioting, the law is there. What is lacking? I think Cabinet is shaming us. I thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank you. First of all, what is defined as a “Private place” in the definitions and for the avoidance of doubt, ends up becoming a public place legally. There is nobody who will be arrested and not charged legally.

Secondly, I was listening to the hon. Member representing people with disabilities. In South Africa, where hon. Byabagambi stayed for a long time, what caused most of the problems of Apartheid were laws like this one. People were stopped from having public rallies and they went to private places, which ended up becoming public places. What were those places? Churches and schools. Watch the film of Sarafina where children were shot; it was as a result of gathering and talking to people. 

In Kalungu West, when will you ever stop Ssewungu from talking about politics in Church? When I enter a Church, I talk about issues related to politics and that is a public place. What is interesting, Madam Chairperson, is that you have asked the minister, the Attorney-General and even the Prime Minister about different definitions several times. They are always running away from them because they know what they want to get. It is unfortunate that the Attorney-General who is a legal adviser to Government is still saying, “Please let us pass this Bill.” Inwardly, he knows what is happening and what will come out of this Bill.

How do you tell me that in order to gather anywhere, I have to seek permission from Police five days before? I want the Attorney- General to define for us the word “Public place”. Tell us where you have been conducting your rallies since you came to this Parliament and tell us that you were not holding them in schools or markets. Even your home ends up becoming a public place the moment it has people in it. That is why the Prime Minister had to run away. When you asked him, he packed his books; Gen. Moses Ali talked about sickness; he is sweating about the same Bill because it is complicated.

Madam Chairperson, I am also in support of other Members who proposed that they take back the Bill because I cannot support any clause or section. For example, Section 33 already gives power to Police to order and disperse assemblies and processions that are unlawfully convened. It is the Police Act here - (Interruption)

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think - all we are saying here is that as much as we support regulations, we should not duplicate and cause disharmony among different pieces of legislation. I just want to give you information that, like I had earlier enumerated, there are already sufficient provisions, which cater for unlawful assemblies and riots. Just look at section 65 of the Penal Code Act and I want to read, “When three or more persons assemble, with intent to commit an offence, or being assembled with intent to carry out some common purpose, conduct themselves in a manner as to cause persons in the neighbourhood reasonable fear, those persons so assembled will commit a breach of peace or will by such assembly, needlessly and without any reasonable occasion, provoke other persons to commit breach of the peace, they are an unlawful assembly.” 

That actually covers most of the provisions and centres around what you are talking about. Whether regulating means controlling, maintaining or giving more or little speed, it comes under here. 

Furthermore, Section 66 defines the offence and prescribes punishments for the same. It states: “Any person, who takes part in an unlawful assembly, commits a misdemeanour and is liable to imprisonment for one year.”

Honestly, Madam Chairperson, what are we seeking to cure? What is absent? We have cited the Constitution, the Penal Code Act and he has cited the Police Act and all these provisions are present. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR JAMES BABA: What is absent in what you are saying is the responsibility of organisers and participants in public processions. (Hon. Ssewungu rose)

THE CHAIRPERSON: That was information from hon. John Mulimba. Please conclude.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I am getting worried that the hon. minister is trying to see how he can smuggle this in so that it can be enforced yet we must legislate for the people and for you. Actually, this law will be more useful to you than to Ssewungu Joseph from Kalungu. So – (Interruption)

MR MATHIAS NSUBUGA: Thank you very much. The information I want to give is that as we debate this Bill – in fact I am surprised because when these kinds of laws were passed in the 1967 Constitution, the first victim of these obnoxious laws was Rt Hon. Moses Ali. You remember you spent so many years in Luzira just because of bad laws. So as we debate, we should be conscious of these kinds of laws. (Interruption)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Is the DP Secretary-General in order to mislead the House about me – that in 1967 I was in Luzira? What has that law got to do with me? I was not in Luzira. Why do you say it was me? You are misleading people. Is he in order to mislead people?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Leader of Government Business, hon. Nsubuga is sympathising with you and saying that a certain bad law caused you to be detained. That is what he is saying.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, as I conclude, in Australia there are hunters and they have a very good tool they use for hunting called a Boomerang. When they throw a boomerang to hit a bird, in case it fails, it normally comes back to the person who has thrown it. So, whenever you legislate badly, you might think of a bad law for others but it will boomerang on you. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I see that we are not making progress today. Why don’t we sleep over this matter? Maybe we can reflect on some of the provisions and tomorrow we can legislate because we are not making progress. Minister, move the motion for the House to resume.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Chairperson, can I say something before I move the motion? In the discussions, there were some specific proposals on clause 6(1), one of which was that we could drop “Gathering” and “Assembly” and leave “Concourse, procession or demonstrations of persons in any public place” and also delete “Public premises”. [MRS OSEGGE: “Order”] - Madam Chairperson allowed me to speak. Madam Chairperson, there were no specific- 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Move the motion for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Chairperson, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Order and Management Bill” and again stood over clause 3 and clause 6 but earlier had passed clause 4 and dropped clause 5 without amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been seated here and following very closely. The position the Minister is presenting seems to smuggle in some of the things we did not agree on. Could the minister be clear and repeat the report to the whole House.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the report should cover only what we did today. The other one was done last week and it is already on the Hansard. (Laughter)
 

6.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered clause 3 and 6, debated them and stood over them. I beg to move. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us receive the next report on Trade; it is very small – it is about four pages.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-COUNTERFEITING GOODS BILL, 2010

6.35
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that that the Bill entitled “The Anti-Counterfeiting Bill, 2010”, be read for the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded – okay. Can you justify and give your reasons for the second reading.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move the Bill for the second reading - (Interjections) – is it seconded – thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, can the chairperson give us the report? 

3.37
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to present a report of the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry on “The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2010”. I hope Members have the copies – if you don’t, I know they are being circulated to Members. The report is not very big and I request that I go straight to the introduction. 

Introduction	

“The Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2010”, was read for the first time on the Floor of the House in 2010 by the then Minister of Tourism, Trade, and Industry. The Bill was later re-introduced in October 2011 in the Ninth Parliament by a resolution of Parliament. The Bill was referred to the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for consideration, pursuant to Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedures of Parliament. 

Definition of “Counterfeit”

Counterfeit trade mark goods means any goods, including packaging, bearing without authorization of a trademark, which is identical to the trademark validly registered in respect of such goods or which cannot be distinguished in its essential aspects from such a trademark, and which thereby infringes on the rights of the owner of the trademark in question under the law of the country of importation or manufacture.

The object of the Bill is:
    • To prohibit the manufacture and trade on counterfeit goods.
    • To prohibit the release of the counterfeit goods into the market.
    • To empower the Uganda National Bureau of Standards in exercising its oversight function over the counterfeit goods.
    • To introduce punitive measures and deterrent measures to handle/trade counterfeit goods.

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received views from the following stakeholders:
        i)  	The Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (MTIC)
        ii)  	The Uganda National Bureau Standards (UNBS)
        iii)  	Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry (UNCCI)
        iv)  	Uganda Revenue Authority (URA)
        v)  	Private Sector Foundation Uganda (PSFU)
        vi)  	Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA)  
        vii)  	Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB)
        viii) Civil Society Organisations (CSOs)

The committee held a consultative session with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives on the Bill.

Presentations by Stakeholders

Uganda Registration Services Bureau (URSB) made the following observations:
    • Most of the provisions of the Bill are already catered for by the current legal frameworks, that is, the Trademark Act, 2010 and the Copyright Act and Neighbouring Rights Act, 2006.
    • The current legal framework does not define “Counterfeit” as such.
    • The penalties under the proposed legislation and the current legislation are in conflict. Whereas the current law penalties are stringent, the Bill provides for tougher penalties.
    • The current law already provides for inspectors. It is important to note that the role and function of the inspectors is the same in the current law and in the Bill. This creates duplication of roles and makes administration and implementation strenuous and costly to the Government.
    • The current laws comply with the international obligations under the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) with regard to criminal sanctions against trademark, counterfeiting or copy right piracy on commercial scale.

URSB made the following recommendations:
    • Most provisions of this Bill are already provided for in the current legislative framework and hence there is need to harmonize the current laws and the Bill.
    • It is strongly suggested that since the existing legal framework is monitored at the URSB, as a body mandated to register the subject matter of Intellectual Properties, it is equally prudent that the provisions of this Bill that need administration are administered by the URSB. The rationale is that the data base of these rights is maintained by the URSB and therefore the best suited in verifying registered proprietors of these rights. This will entail restructuring the Uganda Registration Services Bureau to accommodate the anti-counterfeit component – (Hon. Latif Ssebagalab rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: What is your problem, hon. Latif?

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I seek guidance from your chair - given that this report is brief, and the recommendations are very clear – they have done their work and they are saying that the Bill should go back to the ministry for redrafting. So isn’t it prudent for the chair to summarise because they have already recommended sending the Bill back to the ministry?

THE SPEAKER: May be you can give a synopsis - summarise. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, this report is very good. If the Chair is going to summarise, I plead with you that the whole report is captured on the Hansard because it is explaining why the Bill should go back for redrafting and stating the other things that should be done. If we do not put them on the Hansard, we could have a complication.

THE SPEAKER: So I will direct the Clerk to place the entire report on the Hansard and so you can summarise since they will put it in the Hansard.

MR MULIMBA: Okay. Madam Speaker, with your guidance, I will directly go to page 9 now where our recommendations are. But we need to understand the committee’s observations that informed the recommendations. So I will start from observations we have skipped the rest of the details.

The committee observed that:
    • The Bill is not about the production and marketing of substandard products but about goods that violate specific types of Intellectual Property Rights. Intellectual Property issues are distinct from issues of quality and safety; just because a patent or trademark or utility model is granted does not mean that the product is of quality or is safe.
    • Various stakeholders, who will be part of the implementers of the law, if passed, were not consulted during the drafting of the Bill.
    • The Bill is about “Counterfeit trademark” and “Copyright piracy.” Thus, the body responsible for the Bill should be the relevant Intellectual Property offices. It seems strange that while Intellectual Property offices are in charge of the trademark and copyright bills, violations of certain types Intellectual Property Rights, which is covered by the Anti-Counterfeiting Goods Bill, 2010, falls within the authority of non-IP bodies such as UNBS.
    • The existing legal framework is monitored at the Uganda Registration Services Bureau, as a body mandated to register the subject matter of Intellectual Property; it is equally prudent that the provisions of this Bill that need administration are administered by the URSB. The rationale is that the data base of these rights is maintained by the URSB and therefore the best suited in verifying registered proprietors of those rights. This Bill will entail restructuring the Uganda Registration Services Bureau to accommodate the anti-counterfeit.
    • Most provisions of this Bill are already provided for in the current legislative framework, that is, the Trademark Act, 2010, the Copyright Act and Neighbouring Rights Act, 2006; hence there is need to harmonise these laws and the Bill.
    • UNBS is a technical institution charged with technical regulations of product safety and production process standards as well as conformity in terms of weights and measures. The committee observed that UNBS does not have the capacity to handle intellectual property.
    • The current capacity of the UNBS IS at 40 percent due to technical, financial and social issues that do not permit it to operate at full capacity. Adding counterfeit goods responsibility without adding the financial resources will mean that it will not be able to enforce the new mandate. The committee observes that additional funding for this new mandate will go a long way to ensure that the Anti-Counterfeit is properly enforced. 
    • The Bill contains issues pertaining to medicines and pharmaceutical products. The issue of medicine should be left to National Drug Authority because when left in the Bill, it would affect the right to access of medicines due to the definition. The definition in the Bill seeks to take generic drugs as counterfeits.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill, 2010 be referred back to the ministry for re-drafting in consultation with the relevant authorities and stakeholders to ensure the above enumerated issues are adhered to and addressed. I thank you. Madam Speaker.

The report was dully signed by almost all members – more than 75 percent and therefore it is a report of the committee. [MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “May God bless you.”]

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Does the minister wish to say anything before we debate? Yes hon. Minister.

6.47
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, I would like to thank the chairman for the statement. However, my ministry started working on the Anti - Counterfeit Goods Bill in 2008. This was as a result of an outcry from the manufacturers who were faced with serious challenges resulting from unscrupulous persons who were counterfeiting their products leading to loss of revenue. In addition, consumers were buying counterfeit goods unknowingly. Some of these counterfeit goods were also substandard and harmful to the consumers. The existing laws have weak enforcement provisions. My ministry believes that this is a trade issue that needs serious and urgent attention of Government.

The first draft of the Anti–Counterfeit Bill was in 2008 and since then Parliament has enacted the Trademark Act, 2010 which now provides for criminal sanctions in case of infringement, although these are not stringent enough as compared to what is proposed in the Anti–Counterfeit Goods Bill. For example, under Trademark Act, 2010, infringement is liable to pay currency points not exceeding 100 or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both. The old trademark law did not have a provision for criminal sanctions.

On the other hand, the Anti–Counterfeit Goods Bill provides for not less than five years or not exceeding 10 years imprisonment or payment of five times the market price of the value of genuine goods and not more than 10 times or both. This clearly shows that the Anti–Counterfeit Goods Bill proposes stiffer punishment to counterfeiters.

Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament, my Ministry acknowledges that Uganda Registration Services Bureau is mandated to register Intellectual Property Rights and that Uganda National Bureau of Standards is not an Intellectual Property body, but a body responsible for standards. The Bill is very clear on this issue. 

We propose the UNBS to administer this Bill because they already have inspectors at several border posts that inspect imports to ensure that they conform to acceptable standards. In the course of their work, as they inspect substandard goods, they encounter many counterfeit products which are in most cases found to be substandard.

Since URSB does not have appointed inspectors at the border posts, it will be easier and cost effective to delegate that responsibility to UNBS.

What will be required is re-orientation of UNBS border and in country inspectors to look out for trademark infringement and pirated copyright products as they carry out the general standards inspection of imports and goods circulating on the market. This will require additional budget and training and is a better option than creating a new institution altogether. 
We believe that UNBS is best suited to administer the Anti- Counterfeit Bill with the collaboration of URSB, URA and other enforcement agencies.

On the issue of the counterfeit medicines and pharmaceutical products, we realised that UNBS does not have the capacity to handle counterfeit medicines, and that this is already a mandate of National Drug Authority. Therefore, the Bill proposes to leave such matters to National Drug Authority as per clause 20.

During the time we were developing this Bill, we consulted a number of stakeholders including URSB and the civil society. We held workshops and meetings to ensure that we get their view. The Bill that was presented had been refined taking into account views presented by stakeholders. Since the EAC has also developed an Anti-Counterfeit Policy and Bill, we ensured that the proposed Bill does not contradict the East African Community Bill.

We are ready to make further consultations with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Uganda Registration Services Bureau and other stakeholders to ensure that the comments are incorporated in the Bill after which it will be re-tabled to Parliament within the next three months.

My ministry is committed to ensuring the protection of our industries and consumers against counterfeit goods. I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. members of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: So in other words, hon. Minister, you are proposing to withdraw the Bill and re-table in three months.

MS KYAMBANDDE: Yes, thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The minister wants to withdraw her Bill, who has an objection to that?

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I am not objecting but I am just asking if the minister is going to present a formal motion to withdraw or we take it that she has withdrawn the Bill?

THE SPEAKER: If you read her statement the result is that she is withdrawing although she has not gone through the drafting of a motion. When I read it, it says; “Let me take it and bring it back” 

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, there is something that the ministry needs to take into account because we have substandard and counterfeit goods. The counterfeit can be handled by URBS but substandard can be handled by UNBS. Therefore, the ministry as they withdraw the Bill, should know that there is a difference between those two.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for a good job done and I would like to thank the minister for quickly conceding the recommendation of the committee. While on consultations with the stakeholders, the hon. Minister clearly says that they did not consult enough and they are going consult others. There are some three other things which are in the report which I think the hon. minister should take note of so that in the next version, we do not get the same comments.

One is on the institutional framework; the committee is very clear that this is within the mandate of the registration services bureau not UNBS. From the statement of the hon. Minister, she seems to think that if boosted the capacity of UNBS, they will be able to do this work and after all they have staff at the borders and so forth. I think it is important that we do not cause a problem in terms of role clashes between our institutions. So, if the URSB does not have the necessary staff, rather than now mixing up roles of institutions, it is better that you streamline this and you do not cause a problem. 

The second issue is on the finance implication. I am sure that at the time of presenting the Bill, there was a Certificate of Financial Implications but then it is clear both in the report of the committee and in the statement of the minister that there will be implications in terms of training, in terms of reorientation of staff, in terms of capacity building. It is important that these are captured and I believe if it is the right procedure, there should be an updated Certificate of Financial Implication for this Bill. 

Finally, the policy issue; it important that you say the East African Community has already developed a policy on this matter but you need also to provide our own policy to give grounding for the Bill. I did not see it coming out and I thought it would also be important. Rather than simply running into the law, give us a policy framework on anti-counterfeit. But otherwise I would like to appreciate the attitude of the hon. minister on this.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, earlier the minister had moved a motion for a second reading, but now when she listened to the report of the committee, she has indicated that she does not want to proceed. I put the question that the Bill should be ready for the second time.

(Question put and negatived.)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE SPEAKER: We had asked the Minister of Finance to lay the supplementary papers and I think he has now surfaced. 

6.57
THE STATE MINISTER FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kassaija): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My apologies, Madam Speaker and colleagues, for having not surfaced at the first time when you called me – I will not go into explanations. 

This august House approved the budget for financial year 2012/13 amounting to Shs 11,475.35 billion. Since the approval of the budget a number of expenditure pressures have mounted and this has necessitated we submit to this House a supplementary funding. The total supplementary expenditure under this schedule and addendum amounts to Shs 555.78 billion. In line with Article 156(2) of our Constitution, I beg to lay before this august House the Supplementary Schedule No.1 for financial year 2012/13. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Budget, where our colleagues will examine and report back.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have seen a supplementary from the minister. You are showing us the expenditure but you are not showing us the revenue which is important. Are we going to steal money, are we going to break Bank of Uganda? Where is this money coming which you are asking to spend. If we are to appropriate and for you to go and spend, you must have a source to avoid you being killed on the way.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have addressed my mind to the Constitution which the minister has read. Sub-Article 2 says that if the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that the need has arisen. But when you look at what we are submitting such as the Shs 7 billion; the purpose is a refund to the DFID of Shs 5.2646 billion and the DANIDA Shs 2.003 billion for funds lost as a result of financial impropriety under the Office of the Prime Minister. So the question is, did we budget and that was insufficient or has the need arisen now that we must pay money which has been stolen and we use the taxpayers’ money to refund that money?

The constitution looks at the situation where you have budgeted but the money is insufficient either because of interest rates or a result of actually appropriation, the need has arisen that you need to work on certain activities. That is what the Constitution envisaged. What you are trying to cure is an unconstitutional conduct by Government where they went to Consolidated Fund; you removed money without parliamentary approval, now you are bringing it to us to pass it under Article 156 which is illegal. What do you intend to do in this respect? Because I do not understand how we can be passing a supplementary under the circumstances saying that under refund for - 

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure. Honourable members, the questions you are asking will be answered in the committee. So, let us end it there. You the chairpersons are our representatives there; you can put the minister to task and then bring it to the House for debate. So, honourable members, I want to thank you for the work done. The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 7.03 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 April 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 
