

Wednesday, 15 April 2020

Parliament met at 2.26 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to begin by amending the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to lay some documents related to the budget. It is on the Order Paper but I thought that I should bring it up.

Secondly, in an effort to enhance communication during this period when we are observing the COVID-19 guidelines, the UNDP, Office of the Clerk, the Ministry of Information & Communication Technology (ICT) and National Guidance have joined hands and arranged for initial video conferencing. We invite members to register and enroll for video conferencing services. 

This will enable members, who are not attending plenary physically, to participate in the proceedings electronically. Therefore, we invite you to register in the ICT office on Third Floor, East Wing – Parliamentary Building. You will be given some training so that in future we can all work together despite not being in the same room. Thank you.

There are a few matters of national concern but I do not see the Prime Minister; I see only one minister. Anyway, let us have hon. Atkins for two minutes.

2.30
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and it is an item you are very passionate about. It regards our starving citizens. In a bid to control the spread - especially community and countrywide spread - of COVID-19, the Head of State put in place measures to ensure that citizens stay in their homes.

Madam Speaker, their only source of livelihood was shut down and among their sources of livelihood is the market. For some of us who come from the border districts, shutting down markets means they have nothing to eat or where to derive their livelihoods. 

Madam Speaker, as I speak now – and I do not think this is limited to me – I have received messages on my phone and a lot of them are heartbreaking. My constituents are saying: “Wait for dead bodies because we cannot find anything to eat.”

Madam Speaker, you watch the news - and I am very sure that is one of the motivations why, this morning, you appeared on one of the television stations to ensure that you stand with the citizens in as far as fast-tracking – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You had only two minutes.

MR KATUSABE: Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I stand here with a passionate plea that it is either now or never that we stand up as people’s representatives to save our fellow citizens that have been locked up in their homes with nothing to eat. This has turned out to be a moral question. You cannot lock up somebody in a room with nothing to eat. This is a countrywide tragedy.

Madam Speaker, my prayers are that the Government, guided by utmost need and urgency, finds money this week – looking at all the districts - with each district getting at least Shs 1 billion. We can, as a country. All these other things that we are trying to figure out –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – hon. Ajedra – have you noted the request from the honourable member; the request to support the country with food? 

2.33
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I have a matter of national importance. Yesterday, in Kanungu District, in the sub-counties of Kihihi and Nyamirama, we received very heavy rains and hailstorms which destroyed crops, specifically in the parishes of Matanda in Kihihi and Rushaka in Nyamirama. The hailstorms destroyed all the food crops and even some birds and animals died.

Through you, Madam Speaker, I pray that the relevant ministry comes to our rescue and helps us immediately because there is nothing to put on the cooking stones. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness is required to examine the situation in Kanungu, especially in those parishes named by hon. Karungi, so that they are given the necessary support.

2.35
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. Last week, on the 7th of April, under the command of Mr Geoffrey Odoi, the Local Defence Unit (LDU) Commander of Lacekotto Detach in Adilang Sub-county, the LDU shot a deaf man named Willy Oloya who was walking at night. They shot him on the left leg and he is doing badly, in Kalongo Hospital. He does not have any help. Up to now, Mr Geoffrey Odoi is at large and nobody has taken any step to arrest him. He was implementing the presidential directive.

Secondly, over the weekend, we had disturbances from the Karimojong, as usual, who speared eight of my people in two sub-counties: 

    1. James Otoo – of Lela adwong in Paimol Sub-county
    2. Phillip Odero - of Locum
    3. Anwyar Santo - Locum
    4. Okot Amos – Buwakol
    5. Omona Joseph – Lela adwong
    6. Okidi Richard – Chwa East

All these are from Paimol Sub County. They were speared by the Karimojong at night, as they were trying to steal their animals.

As we speak now, they are nursing wounds in Kalongo Hospital. I would like to ask Government to cater for their hospital bills and give them relief.

I also pray that Government finds a final solution to the problem of Karimojong cattle rustlers who come to steal our animals. Actually, next week, Madam Speaker, I will request you to permit me to move a motion on the Floor of this House to present the damage caused to us by the Karimojong.

In Lapono sub-county, Mr Oboke Jubuninu and Orem Bosco are also nursing wounds in Kalong Hospital arising out of an attack on them by the Karimojong cattle thieves.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to address the issue of the LDU who shot at a deaf man and examine the cattle rustling by the Karimojong in Agago District. In addition, he should address the issue of the people who have been injured and hospitalised. Hon. Kibalya, two minutes.

2.39
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to address the House on the increasing insecurity in the countryside from the time the curfew was put in place.
Recently, a lot of insecurity is going on and many citizens are losing their lives. A case in point is my area. Just two or three days ago, in Kamuli town, one businessman called Kaja lost everything. He was not killed but the thieves managed to go away with everything after they attacked him in the night.

The following day, the headmaster of Mbulamuti Secondary School was robbed at night. They were actually going to kill the whole family but he was helped by the people who were moving around. Anyhow, they went away with all that was in the house; all the property was stolen.

Yesterday, we buried a lady called Eseza in Namisambya. The lady was hacked to pieces. She was staying alone in the house of her son who is a trailer driver. 

As I speak, there is a young man called Davis whose body Police has just picked from Kayondo Village for postmortem; the insecurity is very high. 

My prayer is that security and surveillance teams should be beefed up in villages. The Minister of Internal Affairs should help us. Otherwise, there are many police officers in Kampala yet in the countryside there are insufficient numbers of police officers. The LDUs they talk about are very few. You cannot actually see any –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs is again requested to examine the situation countrywide. Otherwise, during the curfew, you cannot even go and assist your neighbour. We would like to get measures for security during this lockdown. Come and give us an update on Tuesday next week. Hon. Mwijukye, two minutes.

2.41
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before the COVID-19 Pandemic outbreak, the Ministry of Health got involved in a preparedness phase. Teams were recruited for verification, following up high risk country travelers, communication and management, institutional quarantine and managing suspects, screening people at the airports. 

Later, they recruited teams to respond to the outbreak. These were to do contact tracing, taking samples and conducting laboratory tests. They went to hotels where people were being quarantined and to communities.

They also recruited drivers. There was another team on the national task force and surveillance committee. Some of the drivers were got from ministries. Others were newly recruited. The ministry got vehicles from World Health Organisation (WHO).

Madam Speaker, the preparedness started in January because that is when they deployed these people. However, as we talk, all these teams have not been paid for three months. The ministry says they are tracing 18,000 people for testing yet the people who are moving around have not been paid for three months. They are threatening to lay down their tools. People in laboratories are saying they cannot continue working without payment. 

Madam Speaker, some of the vehicles they are using are for WHO. The World Health Organisation said since they are not getting enough funding, they have started withdrawing the vehicles. 

When these people sent messages to the Permanent Secretary, Dr Diana Atwine, she said that if they don’t want to work, they would be replaced with other people.

Madam Speaker, we passed money here for the Ministry of Health. It is, therefore, important for us to know when these people are going to be paid. Otherwise, we are not going to defeat this pandemic, if people are going to be working without payments from the ministry.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, we enhanced the supplementary budget for the Ministry of Health from Shs 62 billion to over Shs 100 billion. I believe part of that supplementary was to cater for staffing. We would like to therefore, ask the minister to give us an update on Tuesday next week, why these 300 people have not been paid and when they intend to pay them. Hon. Peter Mugema, two minutes.

2.54
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance regarding the issue of traders in Iganga Municipality.
Madam Speaker, you are aware that for the last three weeks or so, traders were directed by His Excellency to stay home. Last week on Thursday, the Iganga RDC, Ms Eva Kiwesiga, decided to move to the town and demolished all kiosks in there yet to erect a single kiosk costs about Shs 2.7 million.

Madam Speaker, these people have been trading in merchandise like clothes, shoes among others. The RDC did not heed to the advice of the President. The President directed that the sitting landlords should not send away tenants who have not paid their rent dues.

These traders pay for operational licenses for a year. In fact, as I speak, over 600 people have no business. By the time they come out of the lockdown, they will have nowhere to start from and nothing to start with.

Madam Speaker, I am seeking your advice on whether you can direct the RDC to stop what she is doing. Otherwise, she is always on radios saying that she is going to demolish more because she is the representative of the President and has powers from above. When I tried to inquire from the Town Clerk, he told me that he cannot control the RDC because he fears that the eventualities could be court litigations, which at the end of the day, the municipality officials will have to pay.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for the Presidency is directed to urgently address the situation in Iganga Municipality and give us an update on Tuesday.

2.47
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU	(FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government has indicated that they are going to release prisoners who committed minor offences and those who are about to complete their sentences. That is a good gesture in light of the current pandemic that we are experiencing.

However, we have another category of people in prison who have never been tried and yet they are equally likely to be affected by this pandemic. I am speaking in light of the people of Rwenzori from the districts of Kasese, Kabarole, Bunyangabo, Ntoroko and Bundibugyo who were arrested in 2016 but up to now, they are still detained in Kirinya Prison and have never been tried.

I would like to evoke Articles 21, 23 and 28 of the Constitution. Since the people from the Rwenzoris, who were arrested in 2016, have never been tried in court and yet this pandemic is threatening everyone around the globe, I seek your indulgence that Government considers adding these people on the list of those to be released so that they are not affected by this pandemic. I beg to pray.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the Ministry of Justice is directed to come to this House and show cause why the prisoners from Rwenzururu who were arrested in 2016 and have never been tried are still in custody but also whether they cannot be added to those who are about to be released in lieu of reducing congestion under the COVID-19 pandemic.

2.50
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, thank you so much for allowing me to raise this matter of national importance. On the porous border, the fishing community of Lake Albert has a double tragedy. As we are trying to watch our borders against the coronavirus, we now have Ebola. Four days ago, Bunia town and other neighbouring towns have confirmed cases of both Ebola and coronavirus. A better diction is double jeopardy. 

When night lake fishing was introduced as well as closing of the border markets, I made a request, during the Prime Minister’s Question Time, that we should get special consideration for that porous border. It requires more deployment, which should come with food because these people are 100 per cent dependent on night fishing and border markets. Now that they have been closed, we have a very big temptation - Last weekend, after the 14 days, they had finished all that they had. They only sell fish to get food and now it is not possible.

I would like to request Government to take this as a priority. If we are going to enforce that fluid porous border, let us have more deployment but with food. Now that the regional food distribution we requested for is not forthcoming, can we start with Lake Albert and neighbours from Semiliki through Ntoroko District to Kagadi, Hoima, Buliisa and Nebbi districts? We are all neighbours of DRC and we know what that can mean.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk should write directly to the Chairman of the National Task Force to address the issue of border security but to also deal with issue of food because now, the fishing community has no access to their industry and they also need food urgently during this 21-day lockdown.

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, before I lay the corrigenda, I wish to apologise to the House for delaying to lay these documents, which should have come at the time of laying the Budget.

I beg to lay on the Table: 

(i) 	A five year period of focus of economic indicators such as GDP, inflation, employment, exchange rate, interest rates, etc.

(ii) 	The fiscal framework on debt servicing demonstrated in two parts (1) domestic interest rates, (2) domestic refinancing.

(iii) 	The Treasury Memorandum indicating that no monies have been recovered as a result of the recommendations of the Auditor-General’s Report for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

(iv) 	A report on public debt, guarantees and other liabilities of Government for the Financial Year 2019/2020 alongside the Budget that was laid previously for the next financial year.

(v) 	Statement of the tax expenditures of Government for the period July 2019 to March 2020.

(vi)	The annual budgets of self-accounting departments, commissions and organisations set up under the Constitution that were provided but not lack of opinion of the Government on these budgets.

(vii) 	A Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance of the Budget; and 

(viii) The corrigenda for the Budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Lastly, it is also important to note that we are not drawing any monies from the Petroleum Fund to finance the Budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had brought to us the Public Finance Management Act to consider it at length and pass it. However, ever since it came into effect, the finance ministry has never fulfilled the requirements of that Act. You are late every year; you have to be reminded. I do not know what you want us to do but it is really untidy.

It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back.

BILLS
 SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Are there any seconders? It is seconded. Give the justification.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, the justification for this Bill is mainly for purposes of enhanced revenue collection. Currently, the Government collects about 13.2 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in taxes. 

The proposal, under the Domestic Revenue Mobilisation Strategy, is to raise the tax to GDP to 18 per cent. So, the purpose of these Bills is, therefore, to enhance revenue so as to finance the next budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

The overall revenue target that has been set by the finance ministry for the next financial year is Shs 21.724 trillion, which translates to about 15 per cent, compared to the out turn of Shs 18.9 trillion for the Financial Year 2019/2020. The tax to GDP ratio currently is estimated at 13.6 per cent. It is our hope as a ministry that through these tax measures, we expect to raise the revenue to about Shs 21.7 trillion. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the macro-economic assumptions, inflation, economic growth and foreign exchange depreciation import indices and so on will also be enhanced through this.

The tax policy measures that we have put in place will generate about Shs 677 billion and Uganda revenue tax administration measures will raise about Shs 579 billion. We are proposing adjustments in excise tax, VAT, income tax, stamp duty and non-tax revenue regimes in order to maintain the moment in domestic revenue mobilisation.

Government has also clarified on tax incentives - which have already been passed by the House – to investors, as provided in tax laws, to promote stragetic investment. We are also proposing technical amendments to tax laws to clarify on some of the compliance issues that may not have been very clear.

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson of the committee, present your report.

3.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and made the following observations.

Section 28(3) of the Act currently provides that a person is allowed a claim on VAT, which is incurred not more than six months, prior to the person being registered for VAT, provided the supply or import was for use in the business of a taxable person.

Clause 2(a) proposes that a manufacturer will be allowed a claim for input VAT incurred not more than 12 months, prior to the person being registered for VAT. The amendment will increase the period for which manufacturers can claim input VAT credit after registering for VAT. Most investments in manufacturing take a long time before producing taxable supplies. In this regard, the proposed amendment will ease the cash flow on manufacturers, prior to commencing actual sales of manufactured products.

Clause 2(b) of the Bill proposes that an owner of more than one commercial building shall account for tax for each commercial building separately, and shall not claim tax credits on inputs used in the construction of an incomplete building, against the tax collected from a completed commercial. It is not clear how the input tax incurred on purchases for the projects under construction for more than six months will be claimed. 

The VAT Act is equitable, where the supplier accounts for output tax while the purchaser claims the input incurred. However, in this case, the suppliers of goods and services for projects under construction will be expected to account for the output while on the other hand, developers cannot claim the input tax credit on their purchasers.

This is bound to increase the administrative cost for companies in the business of commercial property, since they will have to either obtain separate tax invoices for shared supplies for each property or apportion a single invoice among the properties owned.

The proposal will impact the real estate sector by increasing the cost of each project, threatening the viability of many developers currently undertaking debt-funded projects.

It is not clear how the input tax incurred on purchases for projects under construction for more than six months will be claimed.

Claims for expenses supported by e-invoices

Clause 2(b) (4a) in the Bill proposes that a taxable person, who is allowed a tax credit on purchase of goods and services from a supplier who is designated to use e-invoicing system, shall only claim a tax credit on expenses supported by electronic invoices or electronic receipts. 

This will promote digitisation of the economy and improve tax compliance. It will also ensure real time reporting of transactions. The amendment will also limit abuse of the electronic invoicing system as it provides an incentive to taxable persons to ensure that they demand for e-invoices in order for them to claim import tax credit from Uganda Revenue Authority. 

Offsets and refunds of VAT

Madam Speaker, Clause 3 proposes to give a taxpayer a minimum period of three months to offset VAT on his or her purchases from the final VAT. After that period, the taxable person shall not claim a refund. 

VAT is a consumption tax that developers and other taxable persons are not supposed to be burdened by. This proposal creates a burden on the developer and allows the tax authorities to benefit from income that they are not entitled to for the duration of the projection. 

For example, Madam Speaker, the NSSF submitted that URA currently owes the fund VAT approximately Shs 12 billion incurred on the construction of pension towers. This amount of VAT expected to be incurred during the project is estimated to be Shs 58 billion. The current law requires URA to refund these amounts to the fund during the entire project life. 

Proposed exemptions

Madam Speaker, Clause 5(a) seeks to exempt combined harvesters and trailers for agricultural purposes from VAT. 

However, this will have a negative impact for companies engaged in the manufacture of agricultural trailers in Uganda, making fabrication uneconomic. 

The materials and parts that are used to manufacture the trailers will have VAT charged on them when they buy or import yet they will not be able to claim the VAT input at the sale. This will lead to an increase in the production cost of 18 per cent rendering the production uncompetitive with imported agricultural trailers. Therefore, parts and materials used in the fabrication of agricultural trailers should be exempt from VAT to keep the industry in Uganda competitive. 

There are many other categories of agricultural implements that still have VAT charged on them and we would encourage that these are added on the list. These include:

    a) Tractor mounted hay mowers, slashers, rakes and tedders. 
    b) Crop sprayers;
    c) Hay and straw balers;
    d) Tractor mounted hole diggers/borers;
    e) Tractor mounted scrappers, levelling blades and dam scoops;
    f) Root or tuber harvesting machinery;
    g) Tractor mounted loaders;
    h) Irrigation equipment;
    i) Drinkers and feeders for all farm animals;
    j) Tuber harvesting machinery.

Clause 5(b) provides for exempt supplies by making a substitution that will require a local investor with an investment of at least $1 million in the listed sectors, to have a minimum of 100 citizen employees in order to qualify for a ten-year exemption for listed supplies. 

That is feasibility study, design, supply of locally produced materials for construction of a factory or a warehouse and inputs of machinery or equipment.

The requirement for 100 citizen employees threshold for $1 million investment is discriminatory and locks local investors out of the very fundamental ten-year incentive and enabler. 

The proposal seeks to replace the current requirement which threshold is 65 per cent of employees being citizens. Note that the proposed amendment is discriminatory in two ways:

    a) Any local investor with $1 million project that employs 100 employees for the sake of qualifying for a ten-year exemption will be discriminated against because that project will more likely than note wind up before its second anniversary.

    b) Secondly, local investors, shunned by such an amendment, will keep away or if they do not and from a competitive perspective, they will risk losing the investment to foreign entities that will operate at a larger scale with a ten-year brick.

The percentage threshold should be maintained and increased to 70 per cent of the employees being citizens. However, Madam Speaker, employment of citizens should be gainful and as far as is practical skilled labour.

There is need to lower the capital requirements for citizens and further encourage investments placed upcountry as follows; $300,000 for – Madam Speaker, there is an anomaly here. The word, “municipalities” should be, “Kampala Metropolitan” and $150,000 for upcountry.

Tourism Sector

The tourism sector has been the worst hard-hit by the COVID-19 Pandemic. Therefore, there is need to prioritise the promotion and development of Meetings, Incentives, Conferences and Exhibition (MICE), and generally the tourism sector.

Therefore, the need for tax incentive to subsidise MICE infrastructure investment that would not incur in absence of tax relief.

Tax incentives will not only promote increased or additional investment in tourism enterprises but also increase investment or spending by those undertaking tourism related activities. 

Madam Speaker, the committee would like to recommend as follows:

    1. Uganda Revenue Authority strengthens its tax investigation department so that audits can be carried out where there is suspicion on VAT claims. 

    2. The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

I beg to move. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a copy of the original report together with other documents, which we used to scrutinise the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and Members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for a good job done on the VAT proposals. 

Honourable members, the report has been signed by a multitude of members and you are free to make your comments.

3.16
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja East Municipality, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

I would like to support the committee in respect of the proposed amendment which says that there will be no claiming of VAT on incomplete buildings. Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, you will agree with me that most indigenous investors have no exemption on VAT. It is mostly the projects which have exemptions. Once they are doing construction, VAT would amount to 18 per cent of the cost. Therefore, if there are no claims of tax credits for incomplete buildings, this will mean that Government will hold onto the investor’s money, and this would have helped if it is paid by Government, to maybe take him to another step.

The other angle is where, let us say, I am selling my property or I have invested Shs 5 billion and I have a VAT credit which I would have claimed. Because the law does not allow me to claim VAT on an incomplete building, that would mean that if I am selling property to say hon. Musumba, that would mean that I am going to lose my tax credits in VAT because I will be selling “as is” at that time.

I would, therefore, like to interest the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that this proposal does not intend to promote business in the real sense. Under this COVID-19 arrangement, for instance, Government should be considering VAT refunds. As we speak now, the chairperson has talked about Shs 12 billion for NSSF but there are very many construction companies where Government is holding a lot of money in VAT refunds yet by law they are supposed to refund these companies. Therefore, I would like to invite the minister to concede on this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Yesterday, a Member commented that the local investors may not be aware of their rights under the investment code. I do not know how far the ministry goes in educating the public about their rights under the law. I hope we can get some answers.

3.18
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with a very good report. 

I implore Members to support their recommendations, particularly of the following clauses: clause 2(b) (4a) tends to impute that a building on its own is the taxpayer, if you look at it, yet at the end of the day, the taxpayer is an individual. So, why do you want to penalise the taxpayer who is adding more to our infrastructure development? It is a very retrogressive clause and I beg Members to support the committee and delete it.

Regarding clause 3, why should a taxpayer continue to beg for his or her tax refund from URA without receiving it? Why do you want to limit the principle of offset to only three months and yet when a person comes to demand, they never get the refund? Refunds from URA are a tall order. Therefore, the principle of offset should be maintained as provided in the principal Act and I would like the Members to support the committee.

Lastly, in respect of tourism, I would implore Members to see how we can support this particular sector. If you look around the region, it is only Uganda which has few properties that are hotels managed by international groups. There is a lot of benefit which we get from international companies managing hotels in Uganda. We would need to see more Marriotts, Radissons and more of those important brands. However, because of our limited exemptions in the sector, our tourism sector is lagging behind and yet we would need it to reinvigorate the economy when COVID-19 goes away. I, therefore, implore Members to support the committee’s recommendations and help Ugandans in these sectors.

3.21
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank You, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, there are two issues I wish to address. 

One, yesterday, we passed the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2020 and agreed that for the definition of upcountry, we put the threshold at $100,000. Now, here, the committee is talking of $150,000. Therefore, the chairperson will have to explain and tell us why there is that variation –(Mr Musasizi rose_) - Assuming you will not enter into my time. Why don’t you wait?

THE SPEAKER: Hold on; let him finish.

MR NZOGHU: Secondly, Madam Speaker, one of the objects of the Bill is to exempt the Islamic Development Bank from tax. I would like the committee to explain what the fate of other commercial banks will be. If we exempt one bank against other banks, what form of legislation are we making?

3.23
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report.  

If you look at sub-clause (4a) of clause 2, the refund of a tax credit is on the consumption of that particular input. I will give you an example. Once you have got a tax credit on iron bars, for example, once you have utilised them, then you are entitled to a refund. You do not have to wait until you roof the building before you are entitled to a tax refund.

The proposed amendment as it is in the Bill is very retrogressive and it also keeps the investor’s capital or money. If, for example, you are in this construction business, you do it progressively; you do it from foundation level to finishing level. Therefore, at any stage when you complete and you have utilised that particular input, then you are entitled to the tax refund. I, therefore, agree with the committee’s proposal that this particular amendment is very retrogressive.

Madam Speaker, clause 3(2b) introduces a forfeiture - that the taxpayer must now forfeit the refund if he has not claimed it within three months. I would like to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development the wisdom of this. You put three months, why not two or six months or a year? This is not your money but the taxpayer’s money. This would be an unjust benefit by Government, that if you have not claimed money within three months, then you forfeit it. I think this is very retrogressive. 

3.26
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA KIGOZI (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two points to comment on from the report. Before that, I would like to thank the honourable member for presenting a very good report. 

I concur with and support the idea that the imported equipment, like combined harvesters and sprayers, be taxed more heavily than those ones manufactured here. In fact, for the ones manufactured here, the tax should be completely removed because we should aim at import substitution and also support capital accumulation in the economy. That is the way to go so that in future, we depend on our own technology and other things. 

Secondly and lastly, there is the proposal that foreign investors are required to employ at least 65 per cent citizens, which has been increased to 70 per cent, if I understood you well. In my opinion, it should even be increased to at least 80 per cent. From my experience in the infrastructure committee, as we were supervising projects, mainly by the Chinese, we have people who can ably handle most of those functions in the industries but these people bring in their foreigners and leave out the others. 

Again, even after putting it at 80 per cent, we should go on to increase it at a progressive rate every two or three years to about 90 or 95 per cent, so that in the end we have all these industries being managed by Ugandans. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

3.29
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I would like to seek for more information.

Clause 2, paragraph (b) (4a) says, “An owner of more than one commercial building shall account for tax for each commercial building separately and shall not claim tax credits on inputs used in the construction of an incomplete building against the tax collected from a completed commercial building.” 

I would like to seek clarification from the committee on this. The inputs this investor would be claiming would have already been used. If you have bought something, for example, and you are claiming but it has already been used in the new structure, the report is saying that you should not claim that which has not been used. I would like the committee to come out clear on this.

Secondly, when you want to handle every small structure differently – somebody is constructing a toilet or a separate building, you add the tax - isn’t it going to make the investors run away? Are people not going to be stuck? Isn’t this going to be too much? I would like the committee to come out clearly on this. Otherwise, all the other sections – 

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the chairperson to give the clarification on the issues raised? 

3.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are three comments I would like to make. 

The honourable Member from Kasese, hon. Nzoghu, had a concern about the US $100,000 vis-à-vis the US $150,000. Madam Speaker, yesterday, when I first presented the report on Stamp Duty, there was an anomaly of US $100,000, which we later corrected. The actual figure is US $150,000.

The second one is what hon. Silwany has raised, that why should we require property developers to account for VAT on each separate project and why should there be a limitation on developers not claiming VAT from one project to another. Madam Speaker, this is the proposal that the minister brought before the committee. The committee considered it and made various observations, which have been properly captured in the report. When we get to the committee stage, we shall be proposing – I do not want to pre-empt but we shall deal with it when we get there. 

Lastly, I would like to comment on the Islamic Development Bank. Madam Speaker, when the minister appeared before the committee, in his submission he stated that Government intends to fulfil the commitment to relieve the Islamic Development Bank from payment of VAT. The Government entered into a host country agreement with the Islamic Development Bank, which provides for a VAT relief. The minister is here, he can give further information on this aspect. I do not want to do much of his work when – 

THE SPEAKER: Give the rationale for those proposals, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Let us hear from him. 

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the chairperson of the finance committee has said, the Government of the Republic of Uganda entered into a host country agreement with the Islamic Development Bank. One of the clauses that were stipulated in the agreement was that there will be a VAT relief. That is the basis on which now we are seeking the exemption of the Islamic Development Bank from VAT. Therefore, it emanates from the agreement that the Government signed with the Islamic Development Bank. We are just trying to formalise what was in the agreement. 

MR BASALIRWA: On the issue of the Islamic Development Bank, once a Government enters into a bilateral agreement, that agreement is binding. Madam Speaker, under international law, there is a principle we call pacta sunt servanda - a binding obligation of an agreement. A country cannot hide under domestic law to circumvent its obligations under international law. 

In other words, once you enter into an international agreement, you are in effect surrendering part of your domestic sovereignty. The only way we can overcome this is if we terminate the agreement we signed with the Islamic Development Bank. However, the issue is, is it in our interest, as a country, considering what the Islamic Development Bank has done for this country? That is the clarification I wanted to give, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No one is taking issue with it. The minister says it is part of the agreement. If it is part of the agreement then we are bound by our obligations. 

Honourable members, I put the question – Honourable member, I have been looking around and I did not see you standing. Have you just woken up now?   

3.37
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in appreciating the committee’s work. 

Honourable colleagues, as you know, we are hit by this pandemic and we should now be looking at revamping and strengthening our agricultural production, so that we feed our people in the country and in the whole of East Africa. Today, I read in the papers that the food distribution has been halted because there are no beans. It is not a very good sign because we have had a lot of rain and therefore, we should have had plenty of beans. This is because we have not been focusing on agriculture. 

Madam Speaker, I think that this is the time to invest heavily in agriculture and especially in the health sector. Therefore, I would like to agree with the committee when they say that if we put VAT on these agricultural implements, we would be doing a disservice to our country; we would not be encouraging local production. 

I would like to agree with the committee that we should actually exempt VAT on locally manufactured implements. In addition, we should encourage local investors and give them funding through Uganda Development Bank so that we can increase agricultural production of implements, which will enhance and revamp our agricultural production and we become a –(Member timed out.) 

3.39
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in appreciating the good work done by the committee. 

I would like to go back to the issue of commercial buildings in clause 2(b). I think it is very important for us to give a definition of a commercial building for VAT purposes because it is confusing in some instances. If I have a residential house, which I am renting to someone as an office, is it commercial? I am raising this because of the confusion we have in the sector. I think that we lose nothing if we can be very definite and define this. 

I would propose that a commercial building should mean a building which is set up for purposes of either rental space for office or wholesale/retail business. That would be my proposal. In the sector where we are, we know the confusion that has been there; many people are trying to define this and you find it very difficult, especially with accountants.

Secondly, I also support the e-receipts proposed under clause 2(b). However, I would also propose that we defer the implementation of that until we put in place a framework for e-receipts. Currently, we do not have clear regulations and a framework for e-receipts. I support 100 per cent –(Member timed out.) 

MR SILWANY: What hon. Tayebwa is saying is right, and I would like to give information. If you are sleeping in a house and part of that house is being rented out, where does this building fall? Is it commercial or residential? You are sleeping in one part but maybe the other room is being rented out; where does it fall? Therefore, the definition is very important. That is the information I wanted to give.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is the definition currently under the law?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is good this is a continuous learning process. You can only claim VAT if you are a registered VAT taxpayer. You can have trillions of shillings not claimed if you are not registered. Therefore, I would like to implore my brother Tayebwa that if you have residential properties of which you collect income of more than Shs 50 million, go and register for VAT so that all your inputs will be claimed.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think the concern of hon. Tayebwa is not without merit. I am aware, for example, that under the Local Government (Rating) Act, which this Government passed for purposes of property rates, there is a definition of a commercial building. I think it is important for the committee to really consider this. That law specifically defines a commercial building to mean a building the whole or any part of which is used for purposes of any business. That is how that law defines a commercial building.

When we are making tax laws, clarity is also very important. I am aware people are arguing that this is about VAT but even if it is VAT, it does not permit room for vagueness. We do not lose anything from being very clear on this matter. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, is there any harm in defining? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance. The committee is proposing a deletion of this clause. Therefore, the guidance I am seeking from you is whether we need to define a term, which we are not going to use in the Bill.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, VAT is a different tax head and it has its own formula of calculation. It cannot be mixed with income tax or anything else. This is a tax head, which has its own formula; you calculate it by your inputs and outputs. If you do not output more than you input, you claim. If you have nothing, you declare. Its filing of returns is every month. It cannot be mixed. 

A commercial building that you are constructing – If you have bought the building from somebody who has registered for VAT, you are supposed to claim. Therefore, it cannot be mixed as if you are going to collect rental income. Rental income is different from income tax. Value added tax is its own entity and it has got its own law and the calculations are clear in the VAT statute of 1996. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is it defined in any of the tax laws? That is what is what I want to know.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Yes, it is defined in that VAT statute.

THE SPEAKER: Is the word “commercial building” defined anywhere in any of the tax laws?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is defined. A commercial building gets what we call capital allowances, and it can only get capital allowances when it is clearly defined. When you construct a building for purposes of commerce or industry, it is clearly defined that you will be given capital allowances, which is two per cent per annum for a commercial building. Therefore, in the law – I think it is in the tax procedures law – a commercial building has been defined.

THE SPEAKER: Is it the Tax Procedures Code Act?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, I think it is somewhere there. If you gave me time, I could –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you look for it. Let us have hon. Kangwagye. 

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Tayebwa was very clear. He was asking that, in a situation where you find someone has a house that used to be a residential house but he has now changed the plan and decided to put another project in that very house, where does that person go and how do you define that project in terms of VAT? Am I right, hon. Tayebwa –(Interjection)- Exactly! 

We need the law to capture that. When somebody has been staying in their house and all of a sudden, he turns it into a warehouse, where does that project belong? Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, you are literally confusing various tax laws. You need to look at the Value Added Tax Act in its entirety and look at sections 4 to 8. Those sections particularly define who is liable to pay value added tax. They also tell you how you become liable. 

If you start looking at the income from commercial or rental buildings in respect of the value added tax, you are totally missing the point. In this particular one, you are the one going to claim that, “yes, I have registered because of the conditions under this particular law and my claim is this and that”. Don’t confuse the rental income you are earning with value added tax. Just look at the Act itself, sections 4 to 8, and then you will rest your case.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, maybe to help, under the second schedule of the VAT Act, it is clearly stated that any property, like an apartment, used for rent, holiday and whatever are exempt. It is on exempt supplies and (f) says, “a supply by way of lease or letting of immovable property, other than– 

    (i) a lease or letting of commercial premises…
    (v) a lease or letting of service apartments.” 

What it is clearly saying is that anything you use, like even your house for renting, falls under paragraph (f) (v).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 2 as follows: Under paragraph (b), delete the proposed subsection (4a). 

Our justification is that the VAT Act is equitable where the supplier accounts for output tax while the purchaser claims the input incurred. However, in this case, the supplier of goods and services for projects under construction will be expected to account for the output while, on the other hand, developers cannot claim the input tax credit on their purchases. 

Secondly, this is bound to increase the administrative costs for companies in the business of commercial property since they will have to either obtain separate tax invoices for shared supplies for each property or apportion a single invoice among the property owned. 

The proposal will also impact on the real estate sector by increasing the cost of each project, threatening the viability of many developers currently undertaking debt-funded projects. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 3. Our justification is that VAT is a consumptive tax, thus the developer and other taxable persons are not supposed to be burdened by it. This proposal creates a burden on the developer and allows the tax authorities to benefit from the income that they are not entitled to for the duration of the project.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend clause 5 as follows: 

1. Under paragraph (a), insert new subparagraphs as follows:

“(xxxx) tractor mounted hay mowers, slashers, rakes and tedders; crop sprayers, hay and straw balers; tractor mounted hole diggers/borers; tractor mounted scrapers, levelling blades and dam scoops; root or tuber harvesting machinery; tractor mounted loaders; irrigation equipment; drinkers and feeders for all farm animals; tuber harvesting machinery.”

The justification is: to support the mechanisation of agriculture.

2. Under paragraph (b) (pp), substitute “and whose investment capital is at least ten million United States dollars in the case of a foreigner or one million United States dollars in the case of a citizen for ten years who, subject to availability, uses at least fifty per cent of locally sourced raw materials and employs at least one hundred citizens” with the following:
 
“whose minimum investment capital is ten million United States dollars in the case a foreigner or three hundred thousand United States dollars in case of a citizen; or one hundred and fifty thousand United States dollars for a citizen whose investment is placed upcountry, who uses at least 70 per cent of the raw materials that are locally sourced, subject to their availability, and at least 70 per cent of the employees are citizens earning an aggregate wage of at least 70 per cent of the total wage bill.”

Justification 

    a) The number 100 employees may not be viable for some companies, which work smart and do not need a total number of 100 employees. However, this can be expressed as a percentage as is the case currently under the Value Added Tax Act.
    b)  To ensure that this benefits a larger proportion of the local economy. This can also be instrumental in enhancing and strengthening forward and backward linkages between free zones and/or industrial parks and Uganda’s farmers who comprise 80 per cent of the local economy.
    c) To encourage development and investment in the rural areas as opposed to concentration of investments in towns.

3. Under paragraph (c), we propose to delete (fff).

Our justification is that implementation of digital stamps is at a cost. The service provider therefore earns income from rendering this service and he or she should contribute to the growth of our economy.

We propose to delete the word “imported” appearing in the proposed (hhh). The justification is that the exemption must be extended to local suppliers.

4. Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert new subparagraphs immediately after paragraph (kkk) as follows:
a) 	“(lll) the supply of locally developed computer software, its maintenance and software licences.”

	The justification is: to support technological development among the youth.

b) 	“(mmm) the supply of services to conduct a feasibility study, design and construction; the supply of locally produced materials for construction of premises, infrastructure, machinery and equipment or furnishings and fittings, which are not available on the local market, to a hotel or tourism facility developer whose investment capital is eight million United States dollars with a room capacity not exceeding 30 rooms; or to a meetings, incentives, conferences and exhibitions facility developer whose investment capital is not less than one million United States dollars.”

c) 	“(nnn) the supply of services to conduct a feasibility study design and construction; the supply of locally produced materials for construction of premises, infrastructure, machinery and equipment or furnishings and fittings which are not manufactured on the local market to a hotel or tourism facility developer whose investment capital is ten million United States dollars, with a room capacity not exceeding 30 rooms; or to a meetings incentives, conferences and exhibitions facility…” -

Madam Chairperson, I propose that (nnn) be dropped because it is catered for in (mmm). I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, yesterday, there was some disquiet about the word “subject to the availability” because it is open to abuse. I hope you are able to say something about it. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification from the chairman of the committee as to why the committee decided to use “at least 50 per cent” and not say “50 per cent or are above”.

On page 9, the committee says, “substitute for ‘and whose investment capital is at least 10 million United States dollars in the case of a foreigner or one million United States dollars in the case of citizen for ten years who, subject to availability, uses at least…” Why don’t we define it more clearly and say “50 per cent and above”?

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have not got his point clearly. However, I think principally, the whole idea of employing 70 per cent citizens is to ensure that our local people find their way into employment, especially in the foreign owned companies.

We have also insisted that we should not only look at the numbers but look at the wage bill - How much is being left to our citizens and how much is going away? We are therefore saying not only should 70 per cent be for the number of employees in the company but our local citizens must be earning 70 per cent of the wage bill.

Madam Chairperson, you raised a concern, which is a concern the committee has noted over the years. For your information, we first dealt with these proposals when we were considering the Investment Code Act. Last year, when we were considering the tax Bills, the same wording came up and this argument has always come up - that if we open a window to allow for “subject to availability”, someone can come and say that “I imported the material because it was not available in the local market.”

I tend to agree that some people can use this as a window to abuse the intentions of this provision. However, I am at the same time persuaded by the fact that some of the material required in production may not be available in the market.

In these circumstances, the only hope is in the implementors of the law to ensure that they have proper guidelines on how they determine what is available in the local market and what is not. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, by the time you take a decision to invest, you have done your research and know what is available. How can you be gambling when you are an investor?

After we made the petroleum laws, some of those old people started importing beef and eggs from South Africa and yet, we have animals in Hoima - we have eggs and beef; those are the kinds of things that give them a leeway.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is true that before you make a decision to invest in a particular country, you will have done your feasibility studies in terms of availability of raw material, equipment and manpower.

However, in the course of implementation of the project, things change and you find that material that was available at a particular time might not be available. And, therefore, you have to resort to importing so as to sustain your production.

A similar case in point is one of the investors doing tyres in Mbalala; he knew that he was going to get raw material from DRC for his tyres but the situation there made it difficult for him.

He wanted to plant rubber in Hoima but land was not available. These were all in his feasibility studies and so, he resorted to importing raw materials from China.

You will have done that research, got market analysis and everything but circumstances change in the course of the implementation. There is need for us to make provisions so that we do not hamper operations. I beg to submit.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the committee for that amendment, which requires these incentives, especially in terms of the wage. 

The committee’s proposal of 100 people initially is good but not very good. We must stick to the wage bill because the numbers may close out those companies that are not employing up to 100 people. But let us concentrate on having a wage bill that is catering for the local people up to 70 per cent. Thank you very much. 

MR SSEMPALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concur with the wage bill being 70 per cent but then, I would like to inquire from the minister and the chairperson of the committee why we do not agree that if the labour percentage is 70 per cent, we should also ensure that progressively, the percentage will go up as the company grows.

Even at this point, I am of the opinion - and sincerely agree - that we have manpower but these foreign countries do not want to use our manpower because they want to repatriate our money.

Secondly, even if the manpower is not here, we have it outside this country but the problem is that these people pay low salaries to the local experts. If they paid the same rates as the expatriates, our very expert people in other countries would definitely come back and take up these jobs. That is why we should ensure that we progressively increase the percentage of the locals into these countries so that we take over –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. The reason we are going with the percentage is that supposing you have 200 casual labourers, each of them earning Shs 100,000, that would be about Shs 20,000,000 but there will be only two experts earning $2,000.

The wisdom of the committee is that the per centage of the workforce should be a minimum of 70 per cent; the wage bill should also be a minimum of 70 per cent.

You may have very many but at least, the wage bill should take only a minimum of 30 per cent. This law, which has come today, progressively next year when you see it improving, we can adjust.

MR SSEMPALA: Thank you for the information. As I said, we should definitely allow this progressive increase in the labourforce in these companies. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, we should go for the wage bill because if you did a check with the Commissioner of Labour, in all these industries, the heads of department are foreigners who have no qualification at all but the actual people doing work in these factories are indigenous people who have the qualifications. 
If you went to one of these banks, like Diamond Trust Bank, at the end of the month, they send back money to their countries and yet, they are not more qualified than the people working under them. At the end of the day, they are repatriating almost all the money.

I would like to implore you, honourable colleagues, that we protect our people who are not in charge but are being exploited. An example of a deputy head of department somewhere is earning seven times more than the indigenous persons but this foreigner who actually has no qualification.

Therefore, I would like to support the wage bill. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. On the issue of raw materials and availability, from experience, you come here and want to support the local sector on the raw materials from around. However, someone comes, sets up a factory, imports and even gets better rates than the locally available materials. I think it is a challenge, which the ministry needs to look into deeply and we see how best we can help.

For example, in cosmetics, when you are going to do extracts for avocado, it is cheaper to import them from India than do local extracts. It is very difficult. 

Madam Chairperson, on the issue of the percentage for jobs versus salary, I totally support honourable colleagues. In fact, it should even go around 80 per cent. When the Committee on Natural Resources went to Jinja to visit the dam, we were told that the CEO of Eskom who is running it here might be taking a salary of around 40 local employees. We need to look into this deeply. 

We should also learn from banks. The Bank of Uganda had improved on controlling this sector. Why should you say that for over ten years, you are going to be employing foreigners, when you have local people who have capacity to do the job?

We should even put a limit of around five years. Within five years, you should have improved or developed local capacity for our people to ensure that they are the ones occupying these positions. Otherwise, people keep changing and bringing in foreigners, when they are not the ones doing the job.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, we should look beyond. Let us put a limit. You should employ foreigners if local people cannot do the job but you should be given not more than five years to ensure that you develop local capacity. Banks are trying to do it.

If we have a Ugandan managing a big bank like Stanbic Bank, how do you tell me that the smallest bank cannot have an MD who is a Ugandan? This is abuse of the whole process. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what is your proposal?

MR TAYEBWA: I would propose that we maintain the 70 per cent, as proposed by the committee but we start looking into plans of ensuring that someone should be given not more than five years to employ foreigners. I think we shall need to go back to the Investment Code Act. Let us go much deeper and harmonise most of these laws. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did the minister want to say something?

MR AJEDRA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. We need to realise that we are not an island. We are competing for investment with other countries. 

Secondly, as you are all aware, salaries are based on qualifications, your skills and experience. It may not be really practical in most cases if you just go with the 70 per cent that has been proposed.

Therefore, our view as a ministry is that may be –(Interjections)– You support opposition but let us do some more research, so that in the subsequent Bills, we are able to have a better –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when will you consider the interest of the people of Uganda? Why are we thinking about foreigners? 

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by; 
    i) the insertion of a new paragraph A;
    ii) insertion of a new paragraph B;
    iii) deletion of paragraph C;
    iv) insertion of paragraph K 
    v) insertion of paragraph M.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Tayebwa brought a time limit and we all agreed. How do we fix it? He said a company should have a maximum of five years to employ foreigners.

The justification is that within five years, the investor would have developed local capacity. That would be a very good amendment and it would go a long way in improving our labour force and also tell the foreigners –(Interjections) It has no financial implications and it will also help to build our capacity.

Madam Chairperson, I will even go further and give you an example. If hon. Musasizi went to Kenya now, to be given a licence to practise, they would tell him to do exams of Kenya yet, when they come here, we allow them to practise because they want to control the market. I would like to agree with hon. Tayebwa that we put a time limit of five years. (Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, while I appreciate the point that is being made, allow me to inform you that this is not the appropriate home for such an amendment.

We are dealing with amendments to the VAT Act while the issues being raised are actually issues that relate to investment. An amendment like that would have to be placed appropriately under or in the Investment Code. 

So, the Speaker would direct that the ministry comes up with an appropriate amendment to the appropriate Act to accommodate the concerns of Parliament. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason we are bringing it here is for the purpose of you to qualify for it to benefit from those taxes. We are saying that for you to be able to benefit, you must fulfil these conditions. That is what we are trying to do.

We are saying that you can employ your people but for you to be able to benefit, you must do X and Y and that is the reason. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The matters being deliberated on have been captured in the Local Content Bill. This House supported us to come up with the Local Content Bill. The same committee has processed the Bill.

Once these matters keep coming in, it tells us the importance of the Local Content Bill. The earlier we have it deliberated on here, the earlier these matters will be addressed. All matters we are talking about to do with succession and ensuring that our local people are involved and included within the economy are provided for in the Local Content Bill.

So, Madam Chairperson, with your indulgence - now that the committee completed the Bill, we request that that Bill be put on the Order Paper and it is acted on to support our local people within the economy. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the title do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Title agreed to.


MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and passed clause 1, 2 and 5 with amendments, and deleted clause 3. I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

4.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the third time and do pass.

TEH SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the third and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause)

Honourable chairperson, before we go to the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020’s report, where is the Local Content Bill?

4.28
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Local Content Bill was referred to our committee and we considered it and concluded the report before we started considering the Budget Framework Paper somewhere in January. We have been patiently waiting to be included on the Order Paper. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Let it be reflected on the Order Paper immediately after the Tax Bills. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020


4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read the second time. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded. What is the justification?

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is:

    1. to introduce a minimum tax rate to apply to taxpayers whose declared tax liability for a consecutive period of five years is less than 0.5 per cent of the gross income;
    2. to revise the tax rate applicable to individuals and companies for purposes of rental income;
    3. to provide for a ceiling on deductible expenses on rental income;
    4. to provide for incentives to existing investors;
    5. to impose Withholding Tax on sale of land and other business assets;
    6. to introduce a new tax regime for small businesses;
    7. to exempt the income of the Islamic Development Bank and the income of Deposit Protection Fund from income tax;
    8. To impose Withholding Tax on commissions paid to insurance and advertising agents and other related matters.

Madam Speaker, as I said, all these measures that we are introducing are for purposes of raising the tax to GDP that is currently at about 13.5 per cent. 

Therefore, we hope that the House will support the recommendation of the committee.

4.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2020” and made the following observations:

Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to introduce a minimum tax rate to apply to taxpayers whose declared tax liability for a consecutive period of five years is less than 0.5 per cent of the gross income. 

According to the minister, it has been discovered that most of the taxpayers take advantage of the generous tax provisions to engage into aggressive tax planning to not pay tax. This proposal has been, hitherto, rejected by Parliament for the last two financial years. 

The 0.5 per cent is taxed on turnover of companies that may be in a loss or near loss income position. As a result, it goes against the basic principle that income tax is charged on income and not turnover.

As the country strives to industrialise, this proposal will discourage potential long term investment, which might take ten and more years without making taxable profits but with potential for growth and employment especially real estate, industrial and agricultural projects. 

Since the loss or near loss tax liability is arrived at after allowing tax deduction and other tax incentives, the proposed tax may indirectly result into non-recognition of tax reductions recognised under other tax laws. 

In order to curb any fictitious and incorrect tax declarations, URA should strengthen its tax administration measures to identify such taxpayers. 

Changes to the Taxation of Rental Income 

Madam Speaker, under the current Income Tax Act, 20 per cent of rental income is allowed as expenditures and losses incurred by an individual in the production of rent. 

However, under clause 3(b), read together with clause 7(a)(1), the Bill proposes that for rental income purposes, only 50 per cent of the rental income should be allowed as expenditure and losses incurred by such persons in the production of such income.

This means that whether it is an individual or company, the expenses or losses allowable for purposes of determining chargeable income will be capped at 50 per cent of the rental income.

This denies corporate persons deductions of legitimate capital and operational expenses incurred on deriving rental income, thus contravening principles of taxation and unfairly disadvantaging the taxpayer.

Tax payers in the real estate sector should have the right to receive deductions for all the supportable expenses incurred in deriving the rental income.

Clause 3(d) proposes that a person who owns more than one building should account for income and expenses and pay rental tax for each building separately. Currently, rental incomes and expenses from various buildings owned by the same person are aggregated while accounting for rental tax by that person.

The proposal will increase the costs of administration from the companies who own several buildings. It further ignores the synergies that require a taxpayer, for example, a real estate developer, to run all their projects as part of one business with all the expenses incurred applying collectively across income from all buildings.

Income tax is chargeable on the gross income of each tax payer, which allows for accounting for income tax on the aggregated income of a single tax payer. Therefore, accounting for rental tax separately for each building may work against this principle that, for tax purposes, allows a taxpayer to offset the losses incurred from one income stream from the profits in another income stream of the same taxpayer.

Clause 16 proposes to increase the rate of tax for an individual from 20 per cent to 30 per cent. The proposal is intended to remove any distinction between the treatment of buildings owned by companies and those owned by individuals. It, therefore, means that individuals and companies will be subjected to the same rate of tax on their rental income.

Exemptions

Madam Chairperson, we are proposing exemptions in a number of areas. 

Clause 6 (a) seeks to; 
(i) exempt the income of the Deposit Protection Fund from income tax. The Deposit Protection Fund is a statutory body created under section 108 of the Financial Institutions Act, 2016 to provide insurance for the deposits for depositors in case of closure of a regulated financial institution.


Education is one of the social services that Government must provide to its citizens. However, there are budgetary limitations in this area and an ever-increasing number of citizens requiring this service. There is, therefore, need to allow private educational institutions to grow and supplement the few Government institutions. Hence, the need to exempt the business income of education institutions so that the returns generated are invested in the sector.


Clause 6(b) is to provide more clarity on how the incentives will be assessed, including manufacturers of tyres, footwear, mattresses or toothpaste as persons entitled to the incentives and providing for incremental investments that can benefit from the incentives. There is need to increase to 70 percent to ensure that this benefits a larger proportion of the local economy.

Deductions for expenses supported by e-invoices

Clause 7(b) of the Bill proposes that expenses of a person who purchases goods and services from a supplier who uses the e-invoicing system shall not be allowed a deduction unless the expenses are supported by e-invoices or e-receipts.

The proposal aids the enforcement of the use of Electronic Fiscal Devices (EFDs) by denying a taxpayer deductions where they made a purchase from a person designated to use EFDs but did not receive an e-invoice/e-receipt and will enhance tax compliance.

Withholding tax on purchase of land

Clause 8 proposes to introduce a withholding tax on the purchase of land other than land, which is a business asset, by a resident from a resident person at a rate of 0.5 per cent of the purchase price.

The income, in form of capital gains, made on sale of land, which is not a business asset is already exempted from income tax under section 21(k). It is, therefore, contradictory to impose a withholding tax, as a tax collection mechanism, where the law has exempted the income from tax. This is double taxation because there is already stamp duty to be paid on transfer of land.

It is likely to lead to an increase in land prices as many sellers might not want to incur this tax cost. Effectively, all land purchasers of non-business land would be withholding tax agents, including our people who are in the rural areas and sell land to get school fees for their children. If this proposal passes, they will be required to have tax identification numbers in order to qualify to become tax agents.

This will negatively impact families who sell land for non-commercial purposes who are the majority in Uganda. Many Ugandans do not have TINs and this makes it difficult on how this tax will be accounted for. There is need for URA to improve tax administration before such a measure can be introduced.

Withholding tax on Commissions

Clause 9 provides that an insurance service provider who makes a payment of a commission to an insurance agent or advertising shall withhold tax on the gross amount of the payment at a proposed rate of 10 per cent. The objective is to enhance the revenue effort of withholding tax and ease tax administration considering that the majority of the persons who earn commissions do not keep records.

Re-introduction of withholding tax at six per cent on agricultural supplies

Clause 10 seeks to reinstate six per cent withholding tax on payment of agricultural supplies, which was introduced last financial year, thereby removing agricultural supplies from the list of items that were exempted from the six per cent withholding tax on purchase of goods and services by designated withholding tax agents. 

The committee notes the following in this area; 

    i. There were practical challenges when one per cent withholding tax was introduced on payments for agricultural supplies in 2018. 

    ii. The proposed rate of six per cent withholding tax is even higher than one per cent, which failed to be implemented in 2018 and was scrapped. 


    iii. The current exemption enacted in 2019 should be maintained until a clear equitable and practical mechanism is developed to tax the small and medium enterprises in the agricultural sector. 

    iv. There are likely to be challenges in implementation since farmers would prefer to sell to non-designated agents. Where they have to sell to designated agents, the farmers are likely to increase the prices to cater for the 6 per cent withholding tax. 

Clause 12 seeks to oblige a taxpayer who provides a passenger transport service or a free transport service to obtain a tax clearance certificate from the Commissioner before renewal of operational licenses. 

The proposal seeks to enhance revenue by compliance among transport operators who are doing business and avoiding tax on their income. 

Introduction of a new tax regime for small businesses 

Clause 15 seeks to introduce a new computation of tax for small businesses. This is intended to provide simplified tax regime for small businesses to enhance equity and improve tax compliance. This will encourage small and medium-term enterprises to formalise their businesses since enterprises that keep records will bear relatively lower cost burden compared to those without records. 

However, Madam Speaker, for the last 12 years, prices and inflation have been consistently increasing. For the lowest paid workers, who earn an average of 250, the cost of living has become unmanageable. If one considers the cost of rent, food and other basic necessities, there is need to comprehensively review the pay as you earn tax rates to help low income earners have more disposable income. This will increase the purchasing power of low-income earners and hence more revenue in form of indirect taxes. 

With these observations, Madam Speaker, the committee would like to recommend the following: 

    1. Uganda Revenue Authority should strengthen its capacity to conduct the right tax assessment for companies, which consistently declare tax losses or declare a tax liability of an arithmetic average of less than 0.5 per cent of gross turnover. 

    2. Uganda Revenue Authority may consider a PPP approach where URA partners with private tax experts are licensed under strict regulations to conduct tax assessments on behalf of Government.
 
    3. Government should conduct a study on rental income and how its performance can be improved without affecting growth in the real estate sector. 

    4. Uganda Revenue Authority should increase sensitisation and awareness campaigns to ensure compliance with tax laws. 

    5. Government reviews the Pay As You Earn tax rates to enable low income tax earners meet the rising cost of living. 

    6. The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

Madam Speaker, I have been notified by hon. Nandala-Mafabi that there is a minority report. I beg your indulgence that he presents his minority report, which is attached here. 

As he comes to do that, I beg to lay on Table our original committee reports together with all the supporting documents that were used and generated in the production of the report.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi - 

4.58
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank my chairperson for the report he has presented.  

Madam Chairperson, I have a lot of confidence in my chairperson and my point of dissent is on one item, which is education. If you carried out an investigation, you would notice that all the reports you are seeing have 25 members but the number of members signing are always 20. 

We signed the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill the other day and it also has 20 members. My signature is reflected in the original one, which never had the education sector. I beg to lay it on Table. It was on the iPad until a few minutes ago when it was removed.  

Madam Speaker, when I was coming to Parliament, I discovered that there was a new report, which I never wanted to object to, because of my bright chairperson, whom I have a lot of respect for. The reason is basically that the issue of exempting the education institutions from paying income tax was not there the first time we met and when we signed the first report. This is the reason I am putting across. 

The second committee report proposes the amendment of the income tax to exempt the business income of education institutions from income tax. The amendment has come at short notice and we have not interfaced with the petitioners to understand their intentions and justifications and other stakeholders like, the URA, the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to see the impact of this change. 

I am sure this tax is levied to raise revenue for the Government. The tax levied is on profits and not on the gross income of the education institutions. The exemption has been based on the justification that owners of the education institutions supplement Government in provision of social services. However, there are other investors that are also providing social services such as the medical services but these are paying taxes. 

Madam Speaker, on that, I would like to recommend that we carry out a study on the proposal because every child who goes to a private school pays school fees and after knocking off all the expenses, it is the balance which will be subject to tax. These schools are allowed capital allowances for the investment they make. This means that if you have constructed a building of Shs 1 billion, you are entitled to allow the Shs 1 billion you invested.

Therefore, if you allow them to be the only ones to get first 100 per cent allowance of investment and they do not pay taxes, we have disadvantaged other sectors that provide social services. That is why I am saying we should study it further and see who those are that are providing social services so that they are all exempted or they pay. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, it is logical to generate revenues to finance any Government budget. However, if the above proposals in this minority report are considered, it would render the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill relevant for the Financial Year 2020/2021. Therefore, I implore you to support this minority report for purposes of funding our budget and avoiding discrimination. I thank you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a lot of respect for the chair of the Committee and my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We have two reports before us, from the presentation of hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I am only wondering whether it would not be procedurally right that you pronounce yourself on which report we are going to deal with. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has laid two of them from, which formed the basis of his minority report. I would like to seek your indulgence on that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, other than requesting for a study, the other report does not do anything else. It just says “we want to study”. Is there a problem with that?
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if you want, maybe - I never wanted to go into detail - I wanted to make it simple. For example, let us give numbers. I have 1,000 children in my school and I am collecting Shs 1.5 million per term, which makes it Shs 1.5 billion. I spend Shs 1 billion and make a profit of Shs 500 million in Term 1. Term 2, I make a profit of Shs 500 million and in Term 3, I make a profit of Shs 500 million. In total, I make a profit of Shs 1.5 billion. 

I will then go and build another school while a dentist who is also providing social services - removing our teeth - in a year, he makes Shs 20 million. Since he has made Shs 20 million, he is subjected to tax while the one of Shs 1.5 billion is not subjected to tax and he goes and invests in another school.

Therefore, in the long run, you will have 20 schools operating without paying taxes while the one who made a profit of Shs 20 million per year, is paying tax. So, if it is a social service, we should define it. Which are these social services, which should be exempted.

Secondly, -  

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I do not know why you are labouring the point. Your request is that the matter be studied - isn’t it?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the request is that this proposal never came at committee stage and we are 20 people who signed the report. The one of today, has 10 or 11 people. So, it means the one, which has more people should be the one to be considered.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know why you are taking over my work. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we wanted to be diplomatic because I respect my chairperson. Asking us to go back and study the report is because I wanted to be diplomatic. Otherwise, I would have said that may be we reject it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you have written is here in writing. I think there is no harm in making your study. So, you do not have to labour to make the point. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this matter has been pronounced a number of times but I think that one needs to delve into it a bit further. I do not know what you think.

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, it is a fact that both of these institutions that wish to benefit from this are the high class institutions; those who charge in dollars. Parents pay a lot of money using their hard-earned Uganda shillings to buy the dollars to be able to pay. Most of these have branches internationally - not only here in Uganda. So, it is really a business. 

Our proposal is that they should not be exempted but they should just be like any other and be able to pay tax.

Secondly, I would like to respond to one of the issues in the report by the chairperson of committee.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you should wait until we have a small debate. 

MR AJEDRA: Okay, let us resolve the issue of the schools first and then, I will have my response to the other issues raised by the chairperson of committee.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I have been following this report and I have read through it. The one I have got, which I have even printed and put on my file - I am still not very conversant with technology - I have looked through it and I have not seen it in our report, which I have studied. 

As a matter of procedure, can we first be told by the chairperson whether this report that we have - which does not talk at all about the exemption of schools from taxation - whether this is going to be withdrawn and replaced so that we know exactly what document we are dealing with. Right now, the one I have, which has been fully signed, I have read the tax Bill itself, I have read the analysis of the committee and I have not seen it in the principal Bill. I have also not sighted it in this report, which I have. So, can we first be guided by the chairperson, which report we are going by. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, as far as we are concerned as a committee, the report, which we have is the one we presented to Parliament; the one I have just read. (Hon. Nandala-Mafabi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have your report. Please, allow other Members to speak.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, there is a process we go through to generate reports and there are very many working documents we have. Just in case the honourable member has a report other than what I presented, please, regard that as a working document. (Laughter)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I think we are creating a very dangerous precedent. There is a method of work here. Madam Speaker, you have been very strict that whatever document we are going to deal with must be uploaded on our iPads so that we know the subject even before we come to Parliament. This document, which I am raising here, has been uploaded. The one he has read and that he is talking about – which talks about exempting the schools – is not uploaded. 

I am just asking a simple question: can we withdraw that document and be given the right one that we should be discussing? I have not seen this taxation of schools. As a matter of principle, we must guide this debate based on what has been placed before us. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development definitely knows the content of the Bill. Personally, I need guidance. Can one report be withdrawn and replaced with the right one so that we know what we are dealing with? The one uploaded is the one I am holding now –(Interruption)

MR OKOTH-OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, the point of order I am raising is that the report –(Interjections)– (Laughter). The report, which has been uploaded on our iPads is what the committee chairperson has presented and it includes all the recommendations about exempting private schools. Therefore, is hon. Ogwal in order to mislead the House by alleging that the report, which the chairperson read is different from what was uploaded on the iPads?

THE SPEAKER: If the report the chairperson read is what was uploaded, then she is out of order. Honourable members, let us not waste time. It is almost 5 o’clock. Hon. Kunihira.

5.07
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. Earlier on, I had made a proposal that the threshold be raised from Shs 235,000 to Shs 335,000. I am happy to note that the committee captured the issue of the threshold. I appeal to the Government and members to ensure that the Government starts the process of ensuring that this issue is handled in the Financial Year 2021/2022.

Madam Speaker, you are aware that the cost of living is now very high. The workers at the lower level are living miserably. I, therefore, appeal that the Government considers this issue. You are also aware that Government has been increasing salaries selectively. Right now, the lowest-paid worker in Government – at salary scale U8 – is earning between Shs 200,000 and Shs 300,000. If we increase the threshold, it will help the workers to also have some disposable income.

Secondly, I would like to mention something on the issue of exempting schools. Government has failed to control school fees in this country. Therefore, we cannot exempt schools from paying taxes. They must pay taxes because Government itself, on a number of occasions –(Member timed out.)

5.10
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the exemption of education institutions from paying taxes because, first of all, I am aware that education is among the key social services in this country. Secondly, all education institutions in this country are rendering the education service on top of other services, including medical services. 

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi talked of the schools charging a lot of money but I would like to inform him that there is a high rate of school fees defaulting in education institutions. Therefore, if we exempt them from paying taxes, it would be very good for the institutions –(Interjections)– In medical institutions, they are also rendering a service but it is very important to note that you can hardly get somebody defaulting on paying medical bills. Therefore, I encourage members to support exempting education institutions from paying taxes. 

Secondly, I support the committee’s report whereby –

THE SPEAKER: You are a member of the committee.

5.13
MR JAMES BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank the committee chairperson, my younger brother, for a report well presented. I am here for just a small thing. The minister responsible for the Bill has made it very clear that they did not have this in their proposal and they do not support it. Therefore, why are we trying to put it? This social service being given by school owners is not bad. 

However, as colleagues have said, there are many other service providers, like in medical and engineering, that are paying taxes. 

We would have accepted the tax exemption if the school fees were being controlled, where we say, “If you want to increase school fees, come to the ministry.” However, the same people owning the schools are the ones in control and, therefore, nothing can be done. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, this should be deleted once and for all. Thank you. (Applause)

5.14
MR ISAAC ETUKA(NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson for the report. I only have one issue on the exemption of schools from paying taxes.

Much as we would accept that schools be exempted, we would first request the relevant ministries to regulate school fees payment. As my colleagues have said, we have schools at nursery level were the school fees charged is over Shs 1.5 million. Unless they regulate the school fees, we cannot accept that the schools be exempted.

Madam Speaker, it is not only the education sector where the services are provided. What happens to the rest of the service providers in this country? It would be discriminatory. I, therefore, suggest that school fees and other regulations should first be set clearly, before we can accept that the schools be exempted. I support the minority report. Thank you.

5.15 
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice on the issue of exempting private schools from paying tax.

Madam Speaker, where are we talking about Government schools? We always bring new curricula in Government schools, which we do not implement. Instead of looking at ways of strengthening of our Government schools, we even want to weaken them more by giving private schools tax exemptions.

When you go to rural schools, you find private schools paying teachers to a tune of Shs 100,000 but when you look at the amount of money they collect from parents, it is too much.

Not only that Madam Speaker but there are private schools that are even getting donations and assistance from elsewhere. How do you get money from Government and then, you are exempted from tax? Don’t you think this is triple addition on the private schools? Are we only looking at individual persons who own private schools at the expense of the total population and our Government schools?

It is not only private schools that are giving social services. What about security? We have many security companies that are also giving services. Are we going to exempt them from paying tax when our GDP is crippling. If we begin like this, where are we going to get money from? 

Madam Speaker, if we can tax even the mobile money service that goes straight to the pocket of a local person, then, why do we want to exempt education? Are we really doing the right thing, especially the committee, who came up with the issue of exempting private schools from taxes, yet, you are taxing a local woman who is getting Shs 5,000 from mobile money? I would like to say that we should reject this in totality.

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a student of taxation and I would like to inform this House that this particular amendment or proposal must fail. (Applause) 

One of the cardinal principles of taxation is equity. A tax must follow the cardinal principle of equity, which test this particular proposal fails. On that, I propose that we move to the next level. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: How much time are we going to spend on this matter? Everyone is talking about education and they are not talking about the rent and other things. (Laughter) Honourable members, when you are a member of the committee, why do you want to contribute? Please, make your contribution on other issues.

5.20
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, it is very difficult for me to switch to another issue now. I felt I should also thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. I would like to associate with the observation and proposal of the minority report, objecting to exempting education institutions.

First of all, we are struggling to get resources to finance our budget and these education institutions are very many. When we collect those small bits, we are able to contribute to national budget. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, are we saying that next year, when the health sector comes with proposals for the private health facilities, we will absorb that? Mind you, there are people who do not go to school but they will not miss going to hospital. 

If you are talking of social services, right now, there is lockdown. We are at home but the health facilities are open. If you were to talk of social services that would remain for everyone, then health is one of them. Should they be asked for tax exemption? They will, if we set an example. The question is: have we understood how these proprietors of private education institutions are using their money in terms of how they pay the people they employ, how much they charge the parents - does it benefit the nation?

As hon. Etuka said, let us first focus on establishing a policy to regulate the fees that these private institutions charge parents. If we are convinced that it is a purely social service without any commercial aspect, that is when we can come back and look into that.

In addition, as hon. Musumba said, I think this issue should be dropped given the fact that the minister who owns it has rejected it. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you address the issue of the tax regime for the small business, the withholding tax on agriculture supplies, purchase of land, commissions, deductions supported by invoices? I think we have generally dealt with exemptions. Can you now address those issues since they are important?

Honourable members, this is your Bill. Let us first hear from other Members. It is your Bill. Please, listen to what Members are saying about your Bill and the report.

5.24
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County North, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was once a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to congratulate my former boss, hon. Musasizi upon the achievements including the one of yesterday, the Stamp Duty Bill.

There was a time when I supported Stamp Duty alone on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

My concern is in one of the recommendations of the committee on page 8. The first talks about URA strengthening its capacity to conduct the right tax assessments for companies, which consistently declare tax loses or tax liability of an arithmetic average of less than 0.5.

The second one says that URA may consider a triple “P” approach where it partners with private tax experts licensed under strict regulations.

When I read through these two recommendations, it comes to my mind that they are a little bit contradicting. Uganda Revenue Authority has been one of the most paying organisations before some organisations like MTN came into existence. I would wish to suggest that while –(Member timed out.) Madam Speaker, allow me just an extra one second.

THE SPEAKER: Please, go straight to the point.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you, very much. Instead of opening up a very serious loophole where the tax payer can be duped to pay a lot of money to these triple “Ps” and tax experts because some of them are URA officers who retired and formed companies and called them tax experts; why can’t we recommend URA to employ tax professions who can assess because sometimes it employs people of different disciplines, who did not do courses in line with taxation but they are trained and do the work.

They should employ tax experts who can assess and do this Government role well. I think it should be better than suggesting that URA considers a triple “P” approach and employs tax experts. Thank you.

5.27
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Taxation globally is something that has the ability to make or even break a nation. No country can stand without a firm taxation foundation.

Adam Smith the greatest philosopher and economist in as far as taxation is concerned coined four fundamental principles, priority, certainty, convenience and efficiency but we live in the 21st century and those have already been overtaken by events.

The economists that have come including the best that we have in this Parliament - they are so many namely; hon. Nandala Mafabi, hon. Okupa and so many others certainly have coined up many to broaden the traditional principles.

There are around eight but I will have to focus myself on one; even when this Bill before us talks about exemptions, it cannot not be exuded in a vacuum. The philosophy behind exemptions goes in as far as, “What is the purpose for that exemption and what is the time in terms of limit?” You cannot just exempt people forever.

This being a Bill for clarity and precision, I will present about just three:

(i) 	In a Bill like this, we will have to focus on the counter specification of the Bill.
(ii) 	The content or boundary demarcation.
(iii) 	Avoiding the pseudo scenarios so that we have Bills that come to the House and will not be again reviewed tomorrow or will not stand the test of time. I appreciate you.

5.30
MS RUTH KATUSHABE (NRM, Bukomansimbi County North, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My submission is on clause 3(a) which states that “a person who earns rental income from more than one building shall account for the income, expenses of the building and shall pay tax for each of the buildings separately.”

I propose to add “unless if the two or more buildings are interrelated to the extent that the taxable rental income of one building is derived because of the supplementary services of another building.”

On exempting taxes for some people, I propose that we exempt taxes on our district and sub county councilors. They get allowances but they are taxed. Some districts tax them whereas others do not. 
I propose that they do not tax that little token that they revive.

The tax on the small businesses like those who process agricultural products, that make shoes and juice should also be exempted from some taxes. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would have wanted to complete this Bill but it is 5.30 p.m. Members and staff have to walk to their homes because there is no public transport. I adjourn the House to tomorrow.

We will go straight to completing this debate and the Bill. House adjourned to tomorrow. There are areas they have not talked about. 

Tomorrow we will talk about the six per cent on the agricultural products, the withholding tax on commissions. House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 16 April 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 

