

Tuesday, 4 April 2017

Parliament met at 2.09 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting after this very short recess that you have had. I hope you found time to do the necessary things that required to be done in the period that the House was not sitting - even the committees were not sitting so it was a complete break for all the members with the exception for those committees that wanted to work in the recess.

You will recall that we lost one of our colleagues, the hon. Cyrus Amodoi, who we buried. We received a letter from Esther Akello Amodoi, the widow, communicating her heartfelt appreciation to the Parliament of Uganda, the Government and all the honourable members who supported her in all ways when the husband died in the tragic accident.

In the letter she says thus: “Permit me to place on record our profound gratitude to the Government of the Republic of Uganda for joining hands with the Parliament of Uganda to give my husband a befitting burial. May the Lord God, the Almighty bless you.” Signed: Esther Amodoi. It is addressed to the Speaker of Parliament.

Honourable members, in this period, the main business of the House will be the budget process. Today we will be receiving - something we should have done on the 1st of April - a motion on the budget to be moved by the minister.

We will receive ministerial policy statements by the date that has been appointed in the law. However, it has come to my attention that some of these policy statements have not been uploaded on the iPads and so they are not accessible by members. It has come to my notice that the shadow ministers have not been able to access this to prepare their alternative policy statements and that slows down the work of Parliament.

This House is going to sit for three days after which I will adjourn plenary to allow the committees to proceed with the processes of the budget and report back to Parliament within the timeframe of the law.

So we will sit today, tomorrow and Thursday and then plenary will be adjourned to allow the committees continue with their work.

That is where we are with these matters. So, let us put in the effort that is required for us to pull through all those things that required to be done and for which timeframes have been provided for in the law; let us do that.

Today we are receiving the financial and revenue Bills for first reading. Thereafter, they will be sent to committees to handle them expeditiously because all these Bills are supposed to be part of the budget process. Note that all of them are supposed to be passed before the budget process is concluded and the budget must be passed by the 31st day of May of this year. So, we don’t have a lot of time to handle all these things.

The committees will have busy days because they all have sector budgets to handle. So the work is actually much and so let’s concentrate our efforts for the next two weeks; I am sure we will solve all these issues. Thank you very much.

2.12
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza):  Mr Speaker, much as I did not highlight the matter upon which I am rising, I would like to welcome honourable members back from recess. I pray that the time we are going to spend here will be appropriately used to serve Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, during the plenary Sitting of 16th March, which you presided over, you directed the Clerk to Parliament to extract and forward formal copies of the ministerial policy statements to the shadow ministers.

You further indicated that the shadow ministers would be given up to two weeks to submit their alternative policy statements. 

However, to date no formal copies of these policy statements have been presented to the shadow ministers. You may be aware that the ones that were presented here were forwarded back to the senders for lack of quality.

I can substantively report that only three accounting entities have been able to upload their ministerial policy statements and these are: the Prime Minister’s Office, the Minister of Education and Sports and Kampala Capital City Authority.

This means that the two weeks you gave to us will only apply where the policy statements have been given to us as you had directed the Clerk to do.

Therefore, I would like to call upon the ministers to ensure that these policy statements are tabled so that we can be able to do whatever that we were supposed to do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They were tabled.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, some of these policy statements were sent back.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But they were tabled.

MS WINNIE KIIZA: Yes, but some were sent back for quality reasons. They need to give us the quality of the policy statements that we can talk about so that we can also give quality policy alternatives.

Mr Speaker, the other matter I would like to talk about concerns the attention of either the Minister of Security or the Minister of Defence and/or that of internal affairs and it is something to do with the security of the country.

As you may all be aware, honourable colleagues, it is not too long ago that we yet buried another officer in this country.

Many officers have died under unknown circumstances. You are also aware of the reports that have been indicated in the media regarding the several killings in Masaka, with the killers leaving behind leaflets and messages for their next targets.

The messages and leaflets that are appearing Masaka are not different from the messages and leaflets that we reported on this Floor as being thrown all over the areas of Kasese and Bundibugyo, Ntoroko and Kabarole.

Mr Speaker, you may also be aware that the Teso Sub Region is equally going through these attacks and many are being killed under mysterious circumstances.

What is disheartening, Mr Speaker, is that when the murder of AIGP Felix Kaweesi occurred, the police promised to beef up security for officers and to ensure they have motorcycle riding officers following the officers as part of their security, which was a very welcome move.

However, police also said that the information they had was to the effect that the other targeted people were Members of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, we do not know what the Police have in place to ensure the safety and security of Members of Parliament in addition to the security for the general public. 

As we work towards popularising our country as a tourism destination, I would also like to report that as a matter of fact and in regard to the security situation in the country, tourists were attacked in Mt Rwenzori as they tried to show the world that Rwenzori is free of danger and so tourists could visit. 

What is now happening is that the people who attacked and manhandled the tourists were crime preventers –(Interjections)– yes, crime preventers and yet these are people we have in communities who are supposed to prevent crime. But here, they are being the crime instigators.

As a country, we have to ensure the security and safety of our people. This is the reason as to why I am asking the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister of Security and possibly the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, to come up with a statement to this House on the security situation of the country. 

Presently, nobody is sure of their security. We are all living in fear. Those supposed to protect us are ‘going’ earlier than those who are supposed to be protected and the ones that we think are supposed to protect us –(Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving me way. The killings have not only happened in Masaka but even in the surrounding districts of Lwengo, Ssembabule and Rakai.

Mr Speaker, leaflets are being thrown warning people of an attack in particular areas and indeed it happens. In Kyabakuza, people were hacked. The murderers come with machetes, pangas and other gadgets. Whoever they find, they just beat up, cut and/or rape. It is disheartening to hear that all this is happening and no statement has come out from any Government official. 

Anyway, the information that I wanted to give is that people are living in panic and I think it is now high time that we got to know what our fate is. Thank you.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: As I wind up, Mr Speaker, I would also like to make it known to this House that the conflicts at the border of Adjumani and Amuru seem to be turning into a different twist of events. 

The events started out like a border conflict but recently, the attacks have again become too much. We appreciate the fact that the Deputy Leader of Government Business –(Interjection)– information is accepted. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition for the opportunity. The information I am giving the House is that the escalation of the attacks is attributed to Government’s failure to pronounce itself or to declare – because there is a report showing where the borders should be but Government has been quiet all this time. I thank you.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: That is wonderful information. I hope that the Leader of Government Business will be able to make it clear for us since the Deputy Leader of Government Business is a concerned member. Leaving his office aside, this is a matter he holds close to his heart him hailing from that area. We hope that before we close this session we may be able to hear about that issue.

In conclusion, I would like to call upon Government to ensure they fulfil the mandate of Government as provided for in Schedule Six of the Constitution that calls upon Government to ensure security and safety of all Ugandans. We should be briefed on the security situation of the country and possibly the measures that Government is taking to ensure that no more murders happen to the Ugandans. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Anybody from the Government to react to those issues that have been raised?

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We shall have the Minister of Internal Affairs updating this House on some of the incidents that are happening in the country regarding the security of Ugandans tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow is fine. Let me have the Member from Kaberamaido. Briefly, please.

2.25
MS MARIA GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

I rise on an urgent matter of national importance. The New Vision newspaper of Monday and today carried stories of an invasion by the deadly army worms in over 30 districts across the country. 

The list of districts affected is in the newspapers but Kaberamaido has not been included. I was in the constituency last week and got to know that Kaberamaido is one of those districts badly hit by the invasion of this worm. The farmers had taken it upon themselves to respond to the coming rains by planting. 

However, So far, I think about six sub counties have reported the invasion of this worm that is not only eating or destroying maize but also destroying sorghum, millet and beans. The people are very desperate and there is no sign of Government intervention in place. 

Mr Speaker, it is common knowledge that the country was last year hit by drought and famine. As I speak, farmers cannot even afford the seeds for planting. Now that this worm has come in and given the fact that the farmers cannot afford pesticides that are supposed to be a remedy, my prayer is that Government moves very fast to provide the pesticides that are required and that Kaberamaido District should be put on the priority list as one of the most badly off areas.

Secondly, this worm issue was discussed in July last year though it was happening only in three districts. If the responsible ministry or Government had taken a proactive approach and acted very fast, probably this worm would not have spread to all these districts –(Interruption)

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, hon. Ajilo. The additional information that I would like to give to you is that the worm invasion is a disaster for the country.

According to today’s newspaper, the worms have also invaded the national parks. There are four national parks that are now endangered and that would further endanger the tourism industry.

I thought I would add that additional information that it is not only the farms that are affected but also now the national parks.
       
MS AJILO: Mr Speaker, as I was saying, if the ministry had taken immediate action, a lot would have been prevented. Delays in responding to detected problems leads the country into a disaster and can cost it a lot.

We should, therefore, as a Government, learn to be proactive rather than to do fire-fighting. I rest my case. 

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): It is true that Government knows about this problem of worms. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has submitted papers for a supplementary budget to be able to buy the necessary pesticides. We hope that in the next one week, the ministry will have accessed funds to ensure the worms are handled. I am also sure that the ministry will brief Parliament on how it is prepared to handle this problem. Otherwise, from the finance ministry side and Government in its entirety, we know about the existence of this problem and we are doing whatever we can to address it.

2.30
MR ALEX BURUNGO (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Mr Speaker, on the 24th day of March this year, while we were on recess, Bulambuli was hit by a very serious disaster that saw heavy hailstorms destroy 351 houses – I moved from house to house to witness this. This has worsened the famine situation that already had attacked the people in my constituency.

As I talk, many of the people are homeless. Many of them have been waiting for help from the Government but in vain. That is why I have chosen to raise it as a matter of national importance basically to appeal to Government to come to the help of my people who are living in serious trouble.

Although no one has died, churches, houses and many other vital structures were destroyed. The hailstorms destroyed the crops that people had planted. This makes the situation for my people very troubling; they need immediate rescue.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, honourable colleague. Yes, it is true this information reached the Minister of Disaster Preparedness yesterday evening. We would like to encourage colleagues with such situations to get in touch with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness so that Government can take some immediate actions on the problems.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us now go back to the Order Paper. The rest of the issues can be raised tomorrow. I will now cause alterations on the Order Paper to just do a correction. Honourable members, item 5 is about laying papers. So, I am amending item 3 to include (iii), which was initially five. Please proceed.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/17

2.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the Supplementary Schedule II for the financial year 2016/17.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is now referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for handling and reporting to the House.

BILLS
FIRST READING

 THE ROTARIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

2.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Rotaries and Gaming (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. This is referred to the appropriate Committee of Finance, planning and Economic Development for expeditious handling.

MR JAMES KAKOZA: Mr Speaker, for purposes of the record, it should be clarified as to which schedule is laid because we have two schedules. So what type of schedule are they laying on the Table? This is important to know because we have two schedules of 2016/17 – there is the first and the second.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister, what supplementary schedule is this? Is it the first, the second and the last one?

MR BAHATI: This is Supplementary Schedule II for the financial year 2016/17. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

2.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable member, we are presuming that you have the certificates that accompany these Bills since they have been authored by you. Would you like to inform the House that they are actually there or that they are not required?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, yes the certificates of financial implications are hereby laid.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for expeditious handling in 45 days or within the budgeting timeframe so that the House can take a decision.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It stands referred to the appropriate committee.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE VALUE-ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value-Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee for handling.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TAX PROCEDURES CODE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tax Procedure Code (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read the first time. I have attached the certificate of financial implications for all the five Bills that I moved.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It is referred to the appropriate committee for handling.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE POSITION OF UGANDA REGARDING THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

2.36
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Mr Speaker, as you will recall, on the 16 November 2016, a matter was raised in this House regarding the status of Uganda’s membership in the International Criminal Court (ICC). To be specific, the matter was expressed by the hon. Ojara of Chua West that Uganda was in the process of withdrawing from the International Criminal Court yet there are cases referred by her currently pending before the same court.

I now rise, Mr Speaker, to make a statement on this matter.
 
It will be recalled that on 16 December 2003, Uganda became the first country to refer a situation to the ICC following the coming into existence of this court the previous year.
Following this referral, the Government extended tremendous support to the ICC in such a manner that ICC investigations into the situation in Northern Uganda, which had been projected to take several years were concluded within less than 18 months. As a result of this unprecedented cooperation between the nascent court and the Government, the criminal leadership of the so-called Lord’s Resistance Army was indicted.

Since the surrender of Mr Dominic Ongwen – one of the indicted leaders of the LRA in January 2015 - the Government has continued to cooperate with the ICC to ensure that the court properly executes its mandate and that Mr Ongwen himself gets a fair trial.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, Uganda’s role in the development of the court, as an institution, is both historic and currently on-going.

Mr Speaker, between the 16th and 22nd of November 2016, I was in The Hague, in the Netherlands, representing Uganda at the 16th Session of the Assembly of State Parties of the Rome Statute of the ICC because there had been an inquiry there whether Uganda intended to withdraw from the Rome Statute.

Mr Speaker, my response then was that the Government of Uganda had not and has not notified any person or organisation that it was or is withdrawing from the Rome Statute. Accordingly, the apprehension that we are withdrawing from the Rome Statute, both within Uganda and abroad, is based on conjecture.

Mr Speaker, as I indicated, during my address to the said Session of the Assembly of State Parties, and notwithstanding Uganda’s continued cooperation with the ICC, the Government of Uganda has reservations on the court as related with Africa, since 2009. 

Whereas African members have, at every opportunity, restated their commitment to the course of international justice, they have also consistently advised that the one-size-fits-all approach to complex dynamics within and between the countries is not helpful. They have also counselled that just as justice cannot be sacrificed at the altar of peace, peace too cannot be sacrificed at the altar of justice. At the very best, we must seek a fine balance.

Accordingly, the continent has, on a number of occasions, called upon the court and the United Nations Security Council to strike this balance between the two concepts whenever circumstances so warrant. But on each occasion, the continent’s voice has gone unheeded.

Mr Speaker, I used the same occasion to note that over the last 10 months or so, Uganda has been adversely mentioned regarding the question of cooperation with the ICC notwithstanding our un-matched cooperation with it since the year 2003. This has been in connection with the visit by the president of the Sudan, His Excellency, Omar Al Bashir, to Kampala on 12 May 2016.

When the issue first arose, the Government explained to the court that the invitation to President Al Bashir to attend the inauguration of the new president of Uganda was no different from invitations extended to the heads of state of all neighbouring countries for the historic occasion. Or for that matter the invitation extended to President Bashir by the UN Security Council Secretary General, His Excellency, Ban Ki Moon to come to Uganda for the ICC Review Conference, which we held here in 2010.

Apart from being the head of state of a neighbouring country, President Al Bashir remains an actor in the stability of the Republic of the Sudan as well as that of South Sudan. 

In this regard, as a member of the International Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and one of the guarantors to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement –(Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been trying to open my iPad but I have looked everywhere and I am not seeing the document. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I was saying that as a member of the International Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and one of the guarantors to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the Sudan and the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement of 2005, Uganda felt and still feels obliged to continue to engage with all the actors, including the elected leader of the Sudan.

Accordingly, the invitation of President Bashir was informed by the stand point that good relations with all countries in the region was essential for the maintenance of peace and security, and that continuous engagement of all the leaders, President Al Bashir included, is both important and unavoidable.

We further pointed out that as the African Union had counselled in its communiqué of the 29 August 2010, the engagement of the leadership of the Sudan was vitally and strategically essential for the countries in the region, which by their location, were not only best placed to understand the local realities and dynamics but also stood to bear the brunt of instability arising from the breakdown of that engagement.

Mr Speaker, it will be recalled that the African Union Assembly of Heads of State and Government, on 16 July, 2010 made a request to the United Nations Security Council to defer proceedings against President Al Bashir in order not to jeopardise peace efforts in the Sudan, considering that prosecutions before peace were not in the interest of the victims nor of justice. 

Regrettably, the plea by the AU – which Uganda still associates itself with - was ignored. And as a consequence, the 13th Ordinary Session of the AU Assembly of Heads of State and Government resolved that since the request by the AU was not acted up, AU member states shall not cooperate, pursuant to Article 98 of the Rome Statute. This decision was reiterated by the 15th Ordinary Summit in July 2010 in Kampala.

Mr Speaker, in spite of Uganda’s very reasonable explanation, on 11 July 2016, the pre-trial chamber two, of the ICC ruled that Uganda had failed to comply with the request for the arrest and surrender of President Bashir and subsequently referred the matter to the Assembly of State Parties to the Rome Statute and to the United Nations Security Council.

As I told the Assembly of State Parties on behalf of the Government, Uganda does not agree with the court’s conclusion and hopes that experience will in future compel state parties to deeply reflect on the spirit behind Article 87(7) and where it can be drawn upon. We continue to engage with the court on this issue and hopefully we will find a common ground in the near future.

Mr Speaker, I therefore wish to end by re-stating that Uganda has not yet decided to withdraw from the ICC; it continues to cooperate with it.

Secondly, Uganda wants to see an ICC that recognises that justice and peace are not mutually exclusive and one that is responsive to Africa’s concerns on matters pertaining to stability on the continent. The ICC’s continued relevance on the continent very much depends on this. 

Thirdly, while Uganda shall continue to be part of the ICC and to cooperate with it, it shall not hesitate to abide by any position reached by the African Union in pursuit of peace and stability on the continent. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, if there are comments on this statement, they are welcome.

2.47
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, this is not a file on the ICC. The statement by the Attorney-General is neither here nor there. The African Union made a decision of non-cooperation. Therefore, as a country, we will abide by the decision of the African Union of non-cooperation. But we are still in court. The President of another country wanted by the ICC, shows in Uganda, he is not arrested because, as the Attorney-General tells Parliament, peace is more important than justice.

Can you be specific - because you don’t need to be circumlocutious - just tell Parliament whether we are still interested in being part of the ICC or not. Otherwise, if you say, “Uganda will not cooperate with the ICC because the African Union decided so” but we are there – we are there doing what? Are we there watching a football match? (Laughter)

2.48
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was a bit confused by the Attorney-General’s statement. Although he talks about the historic relationship between Uganda and the ICC, taking into consideration that Uganda asked the ICC to help it look for Joseph Kony and his henchmen - the ICC is also still handling the case of Dominic Ogwen.

Now when you hear that the African Union took a decision to withdraw from the ICC when at the same time Uganda has asked the same ICC to take Joseph Kony and his henchmen to book, you get confused.

The Attorney-General also talked about peace and security in Sudan and that that is the reason President Omar Bashir, when he visited Uganda, was not arrested. But I wonder whether the Attorney-General knows what is going on in the Darfur Region of Sudan where black people are being massacred. The UN has published reports indicating that many people have been killed in Darfur.

The Attorney-General should also look at the reason the Republic of South Sudan was created; it was because of the segregation by the People of Sudan. That is how the people of South Sudan decided not to stand anymore with Sudan.

So, President Omar Bashir coming around to say that because of peace and security, and the African Union comes along to accept that, when people are being butchered in the Darfur Region, one cannot understand it.

And when the Attorney-General says that Uganda is not going to withdraw – which is fine because if we have asked the ICC to have to aid us in arresting Joseph Kony but at the same time, we are saying we should withdraw because the African Union has taken a decision that African countries must withdraw, that confuses me. Where is Uganda’s position? Are we withdrawing or not?

The Speaker is the leader of the delegation to EU/ACP and we made our position clear that because the African Inion is saying this and that, we stand with the African Union. But now the Attorney-General is here saying that we are neither here nor there. That confuses us and the people who go to attend international conferences on the position of Uganda. And so, when we read such a statement from the Attorney-General, we get confused. Are we remaining firmly as a member of the ICC, looking at the historical connections between the ICC and Uganda? That should be clearly told to this country and the Members of Parliament so that we can take a position to avoid being confused.

2.51
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): The Attorney-General’s statement has left me more confused than I was before. The statement has not been specific.

As I, a Ugandan, I see there is no political goodwill towards the works of the ICC. We say this in the morning and in Uganda but when we got out of Uganda, we say a different thing. 

So, I think it is high time we told Ugandans whether we support the works of the ICC or we are with the decision of the African Union. But we need to know that the African Union is full of presidents in Africa who have committed cases against the people of their countries. (Applause)

So, the matter is that Uganda as a country must decide – because what Omar Bashir did to his people – and which is on record – in Darfur, we would have not pretended because we are looking for the market or because we are looking for allies by not arresting him.

The problems of South Sudan as we talk have a connection to him yet they are affecting the entire region. 

Therefore, I would like to request the Attorney-General to let Ugandans know whether we are going to dance to the tunes of the African Union or to the tunes of the ICC. Thank you.

2.53
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, the statement made by the Attorney-General left me still wondering about the kind of statements that should come from the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda.
 
The matter of ICC is a matter of law. We signed it and we are a party to it as a country and we have not withdrawn from that arrangement.

Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General knows that we already have a law that has been domesticated. We did it here in this Parliament; we did it and it has been domesticated.
So, I wonder why leaders in Africa run around talking about the ICC yet they know it was the best thing to be done.

ICC is about impunity where leaders in Africa climb on dead bodies to access power and where leaders in Africa kill and maim people yet they remain in power. The ICC is talking about such impunity and that impunity must be fought. (Applause)

Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– I know more about these things and so I decline to take information from the army general but okay, let me take it.

GEN. PECOS KUTESA: My information is simple. While I don’t dispute the fact that Uganda signed the Rome Statute and while I am not directing on what you should do, allow me ask a simple question. 

In 2005, while I was watching news on CNN, there was a story saying that people in Iraq were withdrawing in convoys of old men and women, being instructed by aeroplanes and the man who was in charge was the former President of the US, Barack Obama together with Mrs Hilary Clinton – I have never heard of their names in these things of the ICC!

So, while some leaders step on dead bodies, but there are a few who have not stepped on dead bodies to be in power. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I was hesitant to put the honourable member to order but I thought we should put the record right that, like the member stated, state parties decided to join the ICC and signed the Rome Statute. And for the information of the House, America is not a state party to the ICC.
 
Therefore, is the Member is in order to insinuate that former President of the US killed people but that he was not arrested by the ICC well knowing that the US is not a party to the Rome Statute to which Uganda is? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the issues of the Rome Statute and matters of the ICC are fairly complex and so we need to handle them properly. Former US President Bill Clinton signed the Rome Statute but President George Bush unsigned it. It means that those who are afraid can also unsign it. That is the point they are making; I mean those who signed can also unsign it. That is the debate that the Attorney-General has outlined that it - It is a point of order and I am ruling unless the member for Butambala would like to come and rule on it. That is why the member is citing America and other places; I cannot rule him out of order. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, thank you very much, for your wise ruling. As a country, we need to make our point very clear. To me, Uganda cannot withdraw because of the benefits that we have had, especially for us in the North who suffered during the war with Kony.

We think we need to fight against impunity - we should not withdraw from the ICC. Secondly, we would like to advice our President not to talk too much against the ICC and to tone down so that as a country-(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Okot Ogong for giving me way. I am giving information in regard to the AU General Assembly, which he and I attended. 

During the debate of the heads of state in regard to the ICC, you remember that the House was divided, but on the recommendations of the heads of state at the end of it all we are part of the African Union as a country. It was very clear that those countries that already signed the Rome Statute independently have to work out their own internal methods, either to remain subscribing to the ICC or to exit. I think the statement by the Attorney-General is very clear. Thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, do we as Ugandans want impunity or not? Do we as leaders want to have big brothers stepping on the young brothers? We do not want that. Therefore, if we want peace, stability and to fight impunity, then let us remain in the ICC.

Remember what happened in Kenya; after elections, they were guarded and that is why there is peace in Kenya up to today - because of their presence at the ICC. 

I would like to appeal to other African leaders; this is a good thing; we should all fight impunity. Thank you.

3.01
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in putting the record clear and I think as we speak here, we are speaking the position of Ugandans because we were elected by Ugandans to speak on their behalf. 

I presume the Attorney-General has presented the position of Government and we need to weigh the two sides clearly. While Government has the mandate under the Constitution to protect the lives of Ugandans and their property, they are also answerable for their actions. 

They do not take actions where there are no guiding principles. That is why we have various laws to guide leaders in the process of taking decisions.

We signed an international legal provision and the person who appended his signature to that provision is still in power. The current President has not yet withdrawn his signature just like you have explained here.

I do not think the position that the Attorney-General has presented should be supported because we have had cases of injustice, murder - like the Mukura massacre where people were roasted in containers. The communities there have never received justice, locally or even at international level.

Recently, people were killed in Kasese; we have not yet subjected the perpetrators to a formal legal process, so we cannot withdraw from the ICC. If we fail to prosecute them locally, then there must be an international mechanism where these individuals can be arraigned before court for the people in Kasese to get justice – (Interruption) 

MR ABACANON: Thank you very much, my brother for giving way. Mr Speaker, to withdraw from the ICC would be a serious crime against the people of Uganda because I have a case of the Barlonyo massacre to be taken to the ICC.

We have cases in Uganda to be taken to the ICC; I think let us first finish those cases with the ICC and then you can withdraw. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

MR ATIKU: Thank you. First of all, we need to ask ourselves whether the ICC has ever gone after any leader in Africa who has never been accused of committing crimes against humanity. Are there cases where -(Interruption)

MS JACQUELINE AOL: Thank you very much. Is it in order for a member of this House to continue confusing people on what has not been said by the Attorney-General? Has he mentioned anything about withdrawing from the ICC?

We all know it is a process - is it in order for someone to continue misleading the House about withdrawing from the ICC when we have not yet started the process. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, sitting here, I was getting worried about the trend of the debate. The learned Attorney-General was very clear; he says Uganda has not withdrawn and it continues to cooperate with the ICC.

He says that is the same position he articulated in a meeting in The Hague recently. Why are we getting this line that Uganda is withdrawing, when the custodian is saying that we are still cooperating with the court?

It has also been clarified that it was an unanimous decision during the African Union General Assembly; let us take this thing in its perspective that there is a debate as to whether African countries should continue cooperating with the court given the experience they have had with it. No one has yet withdrawn from the ICC. Ayivu, please conclude.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance and ruling. In the public domain and Government there have been discussions as to whether we should stay in the International Criminal Court (ICC) or not. My position, which I know is also held by the people of Ayivu is that the ICC is a very good legal framework because we have had a history of chaos. We have witnessed impunity in this country and we need this court to act as a guiding principle for a member state like Uganda which has had this kind of record. We should support the ICC and continue to cooperate with it so that we live in a domain that befits human dignity.

3.09
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Attorney-General for his leading statement. It is leading in a sense that it provides a peek into the probable intention of Government. In the first place, he gave a very good preamble as to the historical relations between Uganda and the ICC without giving credence to the kind of situation that engendered the founding of the ICC. I have heard the debate and Members are spot-on that any indication whatsoever that we can even think of withdrawing is bad enough.

Secondly, it is not true that you are cooperating. If it were the case, you should have arrested President Bashir. Cooperation means that you actually abide by the principles of the law. However, to put it into perspective, this conversation is very important and I agree – like you guided – because it mirrors into the intentions of the rulers towards the ruled. 

I heard the good General making his submission here and I remembered reading his very famous book – Uganda’s Revolution 1979-1986: How I saw it – he knows that actually at one time he planted a bomb at a fuel depot in Industrial Area -(Laughter)- and people only survived because there was no fuel. I am afraid you should be in the ICC as we speak. The point is that this law was meant to guard intention and purpose. He had the intention of causing genocide, but people survived. We need to remain a member of the ICC. 

Forget about the fact that we can actually bow out of it. Remember that even if we sign out, that will not actually stop the law from pursuing perpetrators of injustice. Therefore, do not even waste time signing out unless some of the African leaders will want to end up like chicken thieves – being pursued in every corner of the world. We are better off being part of the law. The history of Africa –(Interruption)

GEN. KUTESA: The information I would like to give is for us to understand the idea behind. The day Africans hope to have guarantee of their security by somebody else, we will have lost it. We cannot say here that because there is ICC, Africa will guarantee its security. If Ugandans cannot guarantee their security and instead run to the ICC, we are lost. Thank you.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you for the information, General. Actually, that is exactly why we need it; Africa has lost trust in those entrusted with power because they have abused it. You were about to throw a bomb. Therefore, we need some kind of vest to protect Africans from people who have the potential and high propensity to getting out of their minds and cause genocide.

Mr Speaker, I would love to have this conversation continue. The Learned Attorney-General has a duty to inform and educate colleagues in Cabinet that our participation in the ICC is actually a deterrent for misconduct. We are all aware of the kind of shenanigans in Congo. We all know how they are playing hide and seek, running away from justice. We need an international umbrella that can actually stop this kind of impunity. 

The challenge is that Africans are jittery about their own involvement. Nobody invited us to sign, but we signed on our own volition. We say we signed erroneously, but continue committing the kind of crimes that engendered our participation. I am afraid this statement does not speak to our commitment, but our potential intention in the future. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was not a statement initiated by the Attorney-General, but a statement in response to what the Member for Chua West raised in this House. Probably, there will be a more comprehensive statement. In addition, we have exceeded the 45 minutes that we were supposed to use for this debate. However, let us have Busongora North and then we see how to proceed.

3.15
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think what the Attorney-General should have asked himself first is why did we go there in the first place? Is this the time that Uganda can even think about the possibility of withdrawing from the ICC? Thirdly, the people of Kasese have already taken three individuals to the ICC. They are H.E Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, Maj. Gen. Peter Elwelu and Asuman Mugenyi. Their case is already registered in the ICC. 

I would like to put on record that if any mistake is made to withdraw from the ICC, the people of Kasese will never forgive this Parliament. This is because it is this very Parliament which ratified the ICC and it cannot be done selectively. I would like to tell the country that Uganda is right now at its height of dictatorship and at this point in time any Ugandans who wants justice for Ugandan - this is the time for us to increase our support for the ICC here –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for the Member of Parliament – I do not know of where -(Laughter)- to mislead Parliament that Uganda is in a state of dictatorship yet the President in power was massively voted for by Ugandans. Is he in order when we are here debating democratically?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these days there are definitions of words but there are also personal definitions of words, which is a matter of opinion. However, a person who imposes his/her will on the people without the people’s will is called a dictator. Sometimes, elected people are also called dictators - you all know how that comes about. Those words keep coming up, but you cannot understand - probably, it is because we do not quite understand what the word dictator means in politics. For that particular one, we accept it because of political discourse. So, I will not rule the Member out of order –(Applause)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker for your wise ruling –(Laughter). Sometimes, you do good ruling, Mr Speaker. However, I know what happened in the 1960’s where some Members of Parliament pushed for an amendment of the law that suspects should not even appear in court but be taken straight to prison.  Mr Speaker, it worked on them fast.

Mr Speaker, as legislators, we should know that Uganda is beyond us; this country existed before us; it is there today and it will be there even after us. Therefore, I would like to say that as Ugandans, it is fair and in the interest of democracy, justice   and international relations to remain in the ICC as a country. We cannot exist alone. We need other nations even outside the continent of Africa. That is why we must cooperate within and outside Uganda – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and my senior colleague for giving me the opportunity. If we have ever needed ICC, we need it even more now as a country and as a continent.

This is the information that I would like to share. The UN, especially the United National Security Council, is already working on giving ICC special mandate. First of all, it is an institution that has been grappling with the hardship of funding – there will be enough funds. Also, as you are aware, it does not have a security enforcement system. The United National Security Council was to put in place a security system that no dictator on this planet earth will have an excuse or escape route. So, why do we worry –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information - 

MR KATUSABE: That is the information –(Laughter)– the reason why we signed for ICC is the very reason why we have got to stick there and I would like to encourage us that this should not take a lot of time because whether we exit or we stay there, the circumstances remain the same – the law, war, injustice cannot be substituted by any self-seeking people that want to run away from justice.

Mr Speaker, I will not take the information - you are aware that our very constitution says - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member let him finish. You rose on information -

MR KATUSABE: This is the information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us respect the rules. Honourable member for Busongora North, you are holding the Floor. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable member, for the information given especially on the background of UN.

Mr Speaker, I know that governments exist because they must exist on the mandate of the people and governments cannot function in speculation. Governments must function in reality. The reality in Uganda is that the security situation in the country is fragile; not only in Kasese but also in Masaka, Soroti, Teso, Kampala and in all the corners of this country –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, be relevant to the matter before the House. 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that it will be fair for our Government not to even think of withdrawing or even imagining that we can withdraw from ICC.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students and teachers from Jinja Vocational Training Institute, Jinja District, represented by hon. Lufafa Nelson and hon. Katali Loy. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. 

We also have students and teachers from Brilliant High School from Kampala District, represented by hon. Sebaggala Latif and hon. Nabila Sempala. They are also here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.  Attorney–General, you would like to make some responses to the issues? 

3.21
THE ATTONEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and Members. Mr Speaker, is it in order that I respond to all of them together?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yeah, you can put them together. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Hon. Ssemujju Nganda, hon. Wamai and honourable member for Busia. Mr Speaker, hon. Ssemujju Nganda said he did not know whether we are here or there; hon. Wamai, said we are looking for Kony, why do we listen to AU. In response to hon. Wamai’s queries, when I went to The Hague to speak about our position in the ICC – I think this would apply to all Members who have made comments in this direction.  I have already said that we are cooperating with the ICC. So, the main issue was whether there are any other issues forming this corporation.

Mr Speaker, one of the issues which you might have heard about is that  there is favouritism in terms of who is taken to the ICC? This was a position reached by the African Union, to which we are signatories; the same position reached by IGAD, to which we are also signatories. We are signatories to all these different groups and, therefore, we have obligations to all the signatories.

Mr Speaker, what we are telling the ICC is that the circumstances should be the same across the board. For your information, when I made the statement to the Assembly of Parties, they all agreed that when they were self-examining, they found themselves wanting; that is on record. They said that they agree with the African leaders that they must reform. To be a party to the agreement does not mean that you do not point out where –(Interjections)– you ask the Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is up to you.

MR BYARUHANGA: Okay, go ahead and ask.

MR TINKASIMIRE: Thank you very much my senior colleague for accepting my clarification. The clarification I would like to seek from you is that you are telling the House that you would like prosecution by the ICC to be levelled across the board, which I think is fair.
However, I am interested in knowing if there is any record of complaint from African leaders that has been registered with the ICC and has not been followed to the letter? Do you have the record so that you lay it on the Table?

MR BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I have not understood the value of that question. I gave him the benefit of clarifying; he ended up not clarifying at all. The hon. Felix Okot Ogong said that we signed as a country and have already domesticated the law in Uganda. I concur because we have already domesticated the law in Uganda. All we said is that, we were informing the ICC that – (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reason why Parliament debates these points of order and points of clarification is to inform the debate that is going on. Is it, therefore, in order for the Attorney-General to ignore a plainly put issue about records of complaint to the ICC and pretend as if our honourable colleague spoke the language that he did not understand? Is he in order to ignore such an important issue which was raised by our colleague, on the question of a formal complaint being put before ICC?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is very difficult for the Speaker to judge the understanding of a Member. You are now asking me to rule that the Attorney-General must understand; I cannot rule on that. (Laughter)

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the Member whose question I presume not to have answered might not know that your response was directed to him. The Member from Busia said that he was more confused now than when he came in. My response to that is that my statement was very clear. The statement that I made to the ICC was that we are demanding for reforms so that it becomes a statute that the African Union can associate itself with.

I have already said that we domesticated the law ourselves – it was this Parliament that domesticated the law, but there seems to be a view that we want to quit the ICC. I do not know whether that has something to do with my understanding, but I just don’t know where that view came from -(Interjections) - my statement was very clear. As I already said, we are still in the ICC. Finally, I would like to respond to the Member for Busongora North -  

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: I would like to get clarification from the Attorney-General on the issue of “we are there”, what happens tomorrow if the African Union says that Africans countries should get out? There are two positions; AU says that we are looking at it, ICJ says that get out and yet you are telling us that “we are still in it”. That is the reason why people are confused; you have not come out openly. Can you, therefore, explain to the House clearly instead of speaking about this and that? You are even referring to what you said to the State Party - tell us the exact position of Uganda.

MR NSAMBA: Attorney-General, I would like to thank you very much. You are aware that the fountain of honour of this nation, the 	President of this country, has often spoken clearly against the ICC. Part of the reason why there is a debate here beyond what you have submitted, is because the President is saying that the ICC is bad, yet ICC is imbedded in the laws of this country. We are also signatories to the law of Charter. That is where the debate emanated from.  We are signatories yet the President is saying something else. What should Ugandans follow? Do we have the law for the sake of it? Alternatively, should we just follow what the fountain of honour says? Thank you.


MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker and the Attorney-General. The clarification I need to get from you is, we have two scenarios here; the African Union heads of summit adopted a resolution where by Member countries are now supposed to take independent measures to determine either to remain in the ICC or to quit, like Senegal and Cape Verde. Different countries are taking different positions with regard to the resolutions that were taken in the 27th Heads of States Annual General Meeting.

The clarification I am seeking from you now, as the Government of Uganda, what is our stand with regards to, either remaining as members of the ICC or exiting from the ICC. You know that we are mandated as a country to be members of the African Union and we participated in the resolution of the AU.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Have you allowed everybody?

MS ALUM: Thank you Attorney-General for being a gentleman. Part of my clarification was asked for by my honourable colleagues; the issue of African Union vis-a-vis our signing of the wrong statute. Now, in the last statement, you have mentioned that in your statement that the Government of Uganda is cooperating with the ICC on the issue of Ongwen that he gets a fair trial. We still have so many other people like Joseph Kony and we the people of Northern Uganda - the people of Western Uganda in Kasese and many more are still waiting for the same justice. Yet you have indicated in your statement that there should be a balance between peace and justice. As a country, we see that taking Ongwen and probably Kony, will be a very good balance between justice and peace. If the AU says that we need to leave, what is our position as a country? I thank you. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is an on-going debate in Government; whether we stay or go. 

On that note, I was saying that finally, the hon. Nzoghu made many statements. However, he made a statement about us needing  each other. That is what formed our position with President Bashir - that is what I expounded in my statement that because President Bashir is a participant in the conflict in the North with Sudan and  many of our people in the North have suffered the blunt of war, we have to be conscious about how we handle President Bashir. Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much learned Attorney-General. Honourable members, you might need to find time and move a proper motion for this debate later but that was a response that the Attorney-General has made to the matter raised by a Member for Chua West.

INFORMATION PAPER ON SCREENING AND TESTING POLITICAL LEADERS FOR PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF NON-COMMUNICABLE DISEASES IN UGANDA

3.39
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Thank you very much Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank you once again and thank honourable members for giving me this opportunity to speak about a very importance topic. Before I start, allow me to apologise for that date which is supposed to be the 4 April 2017. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, non-communicable diseases (NCDs), sometimes called lifestyle diseases are diseases and conditions that are not transferable from one person to another whether by direct contact or through vectors. Examples of the non-communicable diseases are diabetes, cancers, asthma and cardiovascular diseases including hypertension. 

Non-communicable diseases are now the leading killers in the world responsible for 68 per cent of all death worldwide. The burden of non-communicable diseases in the world continues to increase. For example, about 415 million people in the world are currently suffering from diabetes and this number is predicted to increase to 642 million by 2040 according to the World Health Organisation. Unfortunately, 80 per cent of this rise will occur in low and middle-income countries, including Uganda, if nothing is done.

Mr Speaker, in 2014, we conducted a nationwide survey on non-communicable diseases and their risk factors with the intention of finding out what the burden of NCDs is in our own country. The results of the survey showed a high prevalence of non-communicable disease and risk factors more than we had anticipated. For example, one in four adults has hypertension and this was 24.3 per cent.

The problem of hypertension was further found to be more in urban dwellers at 26 per cent than in rural areas at 23.9 per cent. Diabetes was found in 1.4 per cent of adult Ugandan and again higher in the urban areas at 2.7 per cent compared to 1 per cent in rural areas. In terms of numbers, it means that over 4 million adults have hypertension and more than 500,000 adults in Uganda have diabetes.

Other risk factors including raised cholesterol levels were found to be 11 per cent in urban versus 5.6 in rural. Overweight 22.6 versus 12.6 and physical inactivity 7.9 versus 3.5 per cent. This followed similar trends of being more in urban than in rural communities. 

However, the reverse was seen in smoking where 5.6 per cent in urban versus 9 per cent in rural and alcohol use 22.8 versus 29.9 were more in rural communities than urban communities. Unfortunately, according to the same study, 80 per cent of our people with non-communicable diseases do not know that they have them.

They will therefore have difficulty to treat them and often fatal complications may ensue like stroke, heart failure, kidney failure, blindness and impotence to mention but a few. It is important to note here that NCDs once diagnosed early can be managed and controlled and people with them live productive lives hence the importance of early screening.

Furthermore, most non-communicable disease can be prevented by avoiding the major risk factors namely:- 

    1. Unhealthy diet, diet with lots of fat, salt and sugar like most processed fact foods is unhealthy and we encourage you to eat our freshly boiled local food and more of the fresh fruit and vegetables.
    2. Physical inactivity - living sedentary lifestyle predisposes to non-communicable diseases. Therefore, ensure that you exercise at least 30 minutes daily for 5 days a week. Obviously if you can do more, that is better.
    3. Tobacco use; tobacco in all its forms is dangerous to our health and exposes us to several cancers, heart diseases and other NCDs. Avoid tobacco in all forms be it smoking, chewing, sniffing or Shisha. Advocate for a tobacco smoke free environment for a health population.
    4.  Harmful use of Alcohol. Our bodies cannot breakdown Alcohol leading to damage of our internal organs especially the liver. The World Health Organisation recommends not more than two standard drinks of beer per day for men and not more than one for women. The standard drink is 330 mills of a standard beer.

As you are aware, in Uganda, we have so much informal alcohol that it is difficult to estimate the alcohol content. The message, therefore, should  be to avoid if you can and only take it in moderation if you can’t.

Mr Speaker, the average age of getting NCDs in Uganda is 35 years compared to 60 years in the developed world. The affected age group forms the basis of important human capital that is crucial for economic growth of this nation.

Furthermore, the majority of our referral abroad are related to non-communicable diseases which when detected early can be managed here thus considerably reducing on referrals abroad. Most political leaders fall within this high-risk group and therefore need to know their status and be advised to where to seek help early enough since non-communicable disease have no symptoms in their early stages.

In addition, the honourable Members of Parliament often interact with the population and are therefore important advocates for prevention and screening of non-communicable diseases. It is important to note that screening of non-communicable diseases is possible at our primary health care facilities hence no need to travel long distances for the service. Ministry of health will continue to build capacity at our primary health care facilities to enable them screen, diagnose and manage the non-communicable diseases.

Mr Speaker, it is against this background that the Ministry of Health together with its partners is offering a screening programme for the honourable Members of Parliament free of charge. This will play a role in the advocacy for early screening and health seeking behaviour to avoid complications of non-communicable diseases among Ugandans. The Ministry of Health has, therefore, organised a screening programme for all Members of Parliament including Ex-officio and the services that will be offered include the following:-

    1. Screening for pre diabetes; before one develops full blown diabetes, there are some metabolic changes that can be detected in the blood. At this stage, the condition can be reversed by lifestyle modification like reduction in weight, exercises and others.
    2. Screening for diabetes that is full blown. One can live with diabetes for long without symptoms. However, during this period, diabetes destroys internal organs and hence complications like blindness, kidney failure and stroke. It is therefore important that we screen for it without waiting for the full blown symptoms.
    3.  Hypertension; this is raised blood pressure and like diabetes, one can live with it for long without symptoms. However, hypertension can affect many internal organs even without symptoms, leading to serious complications like heart failure, kidney failure, hypertensive blindness and even stroke.
    4.  Weight, height and, therefore, the body mass index. Overweight and obesity predisposes us to many non-communicable diseases including diabetes and hypertension and even cancer. It is important that we keep within the healthy weight according to height. The health professional will advise you on the ideal weight so that you start working towards it.
    5.  Lipid profile. Our bodies break down the food we eat and part of it is stored as fat. Some of the fat is good but some is bad and bad fat predisposes to many non-communicable diseases and needs to be controlled. A health professional will advise you on how to reduce the bad fat if it is found to be raised.

Mr Speaker, all the above tests will be done in strict confidentiality by experienced health workers from Mulago National Referral Hospital and the Ministry of Health. Also, the necessary counselling, advice and referral will be done in confidentiality.

The exercise will take place in the parliamentary lobby opposite the parliamentary canteen and it started today 4 April 2017 and it will continue running up to 7 April 2017.

Mr Speaker, we would like to thank you for your commitment towards this exercise and for officially accepting to flag it off tomorrow, Wednesday, 5th April at 12.00 noon. This shows the importance and value you attach to the health of the honourable members.

Finally, I urge you, dear colleagues, not to miss this opportunity to screen and know your NCD status but also to be our ambassadors in your constituencies. Together we can reverse the rising trend of the NCDs. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, do you want to debate the statement? This is indeed a very serious statement; it was information announcing what is going to happen and what has started happening from today until 7 April 2017 when they finish the screening for MPs.

I thought this was important and I don’t know what we are going to debate right now or we will just go at the appropriate time and then when we are done, we can come and debate our status. (Laughter)

This statement should not attract a debate at this time because we thought that it was important that we do this screening. It is voluntary and not compulsory. If you think that it is something you need to do, then you have it here.

Some people prefer to go to other countries to do it but you have it right here and the time is there; why don’t you go and do it? That was only for that information. If there is a debate on these other matters, we can have it another day honourable members.

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. The minister has made a statement and it touches on the population of Uganda. She has given us statistics and it concerns every Ugandan.

I have told the Prime Minister before that the cases of diabetes and hypertension have increased in Uganda. The cases are so many and I want to thank the minister because she has given us the figures - Four million people in the urban areas and Five million people in the rural areas. Ugandans are suffering from diabetes and hypertension but what is the Government doing? 

Mr Speaker, I can afford screening and I have already done it but what about my people there? What about people who elected us to come here? The Members of Parliament can afford to go and pay for screening but what about Ugandans? We have got insurance and we can go to hospitals and we can be screened. 

What about Ugandans who are suffering? The cases are so many but what is Government doing about it? What is the ministry doing about our people who are very sick? We are saying that the ministry should screen our people and avail medicine in the hospitals because the cases of diabetes and hypertension are so many in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true that these issues are there and they are urgent and we must deal with them. However, the way this one has been brought is specific for this matter. Maybe the Committee on Health can pick this matter up because how do we debate something without recommendations and a line of decisions. 

This is specific for purposes of guiding us that there are things we need to do and provide leadership in the process of doing that. There is need for us to do this screening but of course the other burden of making sure that the rest of the population of Uganda is handled would be helpful.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister has been generous to us as Members of Parliament and my procedural point is from a worrisome point of view. For the population that elects us to see us enjoying all these benefits when we are paid insurance and others and yet they don’t have the same, will cause us serious accountability issues with our constituents.

I wonder whether this was necessary in the first instance to have it here at Parliament. Is it procedurally right, Mr Speaker, for us to hang ourselves on the noose by going for this exercise?

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving us this notice that we should go for screening of non-communicable diseases.

The point of procedure I would like to raise is that her statement, which has been captured by the Hansard, says “Ministerial Statement on the Burden of Non-Communicable Diseases in Uganda.” I represent the people of Buyaga West Constituency and tomorrow when I go to my constituency, and one of my constituents rises up and asks me about the burden of non-communicable diseases in Buyaga West Constituency, what will I answer if we don’t ask the minister now to tell us those figures now?

If you just want her to go away - and how will I answer those questions when I go back to my constituents?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, do you want to debate this statement?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let us start. Two minutes each. 

3.58
MR GAFFA MBWATEKEMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for giving us all the information and for organising for us this good event. 

However, according to your statement, it is broad to all Ugandans and I wonder why it is only for Members of Parliament to benefit yet we can even use our own money.

Honourable minister, listen to this: you are only concentrating on screening and doing a few others but of recent in Rwanda, all companies must subscribe to gyms for their employees to benefit or establish gym centres at their work places. Every –(Member timed out.)   

3.59
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some of us represent constituencies that are purely rural. I represent a constituency where some of my voters have never seen a doctor –(Interjections)– that is a fact and they are my voters.

I represent a constituency where most of my voters are dying from such diseases. It is just common in some of our areas that if somebody is diagnosed and they do not detect malaria, they will say they have not found a disease and they will die from that area because he or she has no way of accessing a doctor or further medication. 

Some of these services and facilities can only make more sense to some of our constituencies than people in the urban areas. I have heard the minister give bigger figures for urban centres in comparison to the rural areas simply because there is no clear data concerning the rural areas. 

When they collect this data, they only visit Kampala, Jinja, Mbarara and other urban areas and come up with figures. They will not go to Bugabula County or my village in Kitayunjwa to get the rural figures. 

I only request and urge the ministry to have the staff visit some of these people who are dying from these diseases that need this sort of assistance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Member for Isingiro County South.

4.02
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity once again. I would like to thank the minister for this report.

However, I have the following misgivings:
A Member of Parliament is entitled to medical insurance and, therefore, he or she has money to do this. This is not to hoodwink any other person. Your role is not to give me a medical facility, which I am already capable of doing for myself. 

Going further, this is to hoodwink us and bring us into bad repute with the population. Everybody out there is saying that Members of Parliament are selfish and that we have even now started to treat ourselves when our constituents are dying. I will not be party to this and I do not think anybody should do that. 

These people should go and do this in the rural areas for example in a constituency like Isingiro South and everybody will then appreciate.

A colleague went to this kind of facility and paid Shs 25,000 for the service. Which Member of Parliament cannot afford this kind of facility? For goodness sake, let us not do the last first and the first last. We should concentrate on looking at those who are not able. 

For how long are we going to talk about having medical insurance for everybody? For how long are we going to shout and talk about this? We have talked about this in the Ninth and now the Tenth Parliaments –(Member timed out.)

4.02
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the initiative she has brought to Members of Parliament.

Honourable colleagues, we sometimes need to appreciate any steps that our colleagues, be it the minister, take. If we just criticise – I would like to challenge Members who have checked before today. I am sure there are very few members –(Interjections)– it is a loss to this country.

I would like to commend the minister. However, my only request is whether we can extend these services further to the vulnerable people who are unable to receive these services. I do request that you make compulsory screening at the hospital levels and other health centre IIIs, if Government can afford. 

These Non-Communicable Diseases are a problem in this country. We may sit unaware of what is going on. I am also aware, through the newspapers, that the army intends to check its members. 

We are losing a lot of colleagues because of this negligence of individuals and yet the country pays for it when we lose these lives.

I would like to stand with the minister and request that if any other tests can be done in Parliament, please bring them within our reach. 

I know that we have medical insurance but we do not have the time. State duty calls us to heed all the time. The minister should carry on and we appreciate your effort. Bring more initiatives and we shall take them. 

4.04
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities, Western): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Minister of Health for this initiative.

This subject matter is raising a matter of costs but colleagues should appreciate –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, can we have some order?

MR KATURAMU: My perception of holding this health camp in Parliament is solely to raise awareness. Awareness should start with Members of Parliament so that we can raise awareness among our constituents, who are affected by these Non-Communicable Diseases and yet we are not giving them the necessary attention.

Mr Speaker, prevention is better than cure. Government is spending a lot of money on buying and importing drugs to treat such diseases that would be preventable. Therefore, the initiative by the Ministry of Health to raise awareness among Ugandans and not only Members of Parliament – 

MR KINOBERE: Thank you very much, for giving way, honourable colleague. 

The information that I would like to give is that however much we want to appreciate the minister for the initiative, the Wold Health Organisation is also very clear on who needs Non-Communicable Diseases testing. There must be research. 

I would like to understand if there was research made that Members of Parliament need Non-Communicable Diseases testing? –(Interjections)–  I am reading from the WHO literature.

Secondly, I went to the testing venue but failed to understand. I thought that before one under goes such tests, there must be clear counselling and testing to avoid risks. I did not see any provision for counselling and testing. 

Suppose you tell a member that he or she is diabetic and the member collapses –(Laughter)– there must be counselling, pre-counselling and post testing so that after testing, one is prepared for the results. Thank you very much.

4.08
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. Mr Speaker, I believe that we need order in the House. The issue concerning nutrition is very important but it is the least important subject to the Ministry of Health. Nutritionists who train both here and abroad do not have employment opportunities in this country. This underscores the argument that nutrition is not important and because it is not important, that is why we are having growing problems of non-communicable diseases.

From the minister’s statement, he should explain to this House why they are not paying attention to nutrition as an important issue and physical education. During the regime of the former President Idi Amin, I think Gen. Moses Ali can testify, we used to have what they call gymnastics from school just to promote the concept of physical exercise. Today, Physical Education is not part of the curriculum in schools and the Minister of Health is silent and not even informing Government that this is critical and we should not avoid it.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, nutrition and physical exercise are critical in preventing these non-communicable diseases –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have noticed that the honourable members from this side have been carrying out debate in another forum. Therefore, nobody from there will speak on the microphone.

4.11
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for starting with Members of Parliament. However, my concern is that now that we have started with Members of Parliament, what will we do with the people who have remained in the constituencies because Ugandans have received the information that Members of Parliament are being screened of these diseases. Do you have the budget after Members of Parliament to spread it out to the constituencies which are the majority of Ugandans? 
Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.12
MR MOSES ANGUNDRU (NRM, Terego West County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like us to understand ourselves and I would like to thank the minister for beginning with Members of Parliament. We are aware that there are very many health units throughout the country. Some of them are genuine while others are fake. When somebody falls sick, you rush him/her to some of these health units, which are not fully pledged. 

The Minister of Health has brought the idea that the Members of Parliament need to be screened here with qualified staff from Mulago Hospital, with very good machines, which this Parliament has procured itself. Therefore, I do support the idea and I would like to request my colleagues to take this initiative and we screen ourselves and get to know what we could be suffering from.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.14
MR JOSEPH KASOZI MUYOMBA (NRM, Bukoto County Mid-West, Lwengo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to upload the generosity of the Minister of Health because it is prudent that leaders know their health standing. I wish that the ministry extends this generosity to even our constituencies by organising health camps, which could be cheaper. We have seen NGOs and other service providers doing health camps and people go for free screening. Therefore, I would like you to extend these camps to the constituencies so that our people benefit from this very generosity of your heart. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister has said since we are one group, they would like to carryout screening for Members of Parliament. If there are Members who feel they do not need this screening it is not compulsory but if there are Members who think they need to do it, they are free to go and do it at the time that will be announced shortly. 

The minister has not said that this screening will be paid for by Members or anybody else in our constituencies; this screening is free. Therefore, those who are here and for those who are in their respective districts and constituencies - we should not complicate issues here. The issue is clear; those who would like to benefit from this proximity of the screening, go ahead and do it. While those who wish to go and do it in India, they are also free to go and carry it out from there. (Laughter) We should not make a big issue from this thing real.

MOTION THAT PARLIAMENT DO RESOLVE ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY FOR CONSIDERATION AND APPROVAL OF:

            I) THE REVISED REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2016/2017

            II) THE BUDGETARY PROPOSALS FOR THE ESTIMATES OF REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE FOR THE FISCAL YEAR 2017/2018

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for consideration of the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the Financial Year 2016/2017 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not the motion. Please, move the motion. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that Parliament do resolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of: 

    I) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2016/2017
    II) The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal 2017/2018. I beg to move.  

MS ANN NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be guided whether it is procedurally right to proceed to Committee of Supply when the budget committee was assigned by this House to go through Schedule I and Schedule II. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: All procedure under the Budget Act – on budget day, the minister will move this same motion: “I beg to move that the Parliament constitute itself into a committee of supply…” to handle this matter that has been raised by the minister. However, when we change the order of things, that which was done on budget day is now supposed to be done by 1st April of every year – and this is the motion. 

This motion simply means it now kicks off the entire budget process; so the House will be proceeding like a Committee of Supply to handle all issues to do with these estimates and budgets and things like that. Therefore, the procedure is correct and we are moving very well, except that we have now brought it forward. Instead of reading it when the budget is being read, now it is done by 1st April every year.

So, what is going to happen is that I will propose this and then we proceed to deal with those issues – and of course the accompanying documents of your budget things have got to be presented also at this time. That is what it means.
 
Honourable members, the motion is for the House to resolve itself into a committee of supply for consideration and approval of: 

    (i) The revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the fiscal year 2016/2017; and 
    (ii) The budgetary proposals for the estimates of revenue and expenditure for the fiscal year 2017/2018. 

That is the motion for which we now constitute ourselves into a Committee of Supply. Therefore, the House is now in Committee of Supply; can we receive the documents that accompany the budgeting issues?

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. With your permission, we had an accompanying brief statement to make.

Mr Speaker, Article 155 and 156 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, requires that the budget estimates for every financial year be prepared and laid before Parliament for review and approval. In addition, section 13(3) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, requires that the Minister for Finance shall, on behalf of the President, present a proposed annual budget of the financial year to Parliament by 1st April of the preceding financial year.

In fulfilment of the requirement of the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act, my ministry has carried out consultations at various levels as required under section 13(2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, and the recommendations arising out of the consultations have informed the budget strategy and priorities for 2017/2018.

Mr Speaker, Parliament approved the Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2017/2018 on 1 February 2017. This informed the basis for finalisation of the budget estimates.

Whereas there has been a slowdown in the economic growth on account of:
    (i) Slow pace of recovery of the global economy;
    (ii) Weak demand of our exports;
    (iii) The prolonged conflicts in South Sudan and Burundi;
    (iv) Delay in implementation of key projects; and
    (v) Adverse weather conditions.

The economy is expected to rebound to a growth rate of six to seven percent in the financial year 2017/2018, as a result of Government interventions to reduce the cost of electricity and doing investment in key infrastructure, especially oil-related infrastructure; improve private sector competitiveness; export promotion as well as increased agriculture productivity and production.

In addition, Government will strengthen implementation of local content through the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” (BUBU) policy; make priority for clearance of domestic arrears to the private sector in a phased manner and ensure proper payment of goods and services supplied by the private sector.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, the budget for financial year 2017/2018 and the medium term strategy has been formulated to mitigate the current challenges in order to achieve the following macroeconomic outcomes:

    1. To raise tax revenues towards the medium term tax to GDP ratio of 15 per cent without reducing effective demand for goods and services.
    2. To keep annual consumer price impression at no more than 5 per cent per annum.
    3. Ensure efficiency and effectiveness in government expenditures, including improvement in public investment management.
    4. Reduce interest rate through mobilisation of long-term capital/financing.
    5. Facilitate the East African Community integration to further access export markets.
    6. Maintain a competitive exchange rate regime to support growth of exports.
    7. Increase foreign exchange earnings through promoting tourism in the country by focusing on strategic tourism infrastructure with emphasis on tourism roads and attracting private investment sector. 
    8. Promote industrialisation and investment to reduce the levels of unemployment and increase the tax base.

Mr Speaker, the strategy for the budget of financial year 2017/2018 and the resultant allocation of resources will therefore focus on the following priorities:

    (a) Increasing agriculture production and productivity for food security as well as promoting exports of strategic commodities identified in the National Export Development Strategy.
    (b) Enhancing private sector development. 
    (c) Intensifying energy and transport infrastructure.
    (d) Undertaking oil-related infrastructure to support the commercialisation of oil and gas with the view to having the first oil out in the year 2020.
    (e) Increasing affordable long-term credit to finance private sector investments.
    (f) Improving service delivery through human capital development.
    (g) Intensifying the fight against corruption.
    (h) Boosting domestic revenue mobilisation.

Mr Speaker, the resource envelope for the financial year 2017/2018 – the total budget for financial year 2017/2018 amounts to Shs 29 trillion and will be financed as follows:

    (i) Domestic financing: Shs 21.8 trillion; (ii) External financing: Shs 7.1 trillion.

The budget estimates for financial year 2017/2018 by category of expenditure is: 

1. 	The recurrent expenditure is Shs 17.4 trillion. 
2. 	Development expenditure is Shs 11.5 trillion.

Out of the above amount, Shs 9.9 trillion is statutory expenditure; this therefore means that the total budget due for appropriation by this House will be Shs 19.065 trillion.

Mr Speaker, consistent with the requirements of the law, I wish to lay before this House the annual budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018 for consideration and approval.
I have one for the central government; it is here and I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: May the records capture that.

MR BAHATI: And the second one is for local governments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BAHATI: Other accompanying documents, Mr Speaker, in addition, as required under sections 13, 7, 10 and 11. I wish to lay the following accompanying documents to the annual budget estimates for the financial year 2017/2018:

    1. A statement of multi-year commitments of Government in the financial year 2017/2018. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BAHATI: A statement of tax expenditure of Government. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: List all of them. 

MR BAHATI: The budgets of self-accounting departments for missions and organisations set up under the Constitution and opinion of the Government on this budget; the schedule of Governments grants; the Appropriation Bill, 2017, accompanied by a certificate of financial implications, a treasury memorandum, a statement attesting to the reliability and completeness of information provided in the budget.

The list of accounting officers to be appointed in the financial year 2017/2018, a certificate of gender and equity responsiveness, the certificate of compliance of the annual budget for the financial year 2016/2017 to the National Development Plan.

The consolidated budget for public operations and state enterprises for the financial year 2017/2018 and a report of the existing loan guarantees including analysis of the risk associated with those guarantees. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay all these documents. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those documents and they stand referred to the appropriate Committee on Budget to handle within the framework of our rules. 

I now need you to move the formal motion and it is for adoption, which decision will be taken by the 31st of May. Therefore, instead of saying “Motion for consideration” it should now be “Motion for approval of the revised revenue and expenditure.” 

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for approval of the revised revenue and expenditure estimates for the financial year 2016/2017 and the budget proposals for the revenue and expenditure estimates for the financial year 2017/2018. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

MR BAHATI: It is very well seconded. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is seconded by the member for Kibuku District, Member for Budiope County, honourable member for Kanungu, honourable member for Kumi Municipality and honourable member for Fort Portal Municipality. It has also been seconded by the honourable member for Busongora North. The motion has already been spoken to.

This motion together with the accompanying documents and everything else now is referred to the appropriate Committee on Budget. They will handle all the details, consult with the other committees, sectoral committees, harmonise all the figures and they will come back and report on this motion. Thereafter, we shall take a decision by the 31st of May. That is what the law now requires. The burden now is on the chairperson to take it from here and move with it. Otherwise, all the documents are now here and the motion is before the House for your acquaintance.

4.31
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this submission. However, we got a practical problem in the sense that the document so laid on Table appeared to be in a draft form and I do not think we have enough copies for ourselves. 

There is a misconception that because we have the iPads, we can process these huge documents using the iPads, which is practically impossible. The iPad I came with has already run out of battery. If I am to peruse a document of 2000 pages, it is unfair to imagine that I can use the iPad. 

We are, therefore, requesting the ministry to actually publish these documents, at least in some reasonable number probably 100 copies. This is because chairpersons and other technical staff experience problems in perusing these documents and that seriously affects the quality of our work. We request that the ministry undertakes to produce copies within the shortest time possible.

Secondly, there has been a problem that sometimes they lay documents, which are still in a draft form and they are not availed to us in good time. I hope that this time round, we shall avoid that situation. We sit here and estimate that we have 30 days within which to process the document, when actually the real documents come 15 days after. I think we should avoid that kind of situation this time. We should get properly published documents to which we can make proper reference and then we come up with our final report in good time. I beg, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the number speaks - somebody in charge of the Committee on Budget and these experiences have been there. Honourable minister, would you like to assure the House of hard copies and then we see? 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, a decision was taken here when we introduced the use of iPads that the ministry should only produce five hard copies and then the rest of the Members would read from the iPads. 

Now that there is demand for going back, we can be guided on how many copies we can produce in hard copy form and then we will comply. 

Secondly, I would like to assure the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget that the documents we have laid here today are final documents. They are not in draft form. They are real documents that can be considered by the committee, even tomorrow.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I seek your guidance on how many copies you would want us to print? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have a set of copies for each of the committees of Parliament so that where there is a problem with the iPad; they can make reference to the hard copies? Can we do five or ten for the library and each of the committees both standing and sectoral committees? Is that okay? That would work out for us. 

MR BAHATI: We could do 100 copies. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: A hundred would be reasonable. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you. 

MR KIVUMBI: I thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural point. Last week, a similar exercise was conducted in the Parliament of Kenya and the Budget Chairperson and I had the opportunity to peruse through the papers that were presented in the Parliament of Kenya following the same procedure as we do. 

I have had the benefit of looking at the provision of the aAct, which the minister is trying to fulfill. It is very scanty yet you are also trying to reverse what used to happen and we have to be very clear on what ought to be done today probably going forward. 

In the past, I used to read a budget proposed to Parliament and thereafter read every detail. Then we would go into committees and begin to debate. Now the cycle has changed, the minister came here and presented some brief and general statement. Parliament threatened to go into a dark room of the country because what we debate is also informed by the general public, who are not going to access our iPads. Mr Speaker, I find it extra-ordinarily difficult for the people I represent to give any idea on how to proceed with the budget proposal in this fashion.

Therefore, the point I would like to seek your guidance on – maybe going forward, is that this is actually the presentation of the budget proposal and the minister ought to have been clear on the taxes, on the burden on the people so that we go into a discussion in our various committees knowing the full weight of what we are going to do.

Mr Speaker, from what the minister has read, I find this document very sketchy. I, therefore, beg your indulgence. Maybe for learning purposes; what I saw in Kenya was an actual occasion to present a budget and the proposals and the question.

You are asking the people of Uganda to make a sacrifice. You are asking for their money and how it is going to be spent. The procedural question I would like to ask is whether we are doing it the right way. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, we basically altered that despite those areas that we might need to revisit in the way we do these things but according to the law, you have seen it yourself in section 13 and its provision. 

This is what was done last year and it is what is being done this year. We are proceeding the way we have been proceeding. The detail of the document is what has been laid before Parliament. In the past, the minister used to go through each and every one of them and even announce tax measures that would come into effect by midnight of - 

However, all those things had issues; they changed this that you front load the entire budget process so that by the time the minister is making a formal statement, the budget is passed to avoid issues of Vote on Account and all these other complicated processes.

However, it is still a very raw process and we shall see how to make it better in terms of how we apply it. It should have been by the 1st of April but it happened to be on a strange day and that is why we are receiving it today. Let us proceed this way until we are able to better advise ourselves on how to proceed. 


For now, let us receive this and let the Committee on Budget begin the process of handling it while the sectoral committees also pick on their sectors. The ministerial statements are there. The challenge that I communicated earlier and raised by the Leader of the Opposition is that only three of the policy statements have been uploaded on the iPad.

I had given a whole two weeks for the shadow ministers to make responses to the ministerial policy statements so that the committees consider both when they begin to sit. That has hit a snag. We would like to know that by the time we go to committees on Thursday, all the statements are in and then, I will give guidance on the alternative policy statements. 

The practical way would be that the alternative policy statements that come will be sent straight to the committees because they will already be in the process of examining this matter so that they are considered together and we see how to proceed. 

Let us proceed this way until we better advise ourselves. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE STATE OF UNIVERSITIES IN UGANDA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had proposed this particular report for debate; are we ready? If there is no debate, I can put the question for adoption.

Honourable members, I now put the question that - 

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the state of universities in this country is very important. It would be prudent to have the cabinet minister present in this Parliament. Yes, I see hon. Seninde here but she is in-charge of primary education. 

The issues affecting all our public universities –(Interjections)– they are many but the questions to some of those issues that are pertinent to those universities deserves the cabinet minister to be present. 

Mr Speaker, I would request that -(Interruption)

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of order. The issue on the Order Paper is about the concerns that Members raised that led the committee to come up with a report that was presented on the Floor of this Parliament.

Today, we expected to hear Members’ questions or concerns as a reaction to the report that was presented.  The ministers here are the Minister of State for Primary Education and the Minister of State for Sports. We all sit in Cabinet with our senior minister.

I would like to make it clear on this Floor that we can all ably respond to concerns that are raised by our honourable colleagues. I would like to allay the fears of my colleague that we can ably respond.

Therefore, is my colleague in order to undermine the ministers present that can ably respond to concerns of the Ministry of Education and Sports?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, now you know better. (Laughter) So, please leave the procedural matter. If there is debate, can we debate? If not debate, can I put the question?

4.45
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the report, the committee highlighted that Makerere University land had been grabbed by some mafias. I was not happy when the committee did not mention the names of these powerful people. 

We have kept pampering these mafias by not mentioning their names. In future, they will come up and even take away land belonging to Parliament. Who are these mafias that the committee fears to mention and yet they went there? 

I, therefore, request that the committee goes ahead to mention the names of the people who grabbed Makerere University land so that they are brought to book. Thank you.

4.46
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. University education is the heart and engine of any nation. We are where we are and stuck as a country because we have failed to prioritise university education. 

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, I will draw the attention of this country to six fundamental roles of universities.  We can do without something but probably we cannot do without our universities for the following roles;  

Number one, universities serve as knowledge banks for both the present and the future generations and that is what they call repository knowledge system.

Secondly, our country needs to prioritise university education because universities help to generate knowledge, especially new knowledge. This new knowledge is purposed for solving society’s problems and that is what they call research.

The third fundamental role of universities is –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Speaker, the committee took the trouble to do some research and come up with a report with specific recommendations. Is the honourable member in order to dwell on generalities without referring to specific recommendations in the report so that we can see how best to deal with them and improve on the university education for our children?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the time was 10 or 15 minutes, I would have given the Member the benefit of the doubt that he was making his preamble and then he would come to the point. (Laughter) However, given that he has three minutes, he needed to be relevant to the subject. Please, use the rest of your time to be relevant to the debate.

MR KATUSABE: Mr Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. I come from the university world. In terms of expertise, I am well placed to deploy my mental capabilities on the subject matter. We are talking about knowledge not common sense. My opening remarks on this particular subject were basically the attention that is given to university support.

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the committee is aware that in terms of Government support, universities literally receive nothing. As I speak, Government now transmits about Shs 60 million. Mr Speaker, as a former law professor, Shs 60 million is not even enough to support one masters student -(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of 80 constituents comprising local council chairpersons and councillors as well as cultural and opinion leaders from Kassanda County South, which is represented by hon. Simeo Nsubuga and hon. Benny Namugwanya. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

4.51
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to thank the able leadership of our country and the minister. You have done such a good job and are ready to take up responsibility on behalf of the senior minister. I have some things to raise to you and one such thing is a commitment from you. 

Honourable Minister of State for Primary Education, the universities which are under the same category as Soroti University have many issues. First, construction is not complete. I am specifically talking about Soroti University and the rest, which are under that level of operation.

Secondly, the ICT, land and network necessary to have these universities start operation are not present. To make Soroti University run, we need Shs 13 billion. Will you commit yourself now on behalf of the senior minister that you are going to have the money there so that by August, we have the university run officially? The people of Teso are waiting. Ugandans are waiting. I am waiting and everybody is waiting. When are we going on the ground to have this university run? Please, may you commit yourself before this Parliament? Thank you.

4.55
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, I join my colleagues to thank the committee for the work well-done. To take on from my colleague about Makerere University, the land in Katanga is guild land. For many years, students were supposed to have a guild mall on that land but up to now – Makerere being a Government university -  people that occupy that land claim to be sent by the Government. We wanted the committee to tell us exactly the position that they reached concerning that land. 

Secondly, the other day, we had an issue concerning State House scholarships and the Speaker said we should wait for that report so that we debate and we are informed about those people that benefit from State House scholarships and those that do not as well as the procedures used to qualify for the scholarship. The committee did not tell us the people who benefit and how they benefit. There are people who study up to master’s level using State House scholarships. 

That is related to the student’s loan scheme. We would like to know how people qualify and how they get to be on the list of those who benefit from the students’ loan scheme.

Mr Speaker, equally, the committee discussed more about Makerere University and little was considered about other universities such as Busoga University where I come from. The university was closed and the committee did not tell us what was going on and how we are going to help some of those very poor universities. That is why you saw the other day when we were considering a loan for centres of excellence, Makerere and Gulu were the only ones that qualified, yet, we need to bring up other universities so that poor people who stay in those areas and do not reach Makerere can also move at the same pace with those ones in Kampala. Thank you.

4.55
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. In the report, they wrote a very biased statement about Mountains of the Moon University and I felt insulted because I am one of the pioneers of that university. The committee said they found containers and so on and they are trying to castigate Government for allowing these private universities. 

However, I would like to remind the committee that actually the President committed himself to seeing that Mountains of the Moon University is taken over by Government because the region where I come from – Rwenzori – does not have a public university and we have a population of about four million people. It is very unfortunate that we are seeing the Government spend resources in other regions when we applied for Government to give us a public university much earlier but areas such as Muni now have a university. Kabale has also got a public university.

Mr Speaker, we in Fort Portal, Toro and Rwenzori region as a whole are also taxpayers. Actually, every year we contribute Shs 1.5 trillion to improve the budget. We are the biggest tea producing region and we generate every year Shs $100 million for the Government in order to save on its forex. We are the food basket of the region. Right now, we are feeding Kampala with matooke, among others and we have got quite a lot that we are producing for the region. 

Mr Speaker, therefore, we are urging the Government to consider Mountains of the Moon University as a public university in order to improve the quality of infrastructure as you rightfully put it because we cannot afford to build that entire infrastructure within our means due to limited resources.

Finally, Mr Speaker, on the issue of research, it is very unfortunate – I have been arguing over the years even including in the Ninth Parliament that our priority as a country in the financing of research is at the bottom end. In the previous debate, we were talking about ICC. Why can’t we empower ourselves by financing our own research such that we can inform our decision making and generate innovations and technologies that can make us competitive globally? I would like to urge that Parliament moves to ensure that Government finances our academic research because it is through research that we can be able to solve a number of the development challenges. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.59
MR RICHARD OKOTH OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are debating the committee report on the state of universities in Uganda. However, I find that there are a number of gaps in this report.

First of all, each time the universities are ranked, our universities do not feature among the top 100 save for Makerere University. Mr Speaker, everybody would love to study in a highly regarded university like Harvard - honourable colleagues here always tell us about the American universities they studied in. I would like to inquire from the committee what the problem is. You are telling us about the state of our universities but why is it that our universities save for Makerere, do not feature among the top 100 in Africa?

I need clarification on that because you cannot report on the state of universities without giving a reference to why our universities do not feature. Is it a question of research or research dissemination? What is the problem? Is it glaring lack of quality? We needed to know something about that because that is what constitutes the state of our universities.

Secondly, on page 26, the committee talks of staffing gaps. Looking at our universities, we are interested in knowing what kind of staff gaps are we talking about? Is it in terms of professors? How many professors do we have in each of these universities? How many do we need and what is the gap?  What is the number of lecturers with PhDs in each of these universities among others. Do we have non-PhD holders still teaching in our universities? These are the issues we needed to know so that we are sure that when our children go to these universities, they are going to get quality education that can meet the needs of our society.

Finally, especially the one that is very dear to me is that the committee visited Busitema University but they did not report much on what is actually going on there. They chose to visit Mbale – that university has five campuses.  There is one in my constituency – Nagongera Campus. It is a huge campus with very big potential and it has a lot of land but it has a total of 130 student population – (Member timed out.)
	
5.03
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE	(NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join colleagues to appreciate the Committee on Education and Sports, for the good report. The mandate according to the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, 2001, demands of the National Council of Higher Education to ensure exercise of effective enforcement of standards in universities.

In Uganda, currently, these standards are lacking in every aspect. You will find universities sending out many graduates but they are discriminated because there are courses that have been created in boardrooms, which have not been accredited by the National Council of Higher Education. The National Council of Higher Education, therefore, has not come out to ensure that there is compliance by both the public and private universities to the existing frameworks that are in place. 

This is a big disservice to our country –(Interruption)

MR MUHEIRWE: I would like to inform the House that Makerere University Medical School has for the last three years graduated students in a course called Biotechnology. Mr Speaker, these people have not been registered by the Medical Council and their professional bodies. As a result, they have been rendered idle and they are looking for jobs outside Uganda. We should find a way of having courses that are relevant and can be used in this country.

Now that we have the Biotechnology Bill in the offing, we are likely to have challenges with people who have graduated but cannot be employed in their own country. Thank you for giving way.

MR NAMBESHE: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. 

Furthermore, the report informs us about the huge funding gaps that are in these universities. Our lecturers –(Member timed out.)

5.06
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have only one issue to raise concerning Government sponsorship to university students. We are talking about a situation whereby presently, students who are on Government sponsorship are pursuing the worst courses yet you are talking about the brightest children of this country. People who score highly get AAA, ABC and qualify to go on Government sponsorship but they are given courses like Philosophy, Psychology, Logic - (Interjections) - Geography among others.

Mr Speaker, those who are rich in this country and their children are given those courses, they reject them and sponsor their children for better courses hence leaving these useless courses to bright children of the poorest of the poor and this concerns me. For instance, if I qualify for Government sponsorship, I should be given the money so that I can decide on what course to pursue. If the money is inadequate, let me top up. It should not be rigid; they sponsor you and say, “We have sponsored you to do Psychology. You either take it or leave it.”

We are confining the poorest people or these children to useless courses. The other day, I was talking to a number of students in the university and all of them had AAB. What would you demand of people? They were doing Philosophy, Psychology and I asked them, “Where are you going to get jobs”?

Many things are hard to come by. Mr Speaker, the point I am emphasising is, can Government be flexible? If I qualify to get Government scholarship, let me be given the fund and I choose the course I want. If the money is not adequate, let me top up other than the issue of take it or leave it.
Secondly, universities do not tell us who takes up sponsorship if I reject a course I have been given? I beg to move – (Member timed out.)

5.09
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. My major concern is about the security situation of our students in these universities. It is true that many students have died. 

They went on to also talk about the infrastructure, which is limiting many of the students in staying in the halls of residence. My proposal, therefore, is that we should build more hostels instead of leaving it to the private sector. Government should expand construction of hostels so that many of our students will be within the university.

I am also concerned about the sponsorship given by Government. Mr Speaker, we need to be more vigilant especially as we represent the poor. This Ministry of Education and Sports should come out to tell us all the types of sponsorship that we have so that we harmonise them and get to know what specifically goes to our districts.

For instance, concerning the students’ loan scheme, it is very difficult to access it. In Adjumani District, I have been approached; the process is very tedious and I want to propose that we should review it and goes to the quota system. We will then get to know how many slots a district can get and this will ensure that the system is highly decentralised. This would ensure that our people benefit, especially the poor.

Lastly, they have observed the absence of key administrative policy manuals, including human, financial and accountability manuals, which these administrators are supposed to follow. I, therefore, propose that the Ministry of Education and Sports should immediately take this up.

If the administrators do not have the manual that governs the management of the university, especially on accountability, this is reflected in local strikes and the confusion in the universities because there are no clear policies on which they can manage the university in a better way. Thank you.

5.12
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good work they have done. I would also like to add on what the colleagues have said; the research – I do not know what research they are doing because some of the courses given to our students in our universities are really disturbing.

Most of the students we have on the streets are unemployed because they have done some of those courses. Research needs to be done seriously and we look at those courses and improve on them.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that the university gets 40 percent from the tuition paid by the students; it is really very unfortunate but I do not think it should cause the university to force the students to pay their tuition within that short period when they have just started school.

Most of those students are from very poor families and the most affected ones are those who are on private sponsorship. Those that are on Government sponsorship are automatically not affected and yet, most of them are from well-to-do families. They are the ones enjoying that benefit. The poorest that need the favour in that area are not being considered.

I, therefore, would like to recommend and suggest that next semester, that should be scrapped off. The students should be given enough time, like they have been given time to organise themselves and their families so that they get school fees and pay at the right time without being pressurised. 

I have some examples from my district that have even given up on their courses; others were in third year and they have dropped out. It is really alarming and bad for the families from where those children come. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I thought you rose on the point of information first. (Laughter)

MS KARUNGI: Mr Speaker, thank you for your protection. On page 24 of the report, they have talked about the universities that are underfunded – (Member timed out.)

5.15
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. I have been a lecturer for the last 16 years. I have found this report very important if we want to cure the problems in tertiary institutions.

I know staffing levels in our universities are quite challenging. As we talk now, most of the well educated, especially professors leave Uganda because of very low payments. Two, the conditions of service are very challenging and that is why my view is, we certainly need to review the salary structure for the professors to maintain them. 

Three, in the report, I have been shocked to learn that Busitema University, Mbale campus is actually sitting on borrowed property. I cannot imagine a Government university operating on a structure that does not belong to them. This is a real problem. My view is that this must be addressed as we go on. 

I visited Soroti University, it was supposed to open this academic year but unfortunately, there was no money. By that time, they had a debt of Shs 11 billion. They are now requesting for about Shs 13 billion if they have to open this academic year of 2017/2018. I am, therefore, requesting that the Government of Uganda should come in to solve these short term but key critical issues. Higher education determines the destiny of this country, especially if handled properly.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I would like to say something about gratuity; if you read the report, it has shown that gratuity for quite a number of universities - like Gulu requires about Shs 3 billion - has not been paid. You can now imagine you work and you are not paid. That is where the problem is.

As I conclude, Mr Speaker, I would like to remind Members that in Uganda, if you studied in a non-chattered university and you want to go and do your masters in a university like Makerere, they will not admit you. That is why I am requesting the ministry and National Council for Higher Education to revisit some of these areas. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me have the following members in this order. Kassanda South, Nwoya District, Masaka Municipality, Ayivu County, PWD Eastern, Ruhinda and Ngora District in that order. Then we will see how to move again.

5.18
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kasanda County South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with this report. On pages 31 and 32 of the report, the committee raised the issue of financial mismanagement by public universities.

At one time, I worked at Kyambogo University and I was part of the top management of the university. The issue of financial mismanagement is a big problem for all the public universities. From my observation, it appears the ministry does not have or it has minimum control over these public universities.

Therefore, I would like to find out from the ministers who are here; what measure have you put in place, as a ministry, to control the issue of financial mismanagement in public universities? Thank you Mr Speaker.

5.20
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for this good report. We have problems with the universities as it has been stated by the committee. I would like to address myself to the kind of courses that are being offered at the university just as my colleagues have mentioned.

We need the minister to regulate and I wonder what National Council for Higher Education is doing. The courses as the committee has mentioned have been split into small courses. I remember when we were at the university, we used to talk of B.com but now in B.com there are almost 10 courses split into small units. What used to be units like Accounting is now a course of its own, Auditing is already a course too. At the end, students come out without basic foundations of those courses and it is difficult for them to get jobs. I request the minister to look into this.

Secondly, we need to reduce the number of private students at public universities. This is a source of problems where they are getting a lot of money then later on they put it aside and they do not even want the minister or Government to talk about it.

When you look at the number of private students at public universities and compare with the private universities, they almost have half the number of students that are in public universities. However, the private universities are using only that money from private students and are managing their universities well yet it is a nightmare in the public universities.

According to the committee report, evening courses are now being managed at departmental level and therefore, they are not accounting in any way. If it is part of the problem that is causing mismanagement at the institutions, why don’t we scrap it off or reduce the number? You need to regulate this; do not let it go on.

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, I would like to find out from the minister what the difference between these kinds of sponsorships is; how different is State House sponsorship from the Government quota system and Government sponsorship? Also the students’ loan scheme, we need to be very clear on how this money is got. 

Otherwise, depending on applications only, the poor are even edging out more because from the Government quota, they do not qualify and cannot get it. Then the students’ loan scheme, we do not know how it is decided. Therefore, we are languishing; our villagers are not getting it any more. 

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I know it is not easy to regulate politics at the universities but somehow students need to be advised not to take violent politics –(Member timed out.)

5.23
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to register my appreciation to the committee for a job well done in the circumstances. From an educationist like me, I know for a fact that there is no education policy better than the quality of these teachers. I contend that the committee did identify this as a challenge but I guess because of time, they never delved into breadth and depth of this challenge in our universities.

They enumerated the challenge of human resource gaps, not because we have a deficit of able men and women to occupy these gaps but they are not attractive. If you went around East Africa and across Africa, many universities are occupied by Ugandan professors because they have found comfort in those places; we abuse them here. 

We advise them to go and supplement their income with rearing goats and all sorts of derogatory things. These people went to school. We shall require from the ministry a very serious commitment in form of a treasury memorandum on how they intend to act on this report so that the team that did this good job does not work in vain.

Mr Speaker, colleagues have ably discussed the preparation of academic programmes at our universities. The course units I did at School of Education are now courses; the ones I did at School of Economics are courses. What has only been saved is what I did at the School of Law. Nobody has duplicated it.
However, you have very funny programmes and we are wondering whether we are training people to grow up. We have the NDP that engenders our planning for all sectors. Can we see public universities as an example reflect the intention of Government for our education?

For example, I was gratified seeing Busitema trying to go specific in its programming. Can we reduce preparation of academic programmes in our universities to say, “If you are a university, you either do this of never?” We should not allow our universities to offer everything. They are offering certificates from Nursery teaching to whatever. 

They are money minting institutions; they are not centres of research to advance knowledge in our community, which is why we are producing people that have no employable skills. They have qualification without employable skills –(Interruption) 

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank hon. Mpuuga. The clarification I am seeking from you and also for purposes of putting the records right is: did you say universities are offering certificates for nursery teaching? I would like to know.
MR MPUUGA: My dear colleague, all sorts of certificates and for the record, including that one and this is one of the pathetic - (Member timed out.)

5.27
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much. I would like to continue from where hon. Mpuuga has stopped. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for this good job and I would like to implore this Parliament to take this report very seriously because it brings out serious issues affecting our universities. They have put up very good recommendations, which if implemented would address the issues that are making our country suffer.

Mr Speaker, I want to dwell on the conclusion of the committee and particularly, the first paragraph where they recommend an overhaul or reforms in the policy framework governing our public universities. If I am not wrong, it seems as a country we do not have a manpower plan. That is why we have problems with universities producing students or citizens without employable skills. 

What is the purpose of setting up these various universities? What is the purpose of licensing private universities? If we do not have a manpower plan, then we are bound to make mistakes and we are bound to waste the money that people are investing. 

If there was a manpower plan, it would guide the country as to where a certain category of students would go. If they are technoscience students, for example, you send them to Gulu University; if they are agriculture students, send them to Busitema University; if they are medical students, send them to Mbarara University and Makerere University. If we do not have that kind of framework, Mr Speaker, we have a time bomb at our feet. 

I call upon the ministry to acquaint themselves with –(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Mr Speaker, the reason this country does not have a manpower plan is because it has failed to undertake a manpower survey. For several years, the National Bureau of Statistics and the National Planning Authority have been struggling to undertake this survey. Unfortunately, the problem has been lack of funds. Therefore, because of the lack of information on the manpower that we have in this country, you cannot plan for it because you need information. That is the information that I want to give.

MR ATIKU: Mr Speaker, can I add my voice to what the committee has recommended and based on the information that has just been give; the Ministry of Education and Sports together with the National Planning Authority embark on this manpower survey to pave way for the country to put in place a manpower policy or manpower plan that can guide this country in terms of admitting our students –(Member timed out.)

5.32
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion.

I would like to bring out one issue that has been historical. I used to sit on the National Council for Higher Education and I would like to say that the separation of MUBS and Makerere University is very critical. I am happy that the committee is reporting that they have now agreed to change the name from “Makerere” to something else. Maybe the minister could come and tell this House when this is going to be possible. There is also a lot of duplication of courses in Makerere University and MUBS. I think they need to look at that.

Mr Speaker, there is also the issue of the courses. I would like to talk about the people I represent in this House. When these young people with disabilities get admitted for courses under the quota system, they are directed to do a course called “community based rehabilitation” and yet when they graduate, they never get jobs. They go back home and they move with this paper and every district service commission says that they do not know that course.

I think this is a disservice to them. This is a disabled person and you think you are doing a good service by giving them that kind of course but three years down the road, the person has wasted their time in the university and does not get employment. I think the country needs to wake up.

Mr Speaker, underfunding is causing strikes in universities. At the moment, the lecturers of Makerere University are planning another strike. What is happening? We make promises and we do not fulfil them. We, the parents, painfully see our children always back at home because lecturers are striking. A promise is made and not fulfilled; what is the problem? Maybe the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give an explanation about this kind of thing.

On the issue about the number of students, there are students who study during the day time and those who study in the evening. However good that lecturer is, after teaching in the morning and he goes back to teach in the evening, I do not know what quality of education the evening class would get.

I think we need to open our eyes and check whether these human beings are machines or they are something else. We just pretend to have 40,000 people graduating; no wonder at the last graduation, many degrees were cancelled because of such a challenge. It is the poor parent who suffers as the policies go on –(Member timed out.)

5.34
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA MUGABE (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the work done by the committee. However, they did not come out clearly on the issue of strikes in public universities.

Strikes in public universities are either staff related, especially the teaching staff, or administration related. Public universities are supervised by the Ministry of Education and Sports and in Uganda it is only in public universities where staff are not transferred. You graduate at the age of 20 years with a first class degree and then you get employed and teach there until you reach retirement age.

Mr Speaker, I recommend that lecturers in public universities should also be transferred within these public universities. This is why you find the quality of students that these universities produce differ. When you go for an interview, they ask you where you graduated from. If you are from Makerere University, you are given priority compared to someone who graduated from a different university. Therefore, for standardisation, I do recommend that staff of public universities be transferred like any other civil servant in this country. Thank you.

5.36  
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman representative, Ngora):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice in commending the committee for the recommendations that they have given to this House.

I am going to restrict my debate to the situation of sanitation and hygiene in higher institutions of learning, especially on the recommendation that was raised about Makerere University. As part of the alumni of that university, I still feel proud to be associated with Makerere University. When students of Makerere University go on strike, as a former student leader in the guild, I do not blame the students because there are many challenges that affect their performance. 

If you look at a hall like Lumumba closing down - Some people pledge their allegiance to the times when they were in Makerere University like definitely, I feel proud when I pass Makerere University and I see my hall, CCE, where I was a chairperson at one time. Therefore, if we are looking at perfecting education in institutions of higher learning, sanitation facilities for the students are very imperative and we must budget for them. 

Even if we cannot have all the universities on the world map, let us preserve our university. When I travel abroad, those students who studied in Makerere University always ask me about the university because they belonged there.

The committee has mentioned that land belonging to Makerere University is now owned by bosses. I do not think that there is anybody above the law in this country. I was an executive member of the Makerere University Convocation and we battled with the issue of land and yet there is a Government in place. I think these are issues that can be resolved and the land returned to the university.

Finally, the issue of Soroti University is now beyond us, the politicians who hail from Teso. Every time I travel to any district in Teso, the issue raised is when the university will be operational. There was construction going on but it stalled and no one is able to explain because of budgetary constraints. We were at the university last week and we were told that Shs 13 billion was needed to accomplish the entire process. 

As we initiate these new universities to appease the population and deliver a service in terms of making higher education accessible, I would like to thank the Government because from the time I was born, the number of universities has increased. However, are they effective? Soroti University, for example, was approved long before I came to Parliament; has it served its purpose? It is not only – (Member timed out.)  

5.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to speak about the extension programme in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The extension programme in the ministry has money to employ people such as veterinary doctors and others that have studied agriculture at every subcounty level; they can employ two people, one for the cattle and the other for the crops. 

The money is there but in the few districts that I have gone to, these people have not been employed and then we come here and complain that all the coffee that was given was destroyed and all our cattle are dying. This is because the owners know nothing about looking after cattle. I appeal to you, - some of you are parents and you know that agriculture is so important to us - let us encourage our children to study agriculture because that is the only initiative that will save our country. 

Statistics show that 83 per cent of our people are employed in the agricultural sector but they have not studied agriculture. These universities are not offering good courses in agriculture. We do not have veterinary doctors to look after our cattle. In your recommendations, please let us have more people to study agriculture so that we are able – 

If you go to the entire Karamoja region, you will not get more than five veterinary doctors and yet the livelihood of the Karimojong is cattle. Why should they come here and study different things and yet their fathers sold cattle to bring them here? I beg to submit.

5.42
MS ANNA ADEKE (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Most obliged, Mr Speaker. I would like to concur with the minister and talk to the leadership at the Ministry of Education and Sports to rise to the occasion. It is very clear that we need a curriculum overhaul in our country. We have so many unemployed graduates because what they are being equipped for does not make them fit enough to compete and be a useful resource to our country. 

Let this be the last time we speak as a Parliament on the need for a curriculum overhaul. We need to have students who are important to the country. We have a National Development Plan and I have heard of Vision 2040. What we want as a country should be reflected in our education system. We are tired. We have people who are walking up and down the streets crying about the education that they have that cannot get them employment. We are sick and tired of this and as a generation, we must start to produce people who can employ themselves and our ministry should take the lead in this.

One of the things that I note in the report is the absence of leadership of the Ministry of Education and Sports. The education sector has been privatised so much that the ministry leadership has lost touch and control of the sector. The National Council for Higher Education is supposed to be regulated by the ministry. It is the agency that accredits university programmes. 

Gulu University has been teaching law and now these law students who have finished have been denied entry into Law Development Centre. Why is Gulu University teaching a law programme and yet the Uganda Law Council says that they cannot offer the students who leave Gulu University a Postgraduate Diploma in Legal Practice? It does not make sense. 

The actors in the education sector are clearly not talking with each other. There is a lot of duplicity of courses. You have the degree in law from Makerere University and then a degree in ethics and human rights. What a graduate of ethics and human rights does is a small bit of what a lawyer would do. It is just duplicity. There are so many people who have different qualifications and yet they can do the same thing because the actors in the sector are not speaking to each other. People from the Ministry of Education and Sports should give us leadership. 

Secondly, I will speak on the issue of sexual harassment in the universities. Makerere University is Uganda summarised. At the university level they are noting that there is sexual harassment and yet these are consenting adults. If an adult can be sexually harassed, you can imagine what is happening to our girls who are at lower levels of education. 

We do have the state minister for primary education here. Our girls are dropping out of school because of the high levels of defilement and the criminal justice system does not make it possible for them to get justice. It is always an out-of-court settlement. The police call the defilers to settle with the victim’s family and the victims are left hanging. This is partly why girls drop out of the education system.

I propose that if we are interrogating sexual harassment at university level, we must also interrogate it at a more basic level like primary school level. We are privileged to have the minister here today. To her I say, please keep our girls in school and protect them against sexual harassment. I thank you. 

5.46
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A university is the pillar and eye of every nation. Therefore, it is quite absurd to learn that some universities are awarding certificates in nursery teaching. I would like to ask the honourable minister to avail us with a list of those universities that are awarding certificates in nursery teaching because it is diminishing and undermining our universities. University education ought to be taken seriously. Mr Speaker, in light of that, we would like a list of those universities that are awarding certificates in those sorts of courses.

Secondly, the way many of my colleagues were submitting was as though they were trying to undermine some courses at the university. We have the National Council for Higher Education that is mandated to approve all courses in this country. Therefore, you cannot say that somebody who has studied psychology or geography has done a useless course. All courses are very important for the nation. Some people have the mentality that medicine, law or education courses are the important ones; no! As a country, all courses are very important for the nation, depending on the area where you are and the area of your specialisation. Therefore, honourable colleagues, we need to stop undermining our courses. 

Thirdly, Mr Speaker, currently we have many upcoming universities. The major objective of a university is to enable students socialise and unite with other tribes. However, due to many universities now, every tribe is advocating for a university. This means that if you are an Acholi, you will study, right from nursery to university, in Acholi region. However, in the past, you would find students from Acholi mixing with students from western Uganda. 

Therefore, the best we can do is to decentralise some courses. If Gulu University offers agricultural courses, let students who are studying agriculture from western Uganda go and study in Gulu University. We can say Kyambogo University will be for education. Let students who are studying education from Gulu and West Nile come to Kyambogo University. Let universities train students on how to socialise, mix and compete with other tribes. 

Mr Speaker, from the way we are moving currently, with each and every district demanding for a university, I think that the quality of our education will be extremely low. If we do not change the modality of giving universities –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Olanya has highlighted very key issues and one of them, which came out clearly in the report, was the geographical inequalities in enrolment of the students for higher education. The central region takes the lion’s share, which is 34.4 per cent of the enrolment of students in higher institutions of learning; western Uganda takes 30.5 per cent; the eastern region goes with a paltry 18 per cent and the northern region only 17 per cent.

Mr Speaker, this disproportionate enrolment has long term effects –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you rise on information?

MR NZOGHU: Yes, I rose on a point of information, Mr Speaker. Yesterday, I read a list of the various positions that are held in this country in the civil service and in Government agencies. From that list, one realises that there is a very big disparity in terms of employment of the people from various regions. Particular regions dominate in employment and in enrolment at higher institutions of learning. As such, we are not considering a country, which should be balanced. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to recommend – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please. You are now recommending on a point of information!

MR OLANYA: Thank you so much for the information my –(Member timed out.) 

5.52
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My concerns are on two issues; one is on brain drain and the other concerns strikes, as somebody mentioned earlier.

When you look at funding in most of these universities, the majority of the students are private. There may be nine universities and Government admits 4,000 students and these are sent to these various universities. This means that the number comes close to around 444 students per university. If you consider this number, the money Government gives per student is not enough. If Shs 4,000 is given to each student per day, this money is not enough, and according to the report this money is not sent in time.

Furthermore, if you look at the money, which is locally collected, there does not seem to be much explanation on how much these students pay and the number of private students. Around 2009 when guild elections were conducted in Makerere University, the number of students was discovered to be around 44,000. This means that these are public universities operating on private students. These students pay a lot of money but how much of this money is brought out?

The issue concerning facilitation of lecturers has already been talked about by one of the Members. Ideally, these are lecturers employed by Government, who are running Government programmes. They should stop lectures early enough but instead, they continue lecturing up to about 9.00 p.m. They are supposed to attract more allowances for this but these were cut. As somebody already observed, these are human beings who require money for their survival. 

Unfortunately, proposals on such issues are not brought out. I think one of the reasons as to why this committee went to the field was the issue of strikes. Here, there are issues to do with arrears of allowances for retired lecturers and non-teaching staff. For non-teaching staff, around Shs 5 billion has not been paid while for retired teaching staff, Shs 125 billion has not been paid. In addition, the current ones still have problems. That means that these problems are bound to continue. Therefore, we should expect to have more strikes. 

In my interest, I would really think –(Member timed out.)                     

5.55
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the report that we are discussing right now. It is very elaborate and it talks about all the issues. 

I can only note that it would have been better if the persons referred to as high level Government officials involved in the grabbing of the land were named. This would make it easy for Ministry of Lands and Ministry of Education to follow up the titles of these individuals. When the committee indicates that the stakeholders should come together, it means Government will again waste money to put up another commission of inquiry into land grabbing. On the other hand, we would have used the resources that Parliament put at the disposal of these Members to come out with the names of these individuals and see whether they acquired the land lawfully or illegally or whether it is part of Makerere University’s land. 

Another point we should note is that Government land and institutions are at the verge of being taken up by individuals who are powerful. Much of Government land is not titled and yet we are the custodians of the Ministry of Lands, which is responsible for titles. We pay surveyors in the ministry and even at the district headquarters but you will realise that majority of our districts, hospitals and schools are sitting on land that is not titled. This calls us to think twice and see whether we cannot prioritise registering of our own land. 

We are going out as a Government under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development telling Ugandans to register their land. However, as a Government, we are not making it a priority. Therefore, it is a contradiction on our part. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to possibly allay the fears of Members who think that some Members come up to say that the courses they studied at university were useless. That is not the issue. The issue is about Government spending money on Ugandans who they find hard to employ. Government spends taxpayers’ money on educating people in psychology and swimming but they cannot create swimming pools where they will work after they have spent a lot of money. 

That is why we are saying, why don’t we dedicate the little money that we have to educate doctors, who we desperately need as a country, or train teachers so that we can have them in all our schools, or train administrators who we shall later employ in the different units that we are creating? Why don’t we use this money to train lawyers who will go and work for people, or train agricultural extension workers who are going to work with Operation Wealth Creation? 

Let us focus on the areas that are going to touch the lives of the people and we can change our society through education. Otherwise, it becomes a little bit meaningless for us to go on telling people that education is the key to success and yet the educated are languishing in poverty and those who have not studied anything are possibly grabbing land and robbing people and they are more successful than our educated people.

Mr Speaker, it is mentioned in the report that the College of Health Sciences of Makerere University is in dire need of very many things. This is a sector that is technical. You need to handle each item in order to know how to use it in the hospital. However, the committee says that this college falls short of standards in regard to the equipment that is supposed to be used in training our doctors. They are saying that the dentists are not conforming to the standards of the East African Community. 

As a country, we need to style up. If we are training doctors, let us train them with the tools that they will use on the job. Let us equip the training institutions so that when we have a doctor, we have one who is fully trained and who is going to use the essentials that he used in training school. 

It is unfortunate, like Members have said, that we have many universities, which are dilapidated and do not have the quality to write home about. We even have universities that are suffering from shortage of staff. It is true that the Ministry of Public Service has put a ban on recruitment, but it is the same ministry that has put some staffing levels for institutions of Government. 

If you think a certain university should have a certain number of staff and yet you are putting a ban on recruitment, and you are allowing them to have very many courses which must have lecturers and you are not allowing them to train these lecturers, what do you think will happen in that university? I would imagine maybe this is the reason why some lecturers have found it easy to abuse our girls by giving them free marks in exchange for sex because they know that they cannot match the time and the quality that is desired.

Mr Speaker, we need to act fast as a country and ensure that we are giving Ugandans what is due to them. This is not something that we should be begging for; it should be something that we should do as planners of this nation.

Lastly, I would also request that our staff who were retired and are still demanding for money from the universities should be given their money. We are talking about non-teaching staff that are still demanding for Shs 5 billion from Makerere University. 

How do you retrench people without a plan for them? We are making them beggars and yet they have spent their time working. There are also teaching staff who were retired but cannot be given their allowances, which they have been working for. The report mentions Shs 125 billion due to the teaching staff in allowances and retirement packages. These are citizens who must be given due respect for the services they have rendered to this country. 

Mr Speaker, unless we deal with this, we are not going to see an end to strikes in Makerere University. These retired officers have children in the university who they must pay for. Look at the rate that is being given to our own Government-sponsored students; they are given only Shs 220,000. Compare that money to the good hostels around Makerere University like Nana Hostel, which is charging between Shs 900,000 and Shs 1.5 million per semester, and Government is giving a student Shs 220,000. You cannot even get a muzigo for that amount around Makerere. Therefore, we are also telling our children to go to areas, which are not secure for them in terms of accommodation. 

May I, therefore, request that if Government is going to take up students on Government sponsorship, sponsor them fully so that the parents can know that their children are safe and secure? You would rather reduce on the number of students that you are taking on Government sponsorship and know that for the ones that you are sponsoring, you are taking very good care of them. It is not about the numbers; we are talking about the security and safety of our own children. We want to talk about the welfare of our children together with the welfare of the lecturers who are in these universities. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker and the chair of the committee together with your team for assembling this report. I pray that Government finds it relevant and does justice to this report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I would like to hear from the ministers and then I will go back to the chairperson to conclude this matter. The issues have already been summarised, honourable minister, help us to conclude them. 

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Dear colleagues, allow me to thank you so much for the issues that you have raised. You will agree with me that most of the concerns you have raised are actually issues that we must take on seriously as the Ministry of Education and Sports because they concern all of us and are for the development of our education.

Mr Speaker, Members have raised quite a lot of issues and if I am to respond to each of them, it will require another 30 or 40 minutes, which I am sure that you will not give me. Therefore, I would like to beg for your indulgence so that I respond to just a few issues. However, as a ministry, we are going to take it upon ourselves to send to the Members all the responses in writing on their iPads. Dear colleagues, trust me because we are going to do this. Even by tomorrow, we can do this. 

Let me respond to a few issues. Mr Speaker, one of the Members asked about the issue of State House scholarships and other funds. I would like to say that the ministry does not control State House scholarships. Therefore, I think the person who is qualified to respond to this could be the Minister in charge of the Presidency.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to pledge to the honourable members that we are going to give you more information on the criteria used for the loan scheme and how it is accessed – (Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think it was in this House when we were discussing the issue of State House scholarships that Members unanimously agreed that State House scholarships should be taken to the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

Members were debating on how people are benefitting from State House scholarships and we felt that it should be the Ministry of Education and Sports to handle them. Today, we are still hearing that they are under the docket of the Ministry for the Presidency. Is that in order, Mr Speaker?

MS SENINDE: Colleagues, I take your concerns. Let me give you the information tomorrow, like I said. 

Colleagues, I would like to inform you that the merit admission is for the best 3000 students. One Member was wondering about these admissions at the university; I just want to make it clear that when we are talk about the merit admission, it is for the best 3000 students. 

You also asked about the district quota admissions. This one is done so that each district has students joining public universities, and this is guided by the population of each district. The districts in Uganda, which are small, are given about six students in that quota and the total number of slots for the district quotas is 896. I wanted to make that clear to you because it was asked about. 

Like I have said, dear colleagues, the loan scheme is only available for science students at universities. The number of slots is 1200, of which 1000 are for degree courses and 200 are for diploma courses. Like I have added, colleagues, we are going to give you the criteria. There are also the disability slots, which are 64 per year, and the sports slots, which are 40 per year. 

On the issue of sexual harassment of our children, I would like to thank my sister who raised this concern. My dear colleagues, let me just point out that this problem hurts all of us and I think we all need to add our efforts, as Members of Parliament, to tackling this issue. This is because it is our constituents who get this problem and the parents tend to sort this out of court. We, therefore, need to sensitise our people together, much as it is our effort, to ensure that we protect our children. 

The reason as to why we were closing schools, dear friends, is because we noted that some schools were even putting up boarding sections, which were not supposed to be there, and making our children vulnerable to such problems. Dear colleagues, yes it is the responsibility of all of us.

Allow me to talk about the issue of programmes. Government is aware of the academic programmes in many universities and I would like to inform you, dear friends, that there was a directive by the President to review all these programmes. I want to assure you that the process of reviewing university programmes aimed at their rationalisation is ongoing and is set to be completed in the 2018/2019 academic year. I would like to inform you that the visitation committee will provide additional guidance on rationalisation of these programmes. 

Colleagues, on the issue of funding, I would like to inform you that Government provides subventions to each public university –(Interruption)– Am I too fast? 

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. I would like to inform you that the committee report on the fragmentation of courses is not only about public universities because the Government may instruct a review of courses on public universities. 

However, from the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act, universities have academic freedom. Due to the academic freedom, they are free to create and procreate knowledge, so they create many courses. How do we create a moratorium ensuring the academic freedom of a university but control the number of courses being created and replicated largely to be sensitive to the market orientation for employment? Thank you. 

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Yes, on the issue of the courses he is talking about and the things that we are concerned about as the Ministry of Education and Sports, it is not only for the Government institutions and I want to make that clear. We are also concerned about public institutions. That is why we are in the process of amending the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act because we know that once we do that, it is going to help us solve most of these problems that we are actually talking about. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to talk about the issue of funding –(Interjection)– Colleagues, allow me to complete because we are going to give you the responses. I beg for your indulgence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up, honourable minister. 

MS SENINDE: Dear colleagues, like I said, Government gives subvention to each public university and it is the responsibility of the governing council to allocate the funds to activities at the universities. However, we appreciate that there is need for increased funding.

As the resource envelope gets better, I would like to inform you that the whole education sector and universities in particular, will be better funded. However, it is also important for universities in general and Makerere University in particular to be frugal with their internally generated funds. 

My dear colleagues, on the issue of creation of new universities, the people of Uganda, through their elected representatives and Government, demand for creation of new universities. In line with Article 1 of the 1995 Uganda Constitution, which is about power belonging to the people, the sector, within their available means, always puts in place a task force to plan the establishment of these universities. However, the financing of the project is normally limited by the constrained resource envelope. Suffice it to note that the current Government policy is not to construct residential buildings, except in special cases. 

I would also like to add that the sector is developing policy guidelines as a complementary document to the proposed national higher education policy to streamline the creation of new universities. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of geographical inequality in enrolment of students, somebody talked about this and it is even in the committee report. The Ministry of Education and Sports is committed to ensuring increased access to quality university education to all Ugandans in all regions of the country. 

In line with this commitment, I would like to point out that Gulu University, with a study centre in Kitgum, was opened in 2012. Busitema University, with campuses in Nagongera, Arapai, Mbale, Namasagali and Pallisa, was opened in 2007. Muni University opened its doors in 2013 and Lira University, formerly a constituent college of Gulu University, became a fully-fledged university in 2016. I think we are all concerned that Ugandans must have this. 

I also want to add that Government has embarked on efforts to establish an agricultural constituent college of Gulu University in Karamoja. With these interventions, the geographical inequality in access to higher education is progressively being addressed through deliberate Government efforts to increase equitable access to higher education to all Ugandans. 

On the issue of land –(Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Mr Speaker, the minister had a very clear question - an observation that in Uganda, there is inequality in the enrolment of students in various universities in the country. The committee was actually very clear that in the central, the enrolment is 35.4 per cent, in the west it is 30.5 per cent, in the east it is 18 per cent and in the north it is 17 per cent. Therefore, the disparity is as clear as the back of my hand. Honourable minister, how are you going to address these disparities? It must be clear. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of order. 

MR OKOT OGONG: Having been given clear observations by the committee and Members, requesting her to address the inequalities, the minister is here simply glossing over the matter without giving us any clear direction. Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, it sounds like clarification. Please, proceed.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I thought I had clarified that when I was explaining the different ways in which we admit. I clearly pointed out those who are -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I suggest that you wind up and then give the full text of your responses?

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable minister, this clarification will help you. Mr Speaker, I seek clarification regarding these percentages: central, 34 per cent; western, 30 per cent; eastern, 18 per cent; and northern, 17 per cent. I am wondering, and I am seeking clarification from you, whether the population in the area does not matter. Central should have more people than western. Where does the concern for the population come in?

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. I think I need to wind up. Members, like I have pledged, we are going to send you all the information you have asked for.

However, dear colleagues, on the concern about how many children are admitted in the central region, remember that most of your children are in the central region –(Interjections)– Yes, that is true! They study from the central region. I would also like to remind you that when I was beginning my explanation –(Interruption)

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, I would have hoped that the minister’s obligation is to clarify to us and give us the reasons as to why we have that disparity. 

Secondly, I expected the minister to inform us whether this quota system is intended to be uniform, meaning that the percentages are supposed to be the same; if that is the case, why not? It is simple and clear. Is it in order for the minister to meander around, circumventing the question?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are the one who is out of order. (Laughter) Please, wind up, honourable minister.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Dear colleagues, allow me to thank you very much. What you have raised is very pertinent and I would like to assure you that we are going to compile all those concerns for you and we will send them on your iPads. 

Thank you very much for supporting the Ministry of Education and Sports. I have no doubt that you will continue supporting us in order for us to do a good job. Thank you very much indeed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is twenty after six and we had agreed to rise at 6.00 p.m. Our focus from tomorrow will be on budget issues and there are Bills that are urgent and need to be dealt with.

Chairperson, do you have some responses on this issue? I think you are only going to ask us to approve your report. We do not have time to go into debate any more. 

6.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Connie Galiwango): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Members for appreciating the report. The concerns that you have brought up are indeed pertinent. The minister has played her part in trying to answer some of the questions and she has promised to bring a document in regard to that. However, allow me to give a response to a few of these issues. 

Members said that I should name the people who are grabbing land. The Leader of the Opposition suggested that maybe we should institute a probe committee. If you can go back to our report, on page 31 there is a recommendation by the committee to set up an inter-ministerial committee that includes the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the Uganda Land Commission and the Ministry of Education and Sports. We recommended that they sit down and synchronise these issues to help the affected universities.

However, it was not only Katanga but there was also land in Makindye and Kabanyoro. As the report ably puts it, I think there is a case in court because much as they tried to push these people out, they were armed and they still remain on the land. 

Somebody asked about Busoga University. Indeed, we went there but the administrators eventually called us and informed us that they were not on the campus. We did not get more time to go back but we had envisaged that we would go there to see that something is done.

For those who would like to know about the staffing levels and those who said that we did not do much about the staffing gap, there is information to that effect in a table on page 21. You will find everything about the staffing levels, especially in public universities because they are the most affected. Go to page 26 and you will read much more about the staffing gaps. (Interjection)

Mr Speaker, I am sorry I may not allow any other information because of time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS GALIWANGO: Regarding Makerere University and MUBS, the report is still very clear. The recommendation was that the ministry introduces a statutory instrument establishing MUBS as an independent university within six months of presenting this report. I am sure that they are already doing it. I would like to inform the Members that the ministry has already began on the process and we will get to know about it since we gave them a time lag of six months. 

On strikes, as reflected on page 17, we found that it was majorly the fees policy that brought up this issue. On page 17(d), you will get to know the nitty-gritty of it all. Otherwise, I would like to thank you so much for debating this report and thank you for the time that you have given us. 

On a special note, I would like to thank the members of the committee for the work done. It was crucial that we had to do something about the universities. The Ministry of Education was very helpful and whatever information we needed was availed to us. The universities were also very cooperative.

Where we have not given any other information, our report is quite elaborate. I know many Members may not have gone through the whole report but a lot of information is here and at any given time, I know the ministers will be able to respond to your concerns. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, honourable minister and honourable members for a very comprehensive debate. This matter is important and that is why we have given it all the time that it needed for us to have a good debate. 

I now put the question that the report of the sectoral Committee on Education and Sports on the state of universities in Uganda be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House will rise and as I said, we will be focussing more on the budget. This House will resume tomorrow at 2 o’clock and there will be Prime Minister’s Question Time from 3 o’clock for 45 minutes to an hour. Therefore, prepare yourselves for that particular process. 

However, I would like to say that tomorrow I will focus more on the Order Paper and if there are urgent matters, we will raise them at the end of the sitting. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 April 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 
