Tuesday, 26 April 2016

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting and as you recall, this time is for the budget and this being a transition between two parliaments, the time for processing of the budget has been shortened by that process. 

We agreed that we would try to do everything possible to complete the budget by the end of this month and actually, we had said 28th of this month which falls on Thursday the day after tomorrow. 

As of today, we still have about seven reports to be presented and we are hoping that we will finish them today, given the method that has been adopted by the Speaker, that we use 10 minutes for presentation of those reports and the figures are not necessary because they are going to be sent to the Committee on Budget again, which should sit tomorrow and finalise and also report tomorrow in the afternoon so that we can proceed to supply the figures for appropriation.

Once the figures are supplied, thereafter, we will put the figures together and then that is what will conclude the figures that will go in the Appropriation Bill, which should be approved by Thursday.

That has been the timeline and I thank you, honourable members, for having handled all the other financial Bills; the revenue Bills have all been concluded and you have done very well with also the other reports that have been concluded. So, we are down to seven. We are not doing badly but we are going to shorten the time, which we use to discuss these reports.

In that line, I have received a letter from hon. Nambooze to the effect that she was not given the opportunity to read through the report on the policy statement for the Ministry of Local Government and thereafter, prepare a minority report.

Honourable members, as I keep saying, a minority report is not a critique of the majority report. A minority report is a departure from what the majority has agreed; when you have a view that is different from what the majority has agreed, you present a minority report. You do not have to wait for the report to be written then you present your minority report. You already disagreed on a particular thing, you should prepare your minority report on that. 

So, the issue of waiting for the majority report, looking at it and, therefore, studying  to give you what you will now prepare in your minority report does not arise. 

Honourable members, when this report is presented and there is a minority opinion, I will give an opportunity for that person to present the minority opinion on that matter and it will be allowed since the notice had been given to the chairperson that there will be such a minority report and of course, it should be attached to the main report also.

I have also received another request from the Chief Opposition Whip to let the Opposition briefly present a summary of their alternative policies for the financial year 2016/2017.

Honourable members, we have been trying to see how to accommodate this but since the alternative policies were already submitted to the committee and since the Government ministers will not be allowed to give their own summaries of the minority report, it is only fair that we wait for the committee to make a report and if there are interventions from either the Government or from the Opposition to be made to cover some gaps that might be there, that would be allowed in the course of the debate. However, there will be no special time allotted that we first give this time for people to speak on the policy that they have presented, whether Government policy or alternative policy.

We do not have that time and we cannot create it but we will proceed as we always do. If there are issues arising, we will be discussing them in the course of the debate.

Honourable members, also on a sad note, we recall that sometime last week, we received notice of the death of Aziz Kasuja, who was a former chairman of the then Electoral Commission; he was an ambassador, he passed on and this was a very important person in this country. We should find time to prepare and present a tribute motion in remembrance of his life and also his passing on. This House should be able to do that at the time that is appropriate. 

We will create time however short it may be, but we should honour one of our own that has served this country. On that note, I will request you that we rise for a moment of silence in his memory.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

2.08
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance in regard to supply of essential medicines. In the last quarter, in my constituency and I have also checked, a number of health facilities have not received essential medical supplies.

I went ahead to find out from the Committee on Health, I also went further to find out from National Medical Stores as to why we have stock outs.

Initially, the allegations were that the health facilities do not request for medicines early enough. On cross-checking, I found most of the health facilities did request for the essential medicines. However, National Medical Stores ran short of funds to procure adequate medicines and essential drugs to health facilities.

Mr Speaker, on cross-checking, I found a communication from National Medical Stores written by the chairman of National Medical Stores to Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that was dated 19 November 2015 indicating that they had a deficit of Shs 68 billion, which arose on account of depreciation of the shilling against the dollar.

Response to that effect from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicated that a financing facility had been initiated and it lay before this House.

Mr Speaker, I have been trying to crosscheck which facility was laid before this House to cover up this deficit and I do not have information to that effect. We continue to grapple with lack of essential medicines and drugs in most of the health facilities. If we cannot afford medicines and essential medical supplies in most of our health facilities, then we deny our community the fundamental requirements for socioeconomic transformation especially the development of human resource.

I would, therefore, like Government to explain why a notice, which was given as early as November last year, up to now - whereas it is indicated by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the medical facility was initiated, I am not aware of any such facility. How long are we going to continue to grapple in this kind of situation? I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Matter of drugs out of stock, anybody from Government to respond to this?

2.10
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for raising this very important matter concerning the lives of our people. As you can see, the ministers who are expected to respond, both the ministers of Health and Finance, Planning and Economic Development are not present in the House. I take an undertaking to inform them so that they come and brief the House.

MS AURU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a Member of the Committee on National Economy and our committee has received requisitions from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for a loan from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank, (PTA)  amounting to $ 200 million. Last weekend, the committee considered the items which the ministry has requested for which includes that amount of Shs 68 billion, which is to go to National Medical Stores. Therefore, the committee has already approved that report and it is due to be brought to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is actually item six on the Order Paper today. Thank you, honourable member. That means it is covered in what is coming up in item six. So we will see if the solution is found.

2.12
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of national importance. (Interjections) Please, protect me from Engineer Byandala -(Interjections)-  Of course, you are the same. Byandala and Byabagambi are the same. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, My name is John Byabagambi, Member of Parliament representing the great people of Ibanda South in Ibanda District. Is it in order for the hon. Nandala-Mafabi to call me a name, which was not given to me by my father or baptised in the church? In addition, he takes me to Luweero, which is not my constituency. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the honourable member for Budadiri West was taken over by the similarities that you two have. (Laughter) Both names start with “Bya”, you are both engineers, you both wear glasses and you kind of work in a related area. He was just trying to draw more similarities ather than the differences of geographical location that you have. 
In any case, honourable member, the Member is hon. Engineer John Byabagambi, the Minister of Works, Member for Ibanda South, Ibanda District. Please, take note. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have taken note. The good thing is that they are all engineers, all are “Bya” and they all worked together; they all have the same height and of the same size. The only difference is the regions but we are all Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of national importance concerning students of Makerere University, who are studying Ethics and Human Rights. They are 950 students but a decision has been taken and it will be concluded by 10 May 2016, scraping the course known as Ethics and Human Rights.

The students and lecturers are saying that the university leadership has not given them an opportunity to make a case for the reason this course should continue. As you are aware, our Constitution talks about human rights; we are talking of ethics that are very important in our lives and we wish to teach our children Ethics and Human Rights, which is good for this country.

What I would like to rise is that since the university is not giving students an opportunity, I request you, Mr Speaker, to direct the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to intervene in this matter before 10 May 2016 so that we can save 950 students who offer this course and future students to offer the same because we are teaching our children, “Love Uganda, be ethical, respect human rights” and this course is one of the best courses to handle this matter.

Therefore, I am pleading with you, Mr Speaker, that you direct the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to come with a report on this matter before the university can scrap such a nice course, which can build our country. That is my request.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, I would like to know whether the numbers of affected students are going to be given the opportunity to complete their course or they are just being cut off midway, because the course has been scrapped. I would like clarification on that. 

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, I would also like to add that if the minister is bringing that information, we should not just look at the Ethics and Human Rights course. As Parliament, we should look at the bigger picture; what are these courses, which are affected beyond one course, because we need to have a picture to see if they are provided for in other courses. 

As long as they have taken care of hon. Minister Byabagambi’s concern of the continuing students to finish, the mandate of the university would allow them to bring more market-relevant, vocational-like and business-like courses. We should get bigger picture than one course. We end up defending Ms Nyanzi’s human rights and forget other obligations.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am sure the continuing students, will continue. However, what happens is that if they say your course has been scrapped, it means it is very irrelevant. The moment the course is declared irrelevant; to get a job might be a very complicated matter. (Interjections) Yes, we need to protect these students because they will say the reason they scrapped it was because it was irrelevant. If they want to do it, they must scale it down or merge it in a certain sector.
Secondly, honourable minister, you are right to say that we need to know the courses they will do but right now, we are teaching students “Patriotism”. Patriotism urges people to love their country and be ethical and to respect each other. If there is a course in Makerere University, which teaches Ethics and Human Rights; this will help the Ministry of Ethics where Rev. Fr Simon Lokodo is - and he has forgotten to tell his people to also dress decently but he is urging us to dress decently here. This is unfair; charity begins at home. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I would request that the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports before Makerere University scraps this course, she comes to the House to explain in detail why they want the course to be scrapped, and if it is being merged with another course, it would be better. However, we would like to have Ethics and Human Rights. Mr Speaker, I know you are a lawyer of Human Rights and these are the people who will help you in your chamber.

2.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for having raised this important point concerning our children who are taking this course at Makerere University. Government, under the Ministry of Education, Science, technology and Sports in liaison with Makerere University have been in talks for a very long time.

You remember Government decided to do curriculum evaluation so that we get relevant courses. The issue here is, to whether Ethics and Human Rights can stand as its own, as a bachelors course, or we can have components of Ethics and Human Rights cutting across other degrees. That is the issue.

However, to scrap it might not help us and I support that the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports comes to this House and informs the House how far we have gone in doing this in the alignment which subject will qualify to be a bachelor’s degree as a fully pledged course, standalone or which one will cut across.

We said, for example, that mathematics and ICT are some of the subjects that must cut across. However, it is important like hon. Nandala-Mafabi is suggesting that the leaders of the students are involved so that we reduce on conflicts and riots. Dissemination of information concerning this subject matter to the stakeholders, in a timely manner is very important.

I will inform the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to ensure that as Members of Parliament like parents we are briefed of what is taking place so that we advise our children on the courses to choose. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us take it that way. I cannot make a directive from the Chair that it should be halted or anything like that. However, I think that the appropriate consultation or processes should be made so that the students are aware and know what is going to happen instead of making it look like there is a lot of uncertainty in what is happening.

If they understand it, they will embrace and accept it. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the document I have, has been signed by 562 students and that shows –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What document is that?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I have a document here and it is addressed to the Speaker of Parliament – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have received it on behalf of the Speaker? (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, they also copied me in. Mr Speaker, it is allowed and Members of Parliament got and the students said it is a petition and you know the procedures of a petition takes long. They said on 10th May, the course will be scrapped and the reason I brought it as a matter of national importance is that the Minister of Education, Science, technology and Sports should be the one to hold the exercise quickly so that she informs Parliament before they go ahead. 

A total of 562 students is quite a big number. Mr Speaker, this petition is in your office but in the interest of all Members of Parliament, I will lay this document on the Table because it will inform the petition –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Nandala-Mafabi, I wish you had informed the Speaker in those lines because if it is a petition, it does not have to be sent to the committee. The rules allow a petition of this nature to be referred back to the appropriate organs to make the necessary consultations and come back and brief us on what is happening.

The rules allow that; it does not have to go to committee. If the nature of this subject is that it must be handled expeditiously, there are procedures that allow us to do that. You might have to think of presenting a proper petition tomorrow so that we direct it to the organs properly and we demand a response from them. That might solve it faster than the way you have presented it.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.1 PAPERS RELATED WITH EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS

A) REPORTS

2.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Legal, Rules and Privileges on the Oversight Activity on the Approximation and harmonisation of National Laws in the East African Context.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the procedural issue I am raising, if I am not mistaken the Chief Whip said a report of legal and parliamentary - yet, she is a cabinet minister and we have our committees here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, this particular committee, I do not think it is a committee of this House because it is “Legal, Rules and Privileges”; we do not have such a committee. It might be a committee in the East African Legislative Assembly. 

We do not have a Committee on Legal, Rules and Privileges, but we have a Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and a Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline; these are two separate committees in this House. This is not our report. So, let the records capture that.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Accounts on the Oversight Activity undertaken with the East African Community Institutions on Governance Project Performance and Implementation of the Assembly Recommendations.  I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Those particular set of reports stand referred to the Committee on East African Community Affairs they look at them and advise the House on how to proceed. 

B) RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, these were the resolutions that were adopted:
    1) Resolution on assembly congratulating – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what are you doing with them?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Pardon?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What are you doing with those resolutions?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I am informing Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is laying of papers.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker. Let me go ahead and beg to lay on the Table the resolutions that were adopted.
(i) 	Resolution of Assembly Congratulating the Republic Of South Sudan upon Joining the East African Community.
(ii) 	Resolution of the Assembly to Bid Farewell to hon. Ambassador Dr Richard Sezibera, the outgoing Secretary-General of the East African Community.
(iii) 	Resolution of the Assembly thanking the former First Ladies of the Founders of the First East African Community (1967 – 1977). I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the appropriate committee to look at and advise the House.

C) BILLS PASSED

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the Bills that were passed.
    (i) The East African Community Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Bill, 2013. That was the Bill, which was passed.

I also beg to lay on the Table the Bills, which were introduced.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the Bill that has been passed by the assembly. Honourable members, this is for your information. You can access these Bills and know what has been happening.

D) BILLS INTRODUCED

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: There were Bills, which were introduced and read for the first time, which I would like to lay on the Table.
    (i) The East African Community Customs Management Act (Amendment) Bill, 2016.
    (ii) The East African Community Supplementary Appropriation Bill, 2016.
    (iii) The East African Community Counter-Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those. And honourable members, this is still for your information. If you have input on these Bills, then you can access the East African Legislative Assembly and make such contributions on the improvement of the Bills as East Africans.

3.2 MODEL PRODUCTION SHARING AGREEMENT FOR PETROLEUM EXPLORATION, DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION OR PETROLEUM DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION IN THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA BY AND BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA AND COMPANY X, COMPANY Y AND COMPANY Z SUBMITTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH SECTION 6(3) OF THE PETROLEUM (EXPLORATION DEVELOPMENT AND PRODUCTION) ACT, 2013

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the model Production Sharing Agreement for Petroleum Exploration, Development and Production Or Petroleum Development and Production in the Republic of Uganda by and between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and Company X, Company Y and Company Z submitted in accordance with Section 6(3) of the Petroleum (Exploration Development and Production) Act, 2013. The document is here. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Honourable members, this is part of the statutory requirements for laying of these particular documents – model production sharing agreements. It has been received. You will have access to them and see if there are issues you want to take up with them or any amendments you might want to propose or any suggestions you want to make on how it can be made better or something like that.

PRESENTATION OF REPORTS FROM SECTORAL COMMITTEES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

    I) FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are guided that we will present a brief summary of the report and the figures – since they are still being sent to the Budget Committee – there will be no need to go to the figures because they will be sent to the Committee on Budget, which will come back here tomorrow. So chair, you have under 10 minutes to summarise your report.

2.34
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Sebunya): Most obliged, Mr Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the financial year 2016/2017. I beg to lay the minutes and the papers we have used.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR SEBUNYA: Just as guided by the Speaker, I will not read the methodology and the documents used as they are listed below. I will go to the recommendations. 

On Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Observations and recommendations

On page 8, the committee observed the following:
(i)	During the half year period of the Financial Year 2015/2016, the ministry’s performance was satisfactory in terms of the outputs met, performing above 50 per cent. However, the ministry has not been able to compile an aggregate balance sheet for Government as a whole, including local governments.

Government should expedite efforts of compiling a consolidated annual Government balance sheet to determine its net worth. 
 
(ii)	Delayed payment of international subscriptions 

Government has incurred costs due to the delay in payment of international subscriptions. Such costs include interest payments and foreign exchange losses. For example, Government incurred $1.17 million in interest costs on arrears of PTA Bank and $1.2 million to East African Development Bank (EADB). This delay led to a forex loss of Shs 0.367 million in financial year 2014/2015.

The committee recommends that international subscriptions be given the first call of the resources to avoid additional budgetary costs. 

(iii)	Losses by Microfinance Support Centre

The committee recommends that Microfinance Support Centre introduces more strict controls for loan processing - review, approval and verification of all clients’ physical location and properties in order to reduce on the losses and keep within the guidelines;  

There should be no political interference in the operations of the Microfinance Support Centre;

The Microfinance Support Centre should also sensitise the public about the importance of the funds and continue capacity building to reduce the losses. 
There have been losses in the Microfinance Support Centre.   

(iv)	Capital markets growth 

Capital markets in Uganda have remained stagnant for some time. It is not progressing as to help in the raising of capital and growth of the economy. Most of the companies listed on the stock exchange are those that were either formerly owned by Government or where Government owned shares. Uganda’s capital market has attracted very few private sector companies to raise capital. 

The committee recommends that Government should put in place policies that support the growth of capital markets. 

(v)	Reduction of cost of capital     

The average cost of capital in Uganda is 25 per cent per annum. This is only available for a maximum of five years because commercial banks only have short-term credit sources while Uganda Development Bank has an optimal capitalisation, which is inadequate. There is need to look at alternative sources of financing within the country. Borrowing from NSSF is limited by the NSSF Act, yet this would allow lending to commercial and development banks for strategic sector development like manufacturing.   

The committee recommends that Government expedites the pension reforms to deepen the financial sector and provide alternative sources of finance for investments for local business. 

(vi)	Streamlining export growth and development on page 10, the committee recommends that Uganda Export Promotion Board be elevated to a level of a semi-autonomous authority to help improve the level of exports and look for market for Ugandan products. Missions abroad should be facilitated to focus on commercial diplomacy.             

Vote 153: Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA)

I will go to the observations and recommendations on page 13.
The committee observed the following:
    (i) Performance during the first half of the financial year 2015/2016. PPDA outputs were met above 50 per cent. However, the procurement audit coverage remains low at 33 per cent due to limited financial resources. This is in spite of the increase in procurement units that continue to be created. 

Government should adjust the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF)ceiling for PPDA to enable it receive additional funding to fulfil its mandate. 

    (ii) Salary enhancement for staff 
	The existence of an effective and efficient procurement system will enhance transparency and accountability in Government procurement processes and reduce the waste in Government expenditure, which is a necessary condition to deliver the National Development Plan (NDP)II. 

The authority has increased resource allocation in operational expenses of financial year 2016/2017 in comparison to Financial Year 2015/2016 from Shs1.8 billion to Shs 2.1 billion to facilitate the opening up of Mbarara regional office, and the recruitment of 15 additional staff to strengthen the staffing levels of the authority. 

The consequence of this is that the cost of inland travel and reliance on consultants for audits, compliance checks and capacity building has reduced. However, the entity has a funding gap of Shs3.7 billion. 

The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 3.77 billion to enable PPDA recruit and enhance salaries for staff. This will improve performance and increase compliance with procurement laws, which will save Government from large sums of money, which are lost through procurements.
 
    (iii) Implementation of the recommendations of the Authority.
The implementation status of the recommendations of the authority by entities in financial year 2014/2015 declined from 77 per cent in Financial Year 2013/2014 to 57 per cent in Financial Year 2014/2015. The failure to implement most of the recommendations is as a result of laxity on the part of the in-coming accounting officers and the Procurement and Disposal Units and failure of the user departments in Ministries Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and local governments to play their roles in public procurement.
 	
The committee recommends that all accounting officers who fail to implement recommendations of the Authority with regard to procurement should be held personally liable to any loss.

    (iv) Fully constituting the PPDA Board 

Under Section 10 (1) of the PPDA Act, 2003, the functions and powers of the authority are vested in the board of directors of the authority. Owing to the number of complaints and suspensions that are received, the board has not met frequently to execute this mandate. 

There are two vacancies on the board. The positions could not be filed in the financial year 2015/2016 since the authority does not have funds for sitting allowances and retainer and this affects the quorum of the board. 

The committee recommends that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development fully constitutes the board and provide Shs 77 million to facilitate the board’s operations given the gravity of the job that the entity is handling. 

Vote 141: Uganda Revenue Authority 
I will go to the observations and recommendations of the committee.
 
The committee observed the following:
    (i) Performance during the first half of financial year 2015/2016

Most of the planned activities were achieved performing at a rate of 78 per cent. However, there was under performance in completion of comprehensive customs audits and a slow growth in the revenue from new value taxpayers.

The committee recommends that URA should strengthen its tax administration measures to realise revenue as planned. 

    (ii) Tax arrears 

During the Financial Year 2014/2015, Government incurred tax arrears amounting to Shs 60 billion. This practice continued in the Financial Year 2015/2016, thus reducing the tax base.

The committee recommends that URA should enforce compliance of Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and collect all the outstanding tax arrears. 

    (iii) Tax register growth 

While the tax register has continued to grow at 9.7 per cent by the first half of the Financial Year 2015/2016 to 836,853, there are only 2,000 taxpayers contributing to over 90 per cent of the total tax revenue. 

The committee recommends that Government embarks on an aggressive tax education exercise to sustain the growth of tax payer contributions.

    (iv) Leasing of motor vehicles
Uganda Revenue Authority continues to lease vehicles under the finance lease agreements. During the financial year 2016/2017, URA has planned to lease 48 double cabin pickup trucks. This is costly to Government as these vehicles are maintained by URA though at the end of the lease period, they are handed over to Government. URA requires a big fleet of vehicles since it requires surveillance across the country. URA will spend Shs 6.04 billion to lease 48 double cabins.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government provides enough funds to URA to do outright purchase of motor vehicles like other Government departments in order to stop the high cost of leasing as opposed to outright purchase.
 
    (v) Tax to GDP ratio 

The tax to GDP ratio of Uganda is currently at 13 per cent. This is one of the lowest ratios in Sub-Saharan Africa and East Africa. This low contribution is largely attributed to the structure of the economy, which has a large informal sector that Government has over time failed to collect taxes from. 

The committee recommends that Government establishes new measures aimed at collecting taxes from the large informal sector to help improve tax to GDP ratio.
     
    (vi) Expanding Informal Sector

The committee recommends that URA should educate the informal sector on the use of e-tax system and also establish more liaison offices in areas with the large informal sector. 

Vote 108- National Planning Authority (NPA)

Observations and recommendations

    i) Provision of recruitment of staff for the added mandate of developing a certificate of compliance of the national budget to National Development Plan

Currently the staff establishment at NPA is 87 staff out of 157 total staff establishment creating a 44.58 per cent staff gap. Basing on the analysis, the institution needs to increase its staff establishment to at least 62 per cent in line with the recruitment plan and this will help the institution to recruit the technical officers who are lacking in critical areas. 

The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 1.667 billion to enable NPA recruit staff to fulfil its mandate.
 
    ii) Assessment of Compliance of the Annual Budget to NDP

The extra mandate to prepare the certificate prompted additional recurrent cost to be incurred, estimated at Shs 1 billion.

The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 1 billion to enable the authority efficiently carry out assessment and regulate plans for both MDAs and local governments’ plans for compliance to the NDP.
 
    iii) Evaluation of Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Decentralisation 

In an attempt to fulfil the authority’s mandate of evaluating Government programmes, evaluation of the performance of UPE and decentralisation policy has been prioritised by the authority but constrained due to lack of funds for execution. 

The committee recommends that Government allocates Shs 1 billion required for evaluation of both UPE and decentralisation policy in the Financial Year 2016/2017.
 
    iv) Repair of the Planning House and finalisation of detailed designs – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR KASULE: Two minutes, Mr Speaker. On the matter of treasury operations, the committee observed that Government keeps skipping over its obligations relating to payments of domestic debt principal amounts.

The committee recommends that to minimise the roll over risks, Government should contract less domestic debt at high interest rates in the medium term and embark on developing the financial market that provide diversified products that offer competitive terms.

Mr Speaker, due to constraints of time, I would beg that the report is captured verbatim and it is put on record for the Hansard. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairperson for that report. On what matter do you rise honourable?

2.56
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): The alternative. It has been a trend where we - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the alternative was presented in the committee. This is a report of the committee.

MR EKANYA: Yes, but there has been a trend where the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that was before we used to have that avenue where the alternative policy was sent to the committee. Now, all are sent to the committee; so it cannot arise now.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, the whole of last week, shadow ministers were making a brief summary presentation; that has been the trend. I was not here in the first week but I saw it happening.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, that was because the shadow ministers were not given the opportunity to present their views to the committee. Now that has changed because both the ministerial policy statements and the alternative policy statements are submitted to the committee; then, the committee reports on all of them. If there are issues you want to raise, you only raise them but you cannot make a substantial presentation because you are not challenging the committee. Are you?

MR EKANYA: I think you are right. However, with your permission I can just present some gap.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. you can just make a comment. (Laughter)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The comments in regards to the gaps in vote 130 and associated votes - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Based on analysis, we discovered that there is duplication of work plan activities and output. This ministry is characterised by inconsistency pasting and lack of synchronizing output, input and results.

If you look at the ministerial policy statement of 2014/2015, you will find that there is a lot of inconsistency. For example, the activity of harmonising financial regulation, including the Public Finance Management Act and the PPDA Act, to this date, there is lack of synchronization. This leads to serious procurement problems.

There is also lack of comprehensive microeconomic model for financial framework. If you look at the ministerial policy statement, you will find that the minister agrees that they lack comprehensive microeconomic model for financial framework. This, therefore, makes tax projection and revenue based on unclear policy framework, which leads to over estimation and under estimation. That is why you will see that every year in and out, we have supplementary shortage and excess.

There is poor procurement and management of contracts. As you will see several committee reports, you will realise that despite the guidelines that refers to procurement that was issued by Secretary to Treasury, till this date, several accounting officers do not comply to that and the duty and the responsibility of supervising procurement and contract management lies with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. You will find that by the end of the year, funds are not exhausted.

The guideline was very categorical and simple. You can initiate procurement but do not sign the contract until you have the money. However, most accounting officers wait until they have the cash and then, they start the procurement. This leads to poor service delivery and mismanagement. (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, it was not my intention to interrupt my good friend. However, before I came in, what he is exactly reading now was being stated by the chairman of the committee about accounting officers signing contracts, etcetera. 

 I do not know, Mr Speaker, with the constraints of time, whether we are proceeding right in repeating what was already stated by the chairman of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is what I said because the procedure has now changed. Since the ministers do not speak to their policy, both the ministers and the shadow ministers submit their proposals or the statements to the committee, where they are represented. When these issues arise they are summarised and the committee brings the report back to the House. If there are supplementary issues you want to raise, then you can raise them in the course of the short discussion. 

I thought that is how it was; now to present something like an alternative because no one has presented something from Government. What has been presented is from the committee. The minister has not spoken. So, why don’t we try to use the time in a way that will make us move forward.

MR EKANYA: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you and Engineer Byabagambi, the Minister for Works and Transport. I hope he remains the Minister for Works and Transport so that he continues raising these matters. The issue that the chairperson of the committee who passed via Masaka like I did pass raised is very serious. I, therefore, rest my case. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, these are presentations that do not require decision from the House, so, I cannot propose debate or a question. However, it is received and we will move and receive the next report accordingly.

In the gallery, this afternoon, we have students offering Bachelor’s of Arts, Ethics and Human Rights from Makerere University. They have come to observe how business is conducted in the national Parliament. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

2.58
THE CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY AND SPORTS (Ms Sylvia Namabidde): Mr Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Education, Science and Technology and Sports. 

I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the proceedings of the committee and also a copy of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and the full text of the report.

MS NAMABIDDE: Mr Speaker, the education and sports sector is one of Uganda’s key social service delivery sectors and the committee appreciates the strides that has been made by the sector. For instance, in increasing access to education through UPE, Universal Secondary Education (USE)and Universal Post O-level Education and Training(UPOLET) and for innovation like skilling Uganda.

However, the committee was concerned about the increasing poor quality of education, particularly sciences, coupled with the fact that a secondary school per sub county policy is yet to be operationalised.

The committee is also concerned that the universities have inadequate financial resources and the new ones are particularly struggling to take off. Most universities operate below 40 per cent staffing levels with some as low as 28 per cent. This affects the delivery of tertiary education.  

The committee is grateful that the National Curriculum Development Centre, Lira, Soroti and Kabale universities were granted vote status to be operationalised in the financial year 2016/2017.  The committee reiterates its recommendation that the following are also elevated to vote status: Special Needs Education, National Council for Higher Education and the Higher Education Students Financing Board.      

Mr Speaker, the following are some of the observations and recommendations of the committee.

Vote 013 – Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports

The committee noted that the ministry has not been restructured to include the mandate of science and technology. The committee was informed that the ministry has sought guidance from the Ministry of Public Service on the new structure and was awaiting action. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Public Service, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports should work on the new structure to include the new mandate in the coming financial year. 

Higher Education Students Financing Board

The committee observed that the loan scheme – now in its second year – supports 2,473 students to pursue higher education, targeting science disciplines.  The committee noted that the board has invested in the acquisition of the Integrated Loan Management System to include all the modules from selection, disbursement and recoveries. The board has so far incurred $1,184,000 and requires an additional $709,423.24 which is equivalent to Shs 2,607,000,000 to acquire the system. 

The committee recommends that Government avails Shs 2,607,000,000 to the board to acquire the Integrated Loan Management System this financial year to enable it manage the loan scheme efficiently. 

The committee also observed that the loan scheme has a funding gap of Shs 587,570,000 on its non-wage budget for tracer studies, strategic plan development and training.

The committee recommends that Government provides Shs 587,570,000 to meet the non-wage funding gap for tracer studies, strategic plan development and training that are critical for the management of the loan scheme. 

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that there are a number of presidential pledges in the education sector that have not been honoured. It was established, for example, that the outstanding presidential pledges for Busitema University alone stand at Shs 26.104 billion. The committee noted that the total outstanding presidential pledges in the sector amount to Shs 84.867 billion. The committee noted that failure to honour presidential pledges in time embarrasses the Fountain of Honour.

The committee recommends that the minister should work out a plan with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to have all these presidential pledges honoured. 

On the teachers’ SACCO, the committee noted that Government has in the last three financial years released Shs 12,867, 423,557 for the teachers SACCO and out of this Shs 9,317,423,557 was transferred to the Microfinance Support Centre to manage. The committee was informed that Uganda National Teachers Union (UNATU) lobbied the President to have the fund managed by the Uganda Teachers Savings Credit Cooperative Union (UTSCCU). Consequently, Shs 3,550,000,000 was transferred to UTSCCU.  It was noted that not all teachers are members of this union, yet the fund was to benefit all the teachers.

The committee recommends that Government comes up with modalities to make it possible for all the teachers to benefit from this revolving teachers SACCO fund. The committee also recommends that the Shs 9.3 billion that is with the Microfinance Support Centre should immediately be transferred to Uganda Teachers Savings Credit Cooperative Union to benefit only teachers who are supposed to be the actual beneficiaries.

Vote 139 – Kyambogo University. The committee observed that the sewerage system for the university is outdated and dilapidated beyond repair. This, therefore, requires a new network of pipes estimated at about 50,000 linear meters to upgrade the entire system by increasing the size of waste water pipes so that it can accommodate the high student population. 

The committee recommends that an additional Shs 0.6 billion be allocated to solve the issue of outdated sewerage system at the university. 

Vote 140 – Uganda Management Institute 

The committee observed that the annual releases from the Government of Shs 1.5 billion for capital development to Uganda Management Institute is not adequate to finance infrastructural development and renovation of the aging buildings at the institute.

The committee recommends that funds be availed for the completion of classroom/office block, rehabilitation of hostel and repair of Kalebo Block, worth Shs 1,896,000,000.

Vote – 301 Lira University

The committee observed that the university, at her infancy stage, requires a lot of appropriate capital development funding to take off and suit the standard set by the National Council for Higher Education.

The committee, therefore, recommends that funds be availed for administration block and accommodation of health workers worth Shs 10 billion.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that there are quite a number of under-funded and unfunded priorities. They include the first phase of installing lightening arrestors in 2,000 schools at a tune of Shs 10 billion; recruitment exercise of more science and English secondary school teachers at a tune of Shs 12 billion and shortfall on the funding of 3,100 new cohort of the Higher Education Students Financing Board at a tune of Shs 8.2 billion.

Others are the overhauling of the old and dilapidated water and sewerage system at Kyambogo at a tune of Shs 0.6 billion and the removal of asbestos roofs and renovation of old structures worth Shs 3 billion.

I have talked about the outstanding presidential pledges at Busitema University worth Shs 26 billion. I have also talked about a shortfall at Lira University worth Shs 10 billion as well as a shortfall of Shs 8.6 billion for the completion of the construction works for the administrative block, lecture rooms and laboratories at Soroti University.

Mr Speaker, the committee – after the recommendations and observations as will be captured in the Hansard – recommends the approval of a total sum of Shs 1,290,341,450,000 for the 15 votes under the education sector. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Any comments on this? This is a presentation that requires a decision and the decision will be taken when the Committee on Budget presents its report. 

3.10
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for a very good report. I know more is in the report and if we were given time, we would raise more issues. 

However, I would like to raise the issue on the policy of having at least one secondary school per sub-county. I remember one time in the New Vision, Government came up very clearly and identified the sub-counties without secondary schools. Government promised to give shs 500 million to each sub-county to ensure these schools are taken up by Government. 

I would like to know, from this budget, how much money is given and how many secondary schools are going to be taken in each sub-county?

There are certain schools, which are already fully fledged with teachers and buildings but the Government is refusing to take them up and they have remained community schools. May I know when they are effecting this policy? 

I have one school; Koch Secondary School. It has all the teachers and the basic infrastructures but up to now, the Government is not taking it over. Please, let me know.

The second issue is teachers’ names missing from the pay roll. Some teachers are not getting their pay. What is happening in the financial system? Why are some of the teachers’ names missing? They are really getting discouraged because they are not getting their pay.

Lastly, I would like to thank Government for giving a vote for the special needs education. However, at the moment, there is no money put there. Can I know how much is allocated? Will it be given by next financial year or you are just deceiving us that the vote is given when the money is not there?

I have also something to be clarified by the minister. I have schools for the blind and the deaf in Koboko. They are supposed to be given subvention but they are being asked for Tax Identification Number. Do schools really need Tax Identification Numbers? Some schools are not even doing business; why do you have to force them to have Tax Identification Numbers? Thank you very much.

3.13
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for this report. 

My first concern is about lightening arresters, which is reflected as unfunded priority. Knowing rain has come back and the absence of the lightening arresters is a way of exposing our children to risks. Can we get to know why they fall under unfunded priority because management of disaster in such a nature would cost us a lot?

Secondly, the issue of having secondary schools in all the sub-counties falls under the presidential pledges but there are also independent needs. Therefore, we need to know the schools that are going to benefit and when these presidential pledges are going to get accomplished. It is time bound. How do you expect newly created sub-counties not to have secondary schools? 

In Adjumani District, we have four sub-counties without secondary schools. Therefore, can we get to know which schools have been budgeted for so that we can have a feedback to our communities?

3.14
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

Secondary schools are where I will begin from. The minister and the chairperson of the committee must explain to us clearly - Creating a new sub-county is not a big problem; that can wait but there are old sub-counties, which have never got secondary schools up to now. It is not a presidential pledge; it is a policy, which we passed here and agreed that all sub-counties will have secondary schools. 

Therefore, can we know from the minister and the chairperson where the schools are? We used to have about 1,200 sub-counties. Of these sub-counties, how many have already got secondary schools? I will give example from our area; the secondary schools ended long ago. We have not seen many and these sub-counties have been there for long. This must be clear. 

Sometime back, in 2012 and 2013, there was an advert in the papers of many secondary schools, which were going to be built. They have never built any and they were supposed to be built through ADB loan. Can we find out what happened to that advert? Was it just for purposes of passing time? 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, this loan scheme for university students. Why should a Ugandan going to the university have to apply for a loan? What is happening is that to get a loan for university education, you must bribe. Why should I apply? It is very dangerous.

Why don’t we say anybody who goes to the university, because we cannot give free education, should get the money and when he or she finishes studying, he or she starts paying back? It should be a policy here. Put enough money to have our children educated other than dropping off halfway.

Mr Speaker, at appropriation time, I would like the minister to tell us how much loan he needs to allow Ugandans finish university education without going into the hassle of applying. In other countries, if you do not have enough money, you borrow a loan and when you finish, you will repay it with interest. That is why some people are still repaying loans up to now and they have got education. We should stop subjecting Ugandans to this crudeness of applying for loans where others get and some do not. 

We have national identity cards. We know everybody will be indexed and when you finish school, we shall follow you because we can track you. 

The last one is SACCO from which teachers can borrow. Why assume teachers are the only ones who want to borrow? The teachers are going to the SACCO because you are aiming to make it have lower interest rates. Everybody wants to borrow. Why don’t we have a SACCO for the nurses or the health workers? Why don’t we have a SACCO for the ministers since we at least have one for Parliament?

Mr Speaker, these SACCOs will not help the teachers. The reason I am raising it is, you are making it look as if a few individuals should control others. If you would like to lend money to Ugandans, make the interest rates low. I know most of you come from town areas but what is happening in the village schools where I come from is that a teacher arrives in school at 10.00 a.m. Why? They have to work around to make ends meet. At 2 o’clock, the teacher has to leave. 

During our time, when we were in primary, there were eight houses in every school for teachers and a specific one for a Mathematics teacher. By 7.00 a.m. every teacher was at school. They would teach up to the end. These were mud schools. We passed exams from there and we are here speaking. We now have cemented schools but the children are failing and they are remaining in the villages. 

If we do not address the teachers’ welfare, we are wasting time - (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. To my friend, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, how do you explain this scenario where, for every Government school, there is a private school? In the private school, the teacher gets half of the pay earned by the teacher in a Government school. However, pupils in private schools are passing while those in the Government schools are failing. How do you explain such a scenario? Is it connected to the welfare? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I did not know that the minister knows something which I am not aware of. I would like to give you an example of the school I went to. It is called Busoga College Mwiri. If you go to Busoga College Mwiri, you will see the bed I slept on being the very one students still use. It is bent and has ropes tied to it. 

If you go to a Government school, first of all, the school itself does not look like a Government school. It seems there was a deliberate policy to destroy Government schools so that private schools can emerge. Private schools are for children from well-to-do families. That is why – and I will explain this to you - I do not believe in what you are saying because teachers who teach in Government schools also teach in private schools. But they are paid better in the private schools - they keep their jobs in the Government schools because they have to wait for pension; it is a permanent and pensionable job.

I think we have also failed to carry out the inspectorate role. During our time, we would have an inspector coming to school. If you have failed to conduct school inspection, it means you have failed. That time you would see somebody coming into the classrooms to check if the teachers were there. He would also come and sit at the back of the class and listen. Right now, I am sure there is a budget for inspectorate but because the school inspectors know that the Uganda Government is full of corruption, they misuse that money and claim to have carried out inspection whereas not. So, it is important for all of us to act immediately. We must invest more money in the education sector and make sure Government schools remain functional. I do not know much about today, but during our time Government schools used to admit intelligent children.  The school fees were low. They were well maintained and we passed. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to help me understand this SACCO very well. How is it going to be run so that teachers avoid wasting time trying to borrow the SACCO money? How are you going to address the issue of teachers reporting to school by 8.00 a.m. to teach and then leaving by 5.00 p.m.? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is there any response on this? Chairperson, could you please respond to this briefly? 

MS SSINABULYA: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports is not around, but hon. David Bahati has said he will ably stand in. I just wanted to say that all the issues that have been raised by the Members have been reinforcing the observations and recommendations of the committee. 

There was an issue raised by hon. Baba Diri, which I just want to put right. The special needs education has not yet been elevated to vote status. However, the committee continues to pursue its recommendation that special needs education be elevated to a vote status. Hon. Bahati will ably stand in for the minister and answer cabinet issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Bahati. Please briefly clarify on these issues.

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to respond to the issue of the teachers’ SACCO. One and a half years ago, the teachers went on strike and they had a number of demands to Government. We sat down with them together with the union and negotiated. The SACCO issue was part of what we agreed upon.
 
The other one was the salary increment, which we have now provided for, close to 15 per cent, in this financial year.
 
Government will continue to look at the welfare of teachers and other civil servants. For the teachers, we have now increased up to 60 per cent of their salary and we think the lowest would earn Shs 470,000. If you add 15 per cent, it would probably come to close to Shs 500,000 per month. 

We also agreed that we are going to inject Shs 25 billion into the SACCO, but we are going to begin with Shs 5 billion every financial year. I find no problem with the teachers running the teachers’ SACCO, as long as they account for it. The National Audit Act is very clear. Any Government investment will be audited, even if it is Shs 1. I do not have any problem with the SACCO being supported after all we are talking about the welfare of teachers. So, if they think the SACCO can be of help, then Government has every reason to support them. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have raised issues of the university loans. You said you are going to stand in for the minister. Tell us about the university loans for students. Why doesn’t everybody qualify? If you are standing in for the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports, why haven’t you built the said seed schools? Hon. Bahati should explain all these things. If not, we need the Minister of Education, Science, Technology and Sports to do so. Do not answer what you do not know. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do what you can and leave the rest for - 

MR BAHATI: The other issue is about what we are doing to rehabilitate the old schools in this country, including Mwiri and others. It is the policy of Government to have a secondary school in every sub county. To that effect, we are committed to it and we are actually doing that. 

The second issue is that we have borrowed money and passed it in this House to expand the secondary schools in this country. Over 1,000 schools have been built across the country. The issue is resources. As you have seen in every policy statement, there are unfunded priorities - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we know in this country, resources are a big issue. The procedural matter I would like to raise is: even if it takes 100 years, how have you segmented it? What have you done? When are you planning to do it? Even if it is going to go to reach Adjumani in 2030, I should sit knowing that this sub county will be built in 2030. The procedural issue I am raising is that can the minister give us the figures? He is talking about 1,000 - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a procedural point, honourable. What is the procedural point? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Is the minister procedurally right to come here and talk about 1,000 when he cannot even explain where the 1,000 are? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister that is a point of clarification. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I do not want to pick a quarrel with the former Leader of the Opposition. We shall provide these figures tomorrow. I thank you. 

3.28
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to get a clarification on the special needs vote. When the minister released UNEB O’level results, she said there was a special needs vote. I do not know whether it is the money that is not there or the vote. If we are talking about the certificate of gender and equity, I think it is high time this Parliament came up with a recommendation. These students are really suffering. They are not the same as the other students; their things are very expensive and are based on their needs. I attended a committee meeting when the minister appeared. I am surprised to hear that there is no vote for special needs. Is it a deliberate effort to deny us education? Mr Speaker, as we move into the budget, this is critical. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you update us about the vote for special needs education

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am happy we are not talking about the funds; the funds are available. What is needed is the vote status. It has a procedure and I will have to check whether they have fulfilled the procedure of getting a vote status. They should be given a vote status if all procedures needed are fulfilled. There is no problem with getting your vote status, as long as the procedure is followed. I will, therefore, take it up with the Minister of Education and report back to this House tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker,0 we would like to know what hon. Bahati is going to bring for us from the Ministry of Education Science, and Technology and Sports. We have asked about seed schools and about the university loans. You should, therefore, come up with the plan for the university loans including the list of those who have benefited and those yet to benefit. If we allow this Ministry of Education to continue like this, we may have a problem tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think what we take is that, the ones that can be handled by the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development will be handled by that ministry. Those which will come under education, the Minister of Education should take responsibility and come to brief the House on what is there.

3.32
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, for the opportunity, Mr Speaker. This morning I had the opportunity to visit the Ministry of Education. I also had the opportunity to meet the director in charge of secondary schools. He poured a lot of plight to me with regards to the plight of secondary schools. To date as we talk, we have a shortage of 34,000 teachers. We are here crying for schools in our sub-counties. The existing ones have a shortage of teachers. I have one in particular, which started about 20 or 30 years ago. Their ceiling for all that time has been 20 teachers and they are still 20 teachers in that school. 

I would like to know if we are talking about enhancing education for the future of our country; if we are talking about universal secondary education; if we are talking about skilling Uganda; and if we are talking about getting into the first world, how are we going to do this when we do not have teachers in our secondary schools?

Can you explain to this House when you last gave out enough money to recruit teachers? For the last 20 or so years, there are these very unfortunate Ugandans who have been over time upgrading from grade V to graduate teachers, acting as deputy head teachers, for over 20 years. No action is being taken yet we are here talking about construction of new secondary schools. How about that Ugandan who has been in an acting capacity, as head teacher, for the last 20 years and nothing has been done because there is no money to facilitate that? Is that being fair? How do you look at a school like Kyezimbire Senior Secondary School - I have told you  that 25 years to date, they have never had an increment on their ceiling - 20 teachers and I am only looking at Kyezimbire, what about Kitoro Senior Secondary School and many others? The concentration is only on these big urban schools.

I think it is high time we put our feet down and said no, there should be equity. Not all Ugandan live in Mbarara as a town or in Kabale and Kampala. There are many Ugandans in the villages and are the majority of the people we claim to be serving, yet we are not looking at their plight.

Therefore, I would like to call upon the minister concerned to open up some of these ceilings and look at them equally and distribute these teachers properly, other than having them concentrate in Ntare, Mbarara High School and Maryhill, among others. There many others down there who deserve that kind of education too. I would like to thank you.

3.35
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, I would like to request that we stand over this topic until we ask the ministers in the education sector to be in the House to answer to these issues themselves. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have received a report from this sector and concluded. The pending issues are those that will require responses from the ministers in charge of the education sector. The chairperson of the committee has done very well on her part. Thank you very much.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to take you back. What happens is that when a minister is not available, we stay the vote until they are here and that is what has been – (Interjections) – Yes, we have received a report but until the answer is provided, we shall not consider that vote. You have been here since we began.

Mr Speaker, I think that the same should apply because these ministers refuse to come here knowing that even if they are not here – you can see that even the minister of health who has been here has also run away because he knows we are just passing things anyhow. So, we stay it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is nothing to stay because we have just received a report. There is no decision on it. What is going to happen is that whatever we have received today will be submitted to the Budget Committee. When the Budget Committee reports, it is when the decision will be taken. If you have raised that matter and the minister has failed to respond, you can raise it that time. As for now, we are just receiving the report; we are not taking any decision. The report has been received. Thank you, Chairperson.

THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY

3.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just going to do a summary of the recommendations on the Report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statements and draft budget estimates for the tourism, trade and industry sectors for the financial year, 2016/2017.

We received and examined the ministerial policy statements of the two ministries. We examined the draft estimates of revenue and expenditure for the financial year 2016/2017. We also reviewed the observations and recommendations on the ministry’s budget estimates and we held meetings with the sectors, the ministries, agencies, departments and even civil society. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings and a copy of the main report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KABAHENDA: Allow me to go directly to the observations and recommendations. It should be noted that the budget of this sector increased due to the creation of Vote-306 for Uganda Export Promotion Board and the expected or projected increase in non-tax revenue collection by Uganda National Bureau of Standards as the table shows.

On Vote 015, under the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, the committee observed that we needed to review the liberalisation policy and it notes that there is need for Government to review it on certain or selected sectors of the economy as a strategy to support the indigenous industries and strengthen the role of the state in liberalisation.

The committee recommends that a review of this policy be initiated so that the role of the State comes out clearly in strategic development and industrialisation.

On border markets, the committee observed that much as emphasis is being directed to the development of border markets, no budget has been allocated for the construction. The resources being allocated to the activity are from European Union and they are utilised on feasibility studies, the development of master plans and environmental impact assessment. Three districts have offered land with land titles for the development of border markets. These are Kabale, Busia and Amuru.

The committee recommends that Government allocates funds to construct a pilot border market in Elegu since its master plan is already developed. This will improve on the cross-border trade between South Sudan and Uganda.

About the enabling laws, the committee observes that the Consumer Protection Bill, the Competition Bill, Cooperatives (Amendment) Bill, Sugar Bill and Price Stabilisation Bill have taken very long to come out of Cabinet yet they are very important Bills to regulate trade.

The committee recommends that Cabinet expedites the process of these laws such as the Consumer Protection Bill, which will assist consumers in protecting their rights, entitlements and safety.

Revitalization of the Cooperative Movement

The committee notes that cooperatives revival is one of the core components in the National Development Plan but the budget allocated for it in Vote 0602 - Cooperatives Development - in the past two financial years and in the medium terms, does not reflect Government’s commitment to revive this sector of the economy. 

During the National Budget Framework Paper for 2016/2017, additional funding of Shs 2 billion has been allocated for revitalisation of the cooperatives movement but these funds have not been provided for in the budget.

The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that Government prioritises and provides Shs 2 billion for the revival of cooperatives than putting more emphasis on only SACCOs, which is a sub component of the cooperatives. The process to revive Cooperative Bank should also be fast-tracked.

Mr Speaker, the proposed budget allocation on Vote 015, Ministry Of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for financial year 2016/2017 has: Recurrent Expenditure in wage Shs 1,940,541,000; Non-wage is Shs 7,883,000,000; and the subtotal is Shs 9,823,541,000.

Under Development Expenditure by Government of Uganda is Shs 3,204,046,000 and from donors; it is Shs 1,420,124,000, giving a subtotal of Shs 4,606,170,000. 

Arrears for International Obligations

The funds retained by Ministry Of Finance, Planning and Economic Development under this are Shs 2,625,000,000. Local government grant for district commercial officers - funds retained in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are Shs 2,008,000,000. The subtotal for local government grants and arrears is Shs 4,633,000,000 and the total Vote is Shs 19,062,711,000 000.

Uganda Development Corporation (UDC)

On the capitalisation of UDC, the committee notes UDC is supposed to be capitalised with Shs 500 billion. However, no funds have been allocated for this capitalisation in the financial year 2016/17.

The committee recommends that the process of capitalising UDC with Shs 500 billion be prioritised in the next financial year since corporations like Kiira EV have commenced, processes of making prototype cars like Kayoola Solar Bus, Kiira EV and Kiira SMACK.

Under Automobile Industry Development Policy, the committee observed that Kiira Motors through the Kiira Vehicle Technology Innovation has developed three concept vehicle prototypes of Kiira EV, Kiira SMACK and Kayoola Solar Bus, whose brand vehicle His Excellency, the President, launched recently. 

However, the committee notes that there is no automobile policy in place to steer this innovation and cater for issues of import substitution and export regulation. The committee further notes that Shs 10 billion has been allocated for this car project and that the first batch of automobiles is expected to be on the market in 2018. 

The committee recommends that Government supports this institution to develop automobile industry development policy to steer and oversee the industry.

Waste Management Disposal Plant

The committee observed that the construction of the Soroti Fruit Factory is ongoing and was anticipated to be complete by July 2016 and the test runs be done in December 2016 to February 2017. Commercial production is expected to start in March 2017. 

However, the waste management disposal plant to drain effluent from the factory has not been budgeted for in the financial year 2016/2017. The committee was further informed that Uganda Investment Authority needs to provide this facility. 

The committee recommends that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development funds the Waste Management Disposals Plant if the factory is to start operations as scheduled.
May I go ahead to read the proposed budget, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we said the figures might bring confusion. You will submit them to the Budget Committee before we will see them properly.

MS KABAHENDA: On the Africa Growth Opportunity Act (AGOA) - the mandate of AGOA. The committee observes that Africa Growth Opportunity Act has been extended for more 10 years and, therefore, there is need to refocus the opportunities in this arrangement for the country to benefit from it. The committee further notes that, the mandate of AGOA in Uganda is not clear and leaves a lot to be asked.

The committee recommends that AGOA adopts the National Development Exports Strategy to ensure increased exports of selected products that go to the USA market.

Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority

Underfunding of Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority

The committee observed that although the authority directly contributes to the National Development Plan objectives in the trade, cooperatives and manufacturing sector, it is grossly under-funded with only Shs 905 million and in the third quarter, there was no release for the operation of its activities.

The committee further notes that funds for refurbishment of the basic identified storage infrastructure and implementation of the Grain Trade Policy have not been provided. The committee recommends that Uganda Warehouse Receipt Systems Authority be supported with the necessary funding to address post-harvest challenges, implement and enforce the Grain Trade Policy. 

The Uganda Warehouse Receipt System Authority Inclusion in the PIP

The committee observed that the Warehouse Receipt System Authority has been included in the new project recommended by the Development Committee on Public Investment Plan under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for approval as pipeline project for the financial year 2016/2017, with the proposed project cost of Shs 5.7 billion, as support to the authority under project code 1203.

The committee recommends this pipeline project be prioritised and planned for in the financial year 2016/2017.

Management Training and Advisory Centre 

The committee observed that Management Training and Advisory Centre continues to use asbestos on their buildings even after it has been outlawed internationally due to its - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, I have not even tackled tourism.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude please.

MS KAHAHENDA: Mr Speaker, subject to the observations and recommendations mentioned in this report, the committee recommends for the approval of the budget for tourism, trade and industry sector for the Financial Year 2016/2017 as follows:

Ministry of Trade and Industry wage - I already read it and for the figures that are provided for in regard to the two sectors. I beg to move.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson, for the presentation. Some brief comments on this?
 
3.50
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to say something in my capacity as Shadow Minister of Tourism and Wildlife. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to request you, with humility to join me in thanking the Almighty God for saving my life in the recent past. Around 24th of January I nearly died. But it is good that I am alive right now -(Interjections) -when someone talks about death, one is serious. What are you talking about? (Laughter) One of my opponents aided by one big radio mounted a programme, which opened a de-campaigning scheme to run me down. And in the process of doing so I developed a shock, which nearly took me to Heaven. (Laughter) However, it is good that I am alive.

Mr Speaker, this portfolio of tourism and wildlife is the hallmark of the economy of Uganda. Uganda cannot survive sustainably while depending on the taxes from textiles made outside Uganda. It is only the environment, which can guarantee the economic survival out of the goods we generate environmentally.

Therefore, I would like to invite Government to make sure they take the environmental sector as a very serious sector. In the report, which was given to us by the ministry, they talked about many exhibitions they have visited outside Uganda - the London and New York exhibitions. 

But before you went to New York, you should have endeavoured to teach the people of Uganda, especially the young generation, that Uganda is second to Namibia in the abundance of birds. We command over 1,000 species of birds. Why don’t you organise a special exhibition for birds viewing of a Ugandan formation? I would like to challenge you on that in my capacity as a Shadow Minister of Tourism and Wildlife. 

So, if we come to Government as the Opposition, what should we have done? Mr Speaker, for a very long time there has been the institute of tourism in Jinja. You talked about the Tourism Act and you also demanded extra money to improve on that institute. Knowing that Uganda’s tourism potential is expanding and that people are free to start hotels, why don’t you develop the Jinja Tourism Institute to the level of Utalii College in Nairobi so that all our hotels can depend on that potential? I do not see any gist of dependency, in terms of building an institution, for which we can be proud of in feeding the mushrooming many hotels in Uganda.

If we came to power as the Opposition, we would give that priority. You should be more serious than what you have been in the past.

Mr Speaker, I am a little bit worried because as we speak many tourists are coming to Uganda but when they come how do we expect them to be treated properly when their focus is on national parks and game reserves.

I strongly propose, on behalf of the Opposition, that the time is now for Uganda to exercise what is called a mixed economic order so as to build lodges in national parks.  Don’t expect the private sector to build lodges in national parks; it should be an undertaking of the Uganda Government. If you do not do that you will never promote real tourism because real tourism, in serious terms, means many exclusive things. You cannot jam the area of seeing birds; and you cannot jam the area of seeing animals including endangered species like the rhino and the gorilla. So, there is a lot of laxity regarding that area.

Mr Speaker, I was recently a visitor at the former Karuma Falls where there is a dam site. I discovered that as a result of the development of the dam, a lot of wildlife was scared away because of the noise generated and so many other things.

Knowing very well that Murchison Falls National Park is one of the greatest national parks in Uganda with spectacular wildlife species many of which are in danger - I am talking about the so many natural resources, which are in danger, namely, the martial eagle, the green-breasted pitta, the fregatidae and some of the chimpanzees’ species- what plans do you have to attract those species back after building or constructing the dam? Many of them were scared away. Some have already reached Congo. This is a serious challenge. I want the answer now not tomorrow.

Development is not all about dams; there are so many other areas that are attractive enough to keep our economy prospectively moving instead of over concentrating on one item.

I have heard of some tree planting days mentioned in the past. I would like to advise the Government of Uganda that knowing that we have failed to put up a national tree planning day, the time is now for us to develop one, which will also be made a tourist attraction so that people from all over the world get to know when Uganda celebrates a tree day. It is on such a day that they can all come and see that exciting function, which will be the basis of wildlife protection.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I am angered by the failure of the Uganda Government to fund the wildlife clubs of Uganda. The wildlife clubs of Uganda would do a great deal to promote the “Miss Tourism Competition”, which Uganda is regularly organising. Is it because the clubs were founded by hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi that you are ignoring them? I founded those clubs and I would like to continue being proud of them until I die. What are you doing to make sure they flourish? Thank you.

3.59
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. My appreciation goes to the committee. I support the issue of revival of the cooperative societies. However, there are a lot of grievances being raised. For example, the Madi Cooperative Society is raising a claim that Government did not compensate them. I would like to know what Government is doing to the old cooperative societies so that when revived they will not meet a lot of challenges.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, there was the issue of Elegu Market. I still remember in 2013, if I can recall very well, we passed a vote to construct a market in Elegu at the border. May I know exactly what happened to that money? There was that money, which was voted. I still remember it and the committee brought a report pertaining to the same market. Can we know what happened to that money?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and my sister. I recall the market in South Sudan was under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs where they spent the money in the name of the people of Uganda. So, was this one under trade or the ministry - maybe the minister my help us.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you. Maybe the minister will clarify on that. On the issue of the policy in relation to liberalisation, as Parliament, we have been raising the issue of privatisation and to me this also relates to this ministry. Our prayer has been that we need an assessment report on how we have performed on the policy of privatisation.

May we know more whether this was captured in their reports or what ministry is talking about it? If it is another ministry, let me get to know if it is not related with trade. 

On the issue of tourism, I personally feel inadequacy is there in exposing many of the sites. In the Madi Sub Region, we have historical sites, but which have not been put on the map of this country to date. Can we get to know what the ministry is planning so that some of the sites, which are not visible enough today, can be at least recognised through having a budget to have those sites visited to get exposed? Thank you.

4.03
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report presented. I would like to request for clarification on this and request the minister to say something on the issue of SACCOs. 

We have a very big challenge as Ugandans. Yes, we have encouraged our people to save but many have lost their money in these SACCOs. 

I would like to request the honourable minister to bring a Bill on the Floor of Parliament so that we can pass the law regulating these SACCOs in order to once again encourage our people to save. This is because having lost a lot of money in these SACCOs, people have resorted to money lenders to solve their issues yet they have lost their property in the due course because they could not manage the interest rates charged by the money lenders.

Therefore, I kindly request our minister to bring this law on the Floor of Parliament so that we can have a law governing these SACCOs to instigate the culture of saving to our Ugandans. I thank you.

4.04
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntugamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise three issues with the committee. One is on the matter that has been alluded to by one Member about the debts owing to cooperatives.

Mr Speaker, we are talking about reviving cooperatives today and starting up SACCOs but we cannot start new SACCOs before we tackle the indebtedness of Government to the cooperative movement. The last story I heard was that Government owed up to Shs 40 billion to cooperatives in form of lost animals, crops like coffee and money taken by Government in the numerous wars and to all cooperatives.

This is money that is not attracting interest. Some of these cooperatives have lost their properties to banks. They have lost all their assets like land to banks as their creditors. 

May we know the problem Government has to pay these cooperatives because these are people’s institutions; the poor man’s institutions. What is Government doing about paying off these debts? Or can Government come out and disown these debts and it is forgotten because this is a matter we have been talking about in this Parliament annually as we discuss the budget.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, is a matter of the Cooperative Bank. The Cooperative Bank was taken over and liquidated by Government more than 15 years ago. To date, 15 years after the liquidators have never come back because it was liquidated under the supervision of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives at that time.  Can Government or the ministry come out to give the status of the defunct Cooperative Bank? They only needed about Shs 10 billion to save that bank but that money was not given and all the assets of the bank throughout the country were taken. Can the co-operators and Ugandans know the fate of the Cooperative Bank and its assets and the money realised from the sale of the assets so that that matter is also closed?

Lastly, Mr Speaker, is the matter of the law. More than 10 years ago I participated in an exercise where Government was drafting a law to revive the then statute. It is now 10 years down the road. What has happened to the revision of that cooperative statute? Every other year, when we go for the State of the Nation Address, the revision of the cooperative statute is always on the agenda. What is the progress on that law and when is it coming to Parliament? I thank you.

4.07
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and chairperson of the committee for presenting the report.
 
The issue of tourism, as one of the sectors that give us income, is a bit under budgeted. When you visit our embassies out there, you do not see the reflection of the things that Uganda has. For example, you might have only flags and a picture of a chimpanzee at a corner. So, I think there is need to see how foreign affairs and Ministry of Tourism wildlife  and Antiquities are inter-linked in order to market tourism more.

When you get out there, if there is a trade attaché, he/she is independent from whatever the embassy does. He/she is alone. There is need to be inter-linked and be able to provide information the people can get about the tourism sector in Uganda.

Mr Speaker, we need to market tourism to the local people - we the Ugandans. How many of us go to these sites?  My understanding of tourism is that if I moved and bought a bottle of water, I am already providing some income that is coming back to the economy.  However, many times, we are not so much interested in marketing it to the local community yet this is one of our income earners.

Mr Speaker, the other thing is the issue of the cooperatives. We need to revive the cooperatives. Most of us went to school because our parents were able to put food somewhere and sell it at a certain price. These days in Uganda, because of the liberalisation policy - I will give an example. When you are going to Busia, on the whole road there is maize being dried up but the Kenyans are taking all that maize to their country. They grind and bring it back as posho flour and we buy it at a higher price yet it is the same maize from Uganda that was crossed to the other side. Only value addition is done to it before it is brought back after branding it with a certain name.

The same applies to our tea. It is taken to another country, branded and the name of that country is indicated and you find it in the US and Germany markets. As Ugandans, we are a bit relaxed. So can the minister give us the processes of trying to ensure that Ugandans can be able to keep their products before they sell them at a very lower price?

In my district people sell cassava from the gardens and groundnuts before they even know what their products weigh. Thank you.

4.11
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee. The chairperson mentioned something about the border markets. I would like to inform the chairperson and House that Koboko is one of those areas identified for border markets.

We have acquired a very big land with title for the construction of that border market. They are aware about that Koboko’s position near Congo and Sudan, but the chairperson has not mentioned Koboko as one of those areas to get markets developed. Please include it there because we have already acquired the land. My worry is that if the land is left idle for too long, people may encroach and settle on it. So, please when will you give money for developing that area?

Lastly, concerning warehouses, we have the farmers’ association which has very big land. We have got over 7,000 farmers who are planting maize, rice and beans. We need a warehouse. Honourable minister, what is the procedure of acquiring a warehouse because the people of Koboko need it? Thank you very much.

4.12
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. One thing we are raising is liberalisation verses cooperatives. There must be a deliberate policy by Government to protect cooperatives. If you do not do it, it looks like you are playing football and your hands are tied while the other one is free.

Much as we talk about co-operatives, the ministry should come up with a policy on how to protect - I will give an example of a coffee industry, which I know very well. You have a competitor who buys coffee and goes directly to the farmer but because co-operatives do not have money, that buyer pays cash but also underpays the farmer and the quality may also go down. At the end of the day even if there is a co-operative primary society around, it cannot do anything because of lack of capacity and energy. So, there must be a policy by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to protect co-operatives. That is the one way we can fight poverty because the middlemen should wait from somewhere not going down to the farmers.

The secondly issue is about what hon. Tashobya raised on compensation. Yes, UCTU still exists but there was UCCU, Uganda Co-operative Insurance, UNEX and the Co-operative Bank. The moment they collapsed, farmers were affected. For example, the investors in UCTU were unionists. So when we were in the Luweero Bush from 1980 to 1986, we took lorries of UCTU; that meant we took property of co-operatives. Therefore, if you compensated UCTU, you would have compensated primary societies in that regard. And if you compensated UCCU, you would have compensated unions and co-operative societies. 

Finally is the issue of coffee stabilisation fund. We who were coffee farmers - of course Bugisu grows Arabic, Robusta is grown in Buganda and Ankole also grew some Robusta – have our Shs 58 billion, which is idle in Bank of Uganda and hon. David Bahati, the Minister of State for Finance Planning and Economic Development, you are aware of it, I am sure.  We need our money to be refunded. What was the purpose of the stabilization fund? It was that because the price had increased, Government said that to protect the farmers during recess, they had to keep for us some money. But we have waited for the money for all these years. 

So, Madam Minister, I would like you to write a letter to Ministry of Finance so that they can return the money to Bugisu Co-operative Union, Banyankole Kwetarana, Masaka Co-operative Union, West and East Mengo - Madi and Bukedi will not get; they have to wait for a stabilisation fund for cotton. That is the only way to build this and of course Minister for Cooperatives, you should get out there to help co-operatives. You should not be in office, go and check on those primary societies; it is a field job and you will find out the problems we farmers face. People may be coming to your office, but you need to be in the field because there are more problems in the field than the ones you receive at your office. I thank you. 

4.16
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for presenting the report. I am afraid I am unable to respond to tourism and wildlife because most of the issues are very technical and they no longer fall under my sector.

Allow me, Mr Speaker, to go directly to Ministry of Trade issues. I would like to thank the honourable members for their comments and questions – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The point stated by the honourable minister holding the Floor is saddening because we expect the Government of Uganda to be fully represented on these important budgetary aspects - there are no excuses. Is she in order to make that remark that Government – can we procedurally move without a representation from the appropriate minister?

MS KYAMBADDE: Procedurally, Government took a decision to separate the ministries and allocated one sector to a full minister. I beg, Mr Speaker, that I continue with trade. Thank you. 

I would like to respond to the issues, especially – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, let us be serious. I stood here in my capacity as Shadow Minister of Tourism and Wildlife and I raised pertinent issues about that portfolio. Is it in order for Government to ignore the issues I have raised in my capacity as shadow minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the information that you should have taken in good spirit is that the docket of tourism and wildlife no longer sits with the Ministry of Trade and Industry. This is not the right minister to respond to those issues.

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond to the issues, especially under co-operatives - Adjumani raised issues of the revival of co-operative societies. The process of reviving co-operative societies has been going on for the last five years, but the honours is upon us, as leaders, to ensure that we sensitize our people to form co-operatives because they comprise people not Government. So we all have a role to play in sensitising our people. 

I would like to talk about the unions that were supposed to be compensated by Government. We started that process about four years ago and we came up with a number of unions, namely Wamala Cooperative Union, Masaka, Banyankole Kweterana Cooperative Union and Bugisu Cooperative Union (BCU). We started our process with BCU and I want to thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi who was very cooperative. Although he says I have not been there, I have been to his area many times and I even chaired his re-election to the board; I know all those societies.

We encountered a challenge when it came to verification; some of the members of those unions did not know exactly how much they were supposed to be paid; so the verification process took a while. Although Wamala Cooperative Union and Banyankole Kweterana submitted and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs said they would compensate them, we are still waiting for verification. I commit to continue pursuing it.

About Elegu Market – (Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. The matter we are raising, Mr Speaker, is a matter that has been going on, that has a history of about 30 years. Some of these unions lost their produce as far back as 1985/86, and you can imagine the money of 1986 and the money now. 

However, it is also true, as the honourable minister has said, that some verification exercise went on; for example, I am aware that Government owes Banyankole Kweterana more than Shs 14 billion. This is the money for all the members of Banyankole Kweterana. What we would want to know is: What programme do you have for these unions? In what period of time do you expect to pay these unions?

MS ABABIKU: I am sorry to inconvenience you, my honourable sister, but I think this is a very big problem down there in our districts. Can we get to know from your docket all the cooperative societies that have approached your office? We have the issue of Madi Cooperative Society – I have some of their documents; if you can give us a comprehensive report about all the cooperative societies that have registered complaints and you also enlighten us on the compensation process, it would be good.

Also, if you can give me leeway, I will go to your office with all the documents I have from the Madi Cooperative Society so that I can be able to help my people. Thank you.

MS KYAMBADDE: All the districts have got someone called a district commercial officer. This officer registers all the cooperatives and gives us information. If he is active, then we have full information. Some of them are not very active and we have been trying to see if we can change them. So, if you could work with the district commercial officer in Madi, he would be able to present all these issues.

About Elegu Market, it is true that this market is under the Ministry of Trade and Industry. As a ministry, we came up with architectural plans and we actually got a title for the land but when we were about to start constructing, the architect realised that the area floods and he had to change the designs.

Privatisation is under Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development. I think the minister will comment on that. Fortunately, he is here.

On SACCOs, we agreed with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that all those SACCOs with a portfolio of about Shs 300 million would be handled under the microfinance law. I understand that this is with the committee but the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will comment on that. At the Ministry of Trade and Industry, we only handle those SACCOs with a portfolio below Shs 300 million.

About the Cooperative Bank, we started on this project and there have been mixed feelings about this issue. However, we are consulting, as stakeholders, and we will be able to come out with a report, probably next year if I am still here, or anybody else who will be here. 

On Koboko, you talked about revival, but for most of this, like the revival of the Cooperative Bank, Government has to partner with local leaders. What we have done on the issue of warehouses is to restructure the Uganda Commodities Exchange, and it is now the Uganda National Commodities Exchange. We have now de-mutualised the shareholding with the private sector taking 80 per cent and Government 20 per cent. That has motivated the private sector through the grain council to construct warehouses. We have a number of warehouses all over the country and the total is almost 48 constructed by the private sector.

In the ministry, we have already come up with a warehousing receipt system authority. What does this authority do? It is supposed to move around ensuring that these warehouses are of quality but also licensing them. In East Africa, we are the only ones who have an authority; no other country has a warehouse receipt system authority. So, these warehouses are there, but Government has a plan as well to construct 60 warehouses and silos under a Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement with Uganda Development Corporation. I seek your support on this with the budget so that we start constructing next year. 

What are our efforts to ensure that commodities are not sold at low prices? We started a project called “one village, one product” and it has been rolled out to a number of districts- not so many though; they are about 35. We identify cooperatives and we give them small-scale equipment like maize mills, rice hullers, honey processors, and we have been giving out machines so that people add value to their produce. 

What other efforts? We have to make sure that our commodities are of standard. We are now working with the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries to ensure that we train people to have standard goods. We have started putting up factories; for example in Soroti – I know it is a long story but we are about to roof it now, so that we buy oranges from the locals. Those are some of our efforts.

The other efforts are markets. There is now a regional market. We have worked on the markets in the East African Community, COMESA, and the EU has taken about eight years but we now have a market there. These are some of the efforts we have been making in the Ministry of Trade and Industry. As for warehouses, we have to make sure they are rolled out.

A policy to protect cooperatives is in place. In the new Cooperatives Act, there is a provision but we need to work more on that.

On the stabilisation fund, I think the Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development is more competent in that area. Probably, he will be able to respond.

As far as moving out into the countryside is concern, I have been moving out a lot. I have been to most of the areas including Karamoja and I have seen how the cooperative societies operate. However, I need your help, as Members of Parliament, to ensure that we fight together to consolidate these cooperatives. I wish to submit, Mr Speaker. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Did the committee chairperson have some matter that she wanted to comment on, briefly?

4.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you. In the event that the minister is not here, I will just give information to the Shadow Minister for Tourism on only two or three issues.

One, the Uganda Wildlife Conservation Education Centre has embarked on reviving wildlife clubs in schools and there is a budget to that effect. Therefore, I would like to allay the fears of the honourable member. This initiative may not start with all schools but at least they have embarked on reviving these clubs. Schools will be chosen according to regions, because we emphasised the issue of equity; so that they revive the spirit of wildlife clubs.

There is also money to carry out feasibility studies to establish wildlife education centres regionally. For the year 2016/17, two regional zoos or wildlife education centres are going to be studied. There is land that has been given by the local governments and the cultural institutions for the establishment of these centres, so that we decongest Entebbe where the whole country has been trekking to for conservation education.

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife and Antiquities is working with cultural institutions for the Miss Tourism Pageant because culture and heritage are appreciated and encouraged for conservation and as a tourism product. I am sure that even wildlife clubs will be brought on board to support the Miss Tourism Pageant and to share education on conservation of culture and heritage.

The Uganda Wildlife Authority trained and deployed researchers and technical people that are doing all it takes, not only at Karuma but also at the national parks where oil is being extracted, to ensure that wildlife recovers and returns. The honourable member can get more information from the Uganda Wildlife Authority about that because as a committee, we were concerned but we were informed that a team of technical people is trained to research and find strategies to bring back the wildlife to their natural habitat after those activities of extraction are done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I thank you, honourable minister and Members. 

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee chairperson has 10 minutes.

4.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am aware that I have 10 minutes but this is a document for two ministries, but I will try my best. 

Mr Speaker, before I read the report, I would like to lay on the Table the following documents:
    a) A file containing minutes of the committee on the deliberations that enriched this report;
    b) Status of the standard gauge railway and the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area light railway transport;
    c) A clearance letter for the contract of the design, printing and supply of computerised driving permits, for extension of the lease agreement between Meera Investments and Face Technologies Ltd; 
    d) An agreement for design, printing and supply of computerised driving permits; and 
    e) Addendum No. 1 for supplying computerised driving permits. I beg to lay these documents on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents.      

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, under Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution, section 13 (4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 177 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, the Sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure is mandated to, inter-alia examine critically Government recurrent and development budget estimates and make recommendations on them for general debate in the House, and to examine and comment on policy matters affecting the ministries covered by them. 

To fulfil these mandates, it is my honour and pleasure to present for your consideration and adoption the report of the committee in respect to the policy statements and budgetary provisions for the fiscal year 2016/2017 for the following votes: 
1. 	Vote 012 - Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development;
2. 	Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission;
3. 	Vote 016 - Ministry of Works and Transport;
4. 	Vote 113 - Uganda National Roads Authority;
5. 	Vote 118 - Uganda Road Fund; and
6. 	Votes 500, 501-850 - Local Governments.

Mr Speaker, I beg to omit the methodology. However, we interacted with all the ministries and analysed all the ministerial policy statements and the alternative policy statements from the Opposition. The Members can read the structure of the report on page 5; I will omit that too. I will now go to 3.1.	

Structure of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development 
The ministry is delineated into five vote functions, namely:
Vote function 1 - 	Land administration and management;
Vote function 2 - 	Physical planning and urban development;
Vote function 3 – 	Housing;
Vote function 4 - 	Policy, planning and support services; and
Vote function 5 - Government land administration, otherwise known as the Uganda Land Commission. 

There is a budget framework presented in table 1. I think Members can read that as the figures are very clear. Under achievements of the previous financial year, I implore Members to read what the ministry considers as achievements on land administration and management on page 7. The same goes for 3.3.1, physical planning and urban development; 3.3.3 on housing; 3.3.4 on policy, planning and support services on page 8. I am going to skip the entire page 9 because I will come back to it for the summary of figures.

Under the planned activities and programmes for financial year 2016/17, we have land administration and management, followed by 5.2 on physical planning and urban development. That page is very clear and Members can read it because we have been requested to summarise.

Unfunded Priorities under Vote 012

The key funding issues for consideration by Parliament are:
    a) Land Information Systems Implementation and Maintenance: Shs 1.43 billion was required in the financial year 2015/16 as a supplementary for maintaining the existing six ministerial zonal offices and was not carried forward in the budget for the financial year 2016/17. 

    b) Delay in operationalisation of ministerial zonal offices: A total of Shs 6.44 billion is required for the operationalisation of the ministerial zone offices and Shs 1.43 billion for the maintenance of the offices; thus, a total funding gap of Shs 7.87 billion is required by the ministry.

    c) Inadequate office accommodation: The ministry requires start-up funds to supplement the existing Shs 1 billion under the project support of the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development to plan for preliminary activities of constructing office accommodation.

    d) The implementation of the National Land Policy requires an additional Shs 0.5 billion for countrywide awareness and dissemination. 

    e) Development of a national physical development plan and the enforcement of physical development plans at district level require Shs 8.7 billion.

Vote 156 - Uganda Land Commission

Mr Speaker, Uganda Land Commission has got a mission statement and there is a table showing the budget performance for the financial year 2015/2016, which I will skip. I will come back to page 13 for a summary of the figures when we are requesting for the funds to be released.

Selected planned activities/output for the financial year 2016/2017: They need to compensate 3,500 hectares of land and issue 600 leases for Government land. They need to collect Shs 3 billion of non-tax revenue. They need to process 60 Government land titles and sensitise and register 1,000 bona fide and lawful occupants.

Observations and Recommendations

Finalisation of a Legal Framework for Land Laws and Policies

The committee took great concern at the slow progress of the finalisation of several land related laws including the critical Uganda Land Commission Bill, 	the Landlord Tenant Bill, the Survey and Mapping Bill, the Land Information and Infrastructure Bill, the Registration of Titles (Amendment) Bill, Surveyors Registration (Amendment) Bill, and the Land Acquisition (Amendment) Bill. This has taken long  despite the committee’s recommendation over the years to have such legal instruments in place. 

The committee continues to recommend that all land related laws and policies be fast tracked to enable a guided growth in the sector. A steering committee should be formed to oversee the completion of these legal instruments and report to the committee on the progress of these laws within a period of six months of adoption of this report.

Border Disputes

The committee noted that both international and local border disputes have persisted unresolved despite this issue appearing severally in the minister’s statements over the years; notably the undefined boundaries between Uganda and South Sudan, the Migingo Island and the local boundaries between Teso and Karamoja regions.

The committee recommends that the ministry unrelentingly continues to engage the partner states so that a survey of all Uganda’s borderlines is done once and for all to avoid further international border conflicts. The ministry should adequately budget for the process of surveying international borderlines to avoid being dependent on donor funding in resolving urgent border conflicts that may end up escalating into loss of lives and property.

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should also liaise with the Ministry of Local Government and district leaders in surveying all local boundaries so that they are informed of the decisions being taken. This is to curb the rampant contestation of survey results in the country. The committee urges the minister to bring up the issue on the Cabinet agenda so that a deliberate work plan is developed to tackle the issue.

Proliferation of Slums

The committee further noted that the sector proposes to spend Shs 2 billion on the upgrade of slums through provision of basic social services like water, drainage channels and saving schemes. This comes at a time when there are unplanned settlements and slums, caused in part by poor regulatory mechanisms, and we lack a national shelter strategy on development of low income housing, and lack of a national slum profile should be discouraged.

The committee recommends that before the ministry thinks of upgrading slums, all the necessary policy and legal frameworks should be in place. Such actions can instead attract more unplanned settlements and slums if done in the absence of a legal and policy framework, thereby creating more slums.

Contestation of Compensation Rates

The committee recommends that the ministry develops and maintains consistency in the methods it uses in computing and valuing for land compensations. The process should also be subjected to annual reviews as stipulated by the laws.

The ministry should also continuously carry out sensitisation of project affected persons to contain their over expectation, as most of them do not have access to uniform information regarding the fate of their properties.

The ministry should also ensure that those who receive their compensation in full indeed leave the project areas. Their continued stay has sometimes bred the feeling of undervaluing their properties and occupying the road reserves and thereafter claiming for compensation for another time.

Management of Public Land

The committee notes with concern the rampant grabbing of public land, which the Uganda Land Commission is mandated to manage and preserve. According to the ministerial policy statement of the sector, out of 307 local governments, over 38 per cent, that is, 117 of them, lack land titles where council properties are situated. This is in part attributed to failure to institute district land boards.

Likewise, the committee noted that there are those who have continued to be issued land titles in wetlands in complete disregard of the law, thereby interfering with road projects in some areas – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, summarise. 

MR BIRAARO: Mr Speaker, I will go to page 9 of the report. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development proposes a budget for the financial year 2016/2017 as follows:

The proposed budget is Shs 127.3 billion for vote 112. The same ministry under the Uganda Land Commission, also proposes a budget of Shs 15.606 billion for its operations. The committee recommends this budget.

The Ministry of Works and Transport, in respect of the mainstream budget, has a proposed budget of Shs 401.735 billion for its operations for the financial year 2016/2017. The same ministry proposes a budget allocation for Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) of Shs 2634.119 billion for the financial year 2016/2017. The Ministry of Works and Transport under the Uganda Road Fund also proposes Shs 417.84 billion to run its operations in the financial year 2016/2017. Mr Speaker and colleagues, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for this report.

4.53
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. The chairperson has talked about grabbing of public land, but I think we also have a bigger problem in our communities concerning rampant eviction of people. I, therefore, propose, if this has not been budgeted for, that we strengthen the land departments and land boards at district level so that there is continuous sensitisation about the existing laws and the people are prepared to protect their land. Otherwise, the situation is overwhelming and Adjumani District is a victim of that.

Secondly, he has not read the whole report but the Atiak-Adjumani-Afoji Road has always been a priority under the Ministry of Works and Transport. When the President visited us last year, he promised that next year this road would be constructed. I know it is a long process, but can we be availed with the list of the roads that are going to be constructed in this financial year, those that we are preparing for, so that we can give adequate information to the communities? Thank you.

4.52
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, the honourable member who has presented this report should take note of the following:

It is on record that in 2014 KCCA, in open disregard of the petition that I moved here on the Floor of the House, went ahead to evict people from the railway corridor right from Kibuye, Ndeeba, Nateete and Busega. The committee took it upon themselves to go and see what had happened. I would like to know what the committee has so far done for all these years. 

Is it not problematic for anyone to assume that the committee should approve their budget when such a big disorder has not been attended to? We seem not to have a Government in establishment. People make noise using proper channels and time is given to those concerned to do something but nothing is done. What do you expect people to do? Before any approval of money is done, you should answer that giant query.

4.53
MS DOROTHY KABARAITSYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. However, it is not detailed. 

I would like to inquire whether there has been an increase in funds for the Road Fund. This is because in the previous years, we have been allocating money through projects such as the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme (CAIIP) and the District Livelihood Support Programme. Very many districts benefitted from these two programmes and they have constructed first-class murram roads but there is no money for maintenance. Therefore, I would like to ask the chairperson and the Minister for Works and Transport whether they have increased the money for the Road Fund to cater for these beautiful roads so that our people in our districts make use of them. Thank you.

4.53
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson for the good report, although he has not had sufficient time to present.

Mr Speaker, for quite some time, it has been the policy of Government to tarmac all roads leading to district headquarters. I would like to ask the minister whether it is possible for him to give us the names of those districts that do not have tarmacked roads leading to their headquarters and what plans they have for them. The reason I ask this is because there have been promises made and it is important that we keep in mind that these roads need to be done.

The issue of maintenance as well as construction of roads without putting water channels is a big one. I do hope that in the budget, there are sufficient funds for channels and maintenance of the roads that we have. Thank you.

4.54
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee and the committee Members for this report, as well as the cooperation and support that they have extended to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

Mr Speaker, the committee made several recommendations and we would like to give an undertaking that we are going to take time off and make sure that we work on all these recommendations because they really stem from our policy statement. However, I would like to apprise the House in regard to specific areas, if I can be permitted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, the first recommendation was to do with finalisation of a legal framework for land laws and policies. We have been working on these laws and policies and I would like to assure the House that the development is fairly advanced. The principles for the amendment of the laws have been developed and are due for submission to Cabinet for consideration and approval.

The second one is the issue of border disputes, which has come up a number of times. We discussed this in the committee. Our view, particularly in regard to our international boundaries, is that the NRM Government has persistently engaged the neighbouring countries with the view of ensuring that there is peace and harmony between our country and the neighbouring countries. It is, however, true that in order for us to have a comprehensive programme for opening up of these boundaries, we need to get joint technical committees named, comprising members of the neighbouring states and our country. 

However, some of the neighbouring states have not been as forthcoming as they would have been required. A case in point is South Sudan, where we have had incursions in the Moyo, Lamwo, Kidepo and Yumbe areas. They took a long time to name the committee that we would work with. They have, however, now named the committee and we have had a joint border exercises of sensitising the people in regard to what the two governments are going to do. We want to make sure that there are clear mark stones and there is densification of the mark stones along the boundaries so that the incursions stop.

In addition, under the African Union there is a programme of re-demarcating the boundaries of all the African states and they are providing us with financial and technical support. There is also a programme for ensuring that the socio economic issues of the peoples within the boundary areas are addressed. This is because some of the countries do not work out clear programmes for service delivery along the border areas and in the process their people are forced to move to neighbouring states. We have discussed this under the African Union and I am sure a solution is going to be found.

Regarding the contentious issue of Migingo, we are in contact with our brothers and sisters from Kenya. I met the Kenyan minister on Friday and Saturday and we discussed this. We had decided to concentrate on the hot spots in the dry land areas and had left the marine area for consideration for demarcation at a later stage. However, in light of some of the pressures which are building up from Kenya, both Uganda and Kenya will be in position to come up with a programme that will see us re-establish the boundary between the two states sooner than later.

As for the internal boundaries, it is true that we have had problems. However, this is a governance issue and we have requested our colleagues in the Ministry of Local Government to do more work in sensitising leaders in regard to what they are expected to do as well as their mandates. This is because we are now getting some new leaders who think that they need to be remembered for having increased on the size or territory of their districts, sub-counties and so forth when actually they are not supposed to do that. However, we hope that constant engagement with the district leaders will help us contain some of those pressures and reduce or get rid of these inter-boundary districts disputes.

We have been dealing with the issue of Napak and Katakwi. In fact, this last Sunday, we had a meeting of the leaders of Katakwi and Napak, chaired by the First Lady. By and large, we solved the issues that have been causing problems between these two areas. However, the people of Napak still need to be convinced that the boundary is where it is supposed to be, that the acacia trees which they used to know, some of which were cut down, were actually not the boundary. Therefore, there is a lot of talking that we have to do. The President was extremely kind to us; there was an aerial tour of the boundaries and leaders were able to see from the sky where exactly the boundaries lie, even on mountain tops.

On the issue of the boundary between Congo and Uganda in the Vurra area, which has also been coming up, on 29th of this month we are sending a team which is going to meet with the Congolese team. We are going to do the boundary re-demarcation on that day.

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of proliferation of slums. Our National Land Policy and Vision 2040 envisage improving on the lives of our people, particularly those who have decided to settle in the urban areas and are living in areas which are not planned and referred to as slums. It is true that we have had a lot of problems trying to convince people, particularly the political leaders, that we need to change the conditions of their people, much as they continue to argue that we should not disturb the status quo of their people. 

It is an African agendum that the slums that Africa presently has must be gotten rid of. This is happening in Nairobi, it has happened in Addis Ababa and it will have to happen even in Uganda. Mr Speaker, you chaired the debate on Kasokoso. I hope we shall not have any such debate again because it is not progressive. Our people deserve better and they need to stay in well-planned areas. They need utilities and better shelter. This is what the NRM Government would like to do.

Contestation of compensation rates in project areas and by project affected people: it is true that there has been apprehension expressed in regards to some of the rates that have been offered for compensation purposes. These rates are actually set by the districts and are approved by our ministry through the office of the Chief Government Valuer. We have provided this and in situations where project affected persons do not accept these rates, they are free to appeal. They can even go to court.

However, we must have a framework and guiding figures that we must use. In some areas, for instance - the oil producing areas and areas with minerals - people would like to be given special rates. However, these rates are also supposed to apply to other things that are being compensated for in the district. Now, if we come up with excessive rates, the districts, projects and even the national treasury will run into problems. However, this is a matter which we can still discuss and be in position to find a solution to.

Mr Speaker, there was the issue of management of public land, which is mainly under the Uganda Land Commission. This is a matter we are paying serious attention to. When we come up with the Land (Amendment) Bill here, this matter is going to receive more attention. I am sure, at the end of the day we shall be able to register better results than we have been registering lately.

There was the issue of developing an inventory for Government land. There is an inventory, except that it is not comprehensive. Fortunately, we have secured funding under the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project; we shall be able to deploy some of the resources that have been availed to ensuring that a more comprehensive land inventory for Government is put in place, so that everybody is certain about what Government land is and what it is not. Therefore, we will be in position to manage it in a manner that one would have expected.

On the issue of registration of land brokers and agents, the process of registration of land brokers and agents is being finalised by my ministry. Soon, agents will be required to register with the ministry. Those who do not act and conduct their business in the manner that will have been spelled out will have to be penalised. There will be sanctions against those who do not comply with the set regulations and guidelines.

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of inadequate land registration and physical planning. The issue of inadequate land registration is one that Government has taken note of. Under the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project, we have set a target of registering one million parcels of land. We have also decided that even in areas where land titles have not been so popular, we are developing programmes for popularising land titles so that we can be able to register parcels of land.

As for physical planning, the Physical Planning Act, 2010 requires us to plan for the whole country. Our failure has only been on account of the fact that we do not have sufficient budgetary support in order to be in a position to deliver on this mandate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.

MR MIGEREKO: Mr Speaker, as I wind up, We totally agree with the committee’s recommendation on the issue of budgetary allocations to the sector. We clearly deserve greater budgetary consideration and I hope this time round, we shall be in position to access the same. I thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable members, for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

5.08
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Works and Transport does not have so many issues; that is why we were not mentioned a lot today, and the questions I received are specific.

Hon. Ababiku wanted to know whether the Atiak-Adjumani-Afoji Road is on the list of the roads to be tarmacked this coming financial year. The answer is yes and no, in the sense that we have 35 projects which are on-going - construction, reconstruction and rehabilitation. All the money, especially Government money, has been allocated to on-going projects. We are bringing on board only two projects on the Government funded money, and that is, the Hoima-Butiaba Road and the Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto Road. That is what we could do within the budget we have in the next financial year. However, on a happy note, for Afoji, we have put aside Shs 10 billion for land acquisition so as to prepare for upgrading in the other financial year. 

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi mentioned the evictions by KCCA from the railway reserves. These evictions will continue. This land belongs to the railway. It does not belong to the people to grab. We shall continue evicting them. We have been working together, so I appeal to you not to encourage people to come back to the reserves. 

On the increment of the Road Fund, it is true that there are some roads which are constructed under different programmes. Sometimes they are constructed to good standard but we do not have money to maintain them. Uganda has got 80,000 kilometres of roads; if I am to maintain these roads and keep them motorable all year round, I would need more than a trillion shillings, which we do not have. 

Unfortunately, the Road Fund has not been receiving any increment for the last four years. In the ministry, we have designed a programme so that in the subsequent years, starting with the previous financial year, we balance road development with road maintenance. We must scale down road development; it does not make any economic sense to continue building roads that you cannot maintain. We must, therefore, balance the two.

If anybody is affected and there has been a delay in upgrading their road, please understand the situation. As we speak, we need about Shs 650 billion in order to cater for the backlog of the tarmac roads. However, we do not have that money. Mr Speaker, we are soon scaling down the upgrading of tarmac roads so that we can transfer the money to road maintenance. 

It is true that under the Uganda Transport Master Plan, all roads leading to district headquarters are supposed to be first-class tarmac. I think we have started on this; there is steady progress in implementing this. (Laughter) 

Hon. Kamateeka should have been candid and asked when the road going to Mitooma District headquarters will be tarmacked. I think it will start soon. It is not like the coming of Jesus Christ where they say he is coming back soon and it has not yet happened. Starting with the next financial year, this road is going to be built because we have already designed it. In the next financial year, we are going to acquire land and it will be done using our internal labour in order to make it a little bit less costly. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, the honourable Minister of Works and Transport should be more serious than he is because when we speak - (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, everybody, including my wife and relatives, know that I am a very serious man. (Laughter) Is hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi “the man” who runs into yams when things go wrong, in order to insinuate that I am not serious? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have listed witnesses to attest to your seriousness. I have no facility of listening to the witnesses so I am unable to rule on it. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. If a minister says, “We are going to evict them whether they like it or not”, what does he mean? A matter was officially tabled in this House regarding a number of people who have been residing in that area for over 20 years. It was resolved that KCCA should wait until the appropriate committee had framed the matter and looked into it, but KCCA unilaterally went ahead to evict the people. That is why I sought to know your seriousness because as a minister, you are expected to abide by the law. Recently, in South Africa, there was such a case - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, deal with the clarification. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I would like to know what you meant by what you said. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, what I meant is what he said- we shall continue evicting these people. They should know that these are reserves. I do not know what the honourable member wants. Does he want the railway to move or the people to move? If you can give me land elsewhere, I will move the railway line there. However, the habit of people occupying well demarcated Government reserves must stop. They are well aware of the fact that this land does not belong to them and yet they occupy it by force. That is what I meant. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we wind this up, honourable members? 

5.12
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add to hon. Jesca Ababiku’s request about land grabbing. If you read the report properly, we have agreed with the ministry and we are pushing very hard to ensure that there will be systematic demarcation. At one point in time, every piece of land in Uganda will have a title. What we lack are funds. 

We have also appealed to the ministry, and we would want everybody’s cooperation and effort, to see to it that the staff in the ministry become more disciplined so that the individual title requests become cheaper. We have got cases; for example, Bushenyi Local Government failed to get a title because it is expensive in Mbarara for unknown reasons. We are, therefore, moving very fast and we are very serious about that. 

The list of the roads has been uploaded on your iPads in the edited report; I will delve into bits and pieces. The other issue is about the roads by KCCA, CAIIP, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Agriculture and PRDP. Our committee’s stand is that all roads should be harmonised under the Ministry of Works and Transport so that in case of any possible road development, there is a plan to maintain that road. It does not make any business sense for CAIIP money to be distributed and scattered all over ministries and when the roads are made, they deteriorate within a three-month period. Concerning the Road Fund, the answer is above. 

Mr Speaker, I will comment on an issue that the Minister of Works and Transport did not respond to very well. He needs to reconcile his position with hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s. We went to KCCA and toured the railway line. We handled some of the several petitions we had and as this Parliament closes, we are going to leave about 25 petitions unattended to. It is a heavy backlog.

However, we said the ministries concerned should sensitise the people. The ministries and Government departments should defend their assets. They should not allow people to squat on the land and then be evicted. It creates a bad precedent and damages the Government’s reputation. We need to do more protection. That is why we are saying that the moment someone is compensated, they should be made to vacate that location.

Hon. Kamateeka, for your information, roads from Rukungiri will move through Kashenyi up to Mitooma in the meantime. The second phase will be from Mitooma up to Rukungiri. However, it is on the plan. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had closed contributions and we had gone to the other side; we still have this report and we have this timeframe that is pressing. Can we move forward and have other reports?

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I totally agree with the minister. We should get serious with those people who are building on road reserves and railway reserves. I agree with him, and on that I will defend him. 

However, the clarification I seek from the minister is about the Kaberamaido–Katine–Ochero Road. This road has been on the Government plan for grade C tarmac. Will you kindly give me information about it? Now that I will not be in the Tenth Parliament, even if I access it through the archives I will be grateful. I thank you.

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The minister mentioned that some money has been allocated for compensation in the process of the acquisition of land for the construction of roads. Honourable minister, we have the Musita-Lumino-Busia Road that has been in the system of Government for now over a year when you got a contractor. When I interfaced with the contractor and UNRA, I realised that the biggest obstacle now for construction of this road is compensation. 

However, honourable minister, you have not engaged the leadership, especially the politicians. We realised that there are people on that road who are willing to give land so that the construction can begin. Can we get to know what your programme is for that road? If the money is not there, can you clarify what can be done along with the leadership in order to see to it that we construct the road?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Honourable minister, since I am speaking possibly for the last time in this House -(Laughter)– I think I should be heard. It is also on record that some of these people you are side-lining have been living on those corridors for the last 30 years. 

I would like to inform you that those I referred to have already gone to court. Whereas you could have talked to them and possibly sorted the matter out, you chose to go wild and let them do what they wanted and in the end, they are going to capitalise on the taxpayers’ money because court will give them endowments. Are you aware of that?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, for Kaberamaido, we were supposed to do what they call a low cost seal on that road. The programme is still on, except that there were so many enzymes which were being brought into the country and almost all manufacturers said theirs worked better. We therefore decided to test some of these materials to get the most suitable for the conditions of our soils, because the soils out there are different from our soil. Most of these are organic substances. We have zeroed down on about two and I think we are going to resume the programme of low cost seal on that road. It is one of the roads which have been identified for that programme.

For the Musita-Lumino-Busia Road, it is true that in the third quarter we received little money. I think everybody knows the exercise that was going on in this country at that time. However, I am happy to inform the honourable member that this quarter, we have received some good money and we are going to resume the compensations. 

I am also happy to hear that there are some people who willing to give land. From here, I will immediately inform the Uganda National Roads Authority to exploit that opportunity, where they can get more land to give the contractor to continue with the construction, as we look for more money to compensate them. I appreciate that good gesture.

On hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi’s submission, that people have lived in the railway reserves for over 30 years, it does not matter when somebody invaded your house. When they were invading these railway lines, they knew that the land did not belong to them. It does not matter. 

I do not know how he has read the mind of the judge that I am going to lose the case and the Government is going to pay; you are very fantastic, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man. I do not know whether you are a messiah. However, do not encourage people to grab Government land. I ask you kindly that as you leave this Parliament, go down there and as you start engaging yourself in growing, – (Laughter) - please stop people from grabbing Government land. I thank you.

MS TAAKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like the Minister of Works and Transport to at least clarify on the position of Busia Municipality. According to what was planned, we were supposed to have some tarmac roads. It is now over six years since Busia became a municipality and we have never had any tarmac roads.

Honourable minister, when you came to Busia to launch the highway, you saw how bad the work was on the drainage systems, which are so huge. Women and children fall inside those trenches and end up breaking their limbs. I would like to know what you intend to do about it. Thank you.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Mr Speaker, about Busia Municipality, this is true; it is a Government policy now that whenever there is a tarmac road under construction and it passes through a municipality, we leave four kilometres for that municipality. For the Lumino-Majanji-Busia Road, you have got four kilometres to tidy up the municipality, which I hear is a city.

Concerning the big trenches, they are forced on us; we do not want them either. Because of our people’s behaviour of throwing rubbish anyhow, we are forced to have open trenches. Busia is a flat town; actually, when you pour water, you cannot easily tell where it will flow. The water flows slowly, so you cannot have self-cleaning trenches, where water runs very fast and takes the rubbish with it. When you go to Busia, therefore, you will find heaps of matooke peelings, kaveera and all other stuff you can imagine. Once you cover the drainage channels, it takes only a week for them to be blocked. Therefore, we had to take a decision to keep them open so that they are cleaned on a regular basis.

However, that notwithstanding, we would like to have some regular crossings. I think when the contractor reaches Busia he will be compelled to put those crossings so that people can easily cross from one side to the other without difficulty. That is the only problem. Otherwise, I love towns with covered drains but conditions do not allow us. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

I think that there is another question here. With your permission, Mr Speaker, I do not know whether I can respond to it –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Can we have the next item? 

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have 10 minutes. 

5.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before I start my presentation, allow me to lay on the Table the report of the committee and the minutes of the meetings. 

Mr Speaker, owing to the time constraint, I will read the executive summary as it should suffice for Members to know exactly what we are presenting to the House.

In accordance with rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the sectoral Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs examined and considered the ministerial policy statements of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and of the departments and agencies that fall thereunder, as well as that of the Parliamentary Commission, for the financial year 2016/2017 and now reports to the House.  

Mr Speaker, the 10 institutional votes that fall under the Justice Law and Order Sector (JLOS) include:
Vote 007 – Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; 
Vote 101 – Judiciary; 
Vote 102 – Electoral Commission; 
Vote 103 – Inspectorate of Government; 
Vote 105 – Uganda Law Reform Commission; 
Vote 106 – Uganda Human Rights Commission; 
Vote 109 – Law Development Centre; 
Vote 119 – Uganda Registration Services Bureau; 
Vote 133 – Directorate of Public Prosecutions; and 
Vote 148 – Judicial Service Commission. 
Together with this, we also considered vote 104, which is the Parliamentary Commission. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to go to the overview of the sector. The released budget for the sector performed at 61 per cent by the end of December 2016. The budget components of non-wage and development performed above 50 per cent largely because of the over performance of vote 102 - the Electoral Commission - in conducting the general elections. 

The sector’s proposed budget for the financial year 2016/2017 is Shs 300.63 billion, which is a reduction of Shs 230 billion from the approved budget of Shs 530 billion for the financial year ending 2015/2016. This reduction is mainly due to the reduction of the budget for the Electoral Commission from Shs 295 billion in this financial year ending 2015/2016 to Shs 59.09 billion for the financial year 2016/2017. 

Procurement including Procurement of Land and Construction of Buildings to House Institutions in the Sector

Mr Speaker, most of the institutions under JLOS still occupy rented structures. The committee is happy to report that many of these have embarked on the process of constructing their own premises. Notable among these is the JLOS House that is planned to be a one-stop centre for most of the institutions in the sector.  

The committee recommends that Government provides the requisite funding to fulfil its obligations as envisaged under the various building projects. With respect to the JLOS House, for example, Government should prioritise execution of the guarantees/capital contribution equivalent to 10 per cent of construction costs, which is equivalent to $10 million, as required under the Public Private Partnership (PPP) arrangement of the JLOS House project.

Harmonisation of Salaries and Emoluments 

Mr Speaker, the committee reiterates its observation from the ministerial policy statements for financial years 2014/2015 and 2015/2016; institutions in JLOS such as the Inspectorate of Government, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and the Law Reform Commission have received salary enhancements while some others such as the Directorate of Public Prosecutions (DPP), Electoral Commission and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs are still operating on old salary structures. 

This disparity in salaries has resulted in a number of problems such as high level of staff turnover, low motivation levels, staff prone to corruption and poor staff performance. During the meeting of the committee with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs this year, he actually informed the committee that the Directorate of Public Prosecutions had become a training ground for attorneys who move on to the private sector where there is more pay. Moreover, Government loses much money in employing poorly remunerated and poorly motivated staff, who may not have the zeal and expertise to diligently carry out their duties, particularly those which entail representation of Government in courts of law. Besides, because of the poor pay, JLOS institutions are often unable to attract the most experienced and sought after professionals.  

The committee reiterates its recommendation made in previous reports on ministerial policy statements that the establishment of a salaries review commission be expedited. Fortunately, the constitutional amendments required for this body to be established have already been passed by this Parliament. 

Without prejudice to the foregoing, the committee further recommends that in the medium-term, institutions such as the Electoral Commission, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, which are in dire need of a salary enhancement to enable them pay a living wage to their staff, be given urgent consideration. Moreover, in most cases, certain salary increment proposals were already agreed to between the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Public Service Commission and the respective institutions. Indeed, while the committee is cognisant of the President’s guidance to staying increase of salaries of public servants in financial year 2016/2017, the committee proposes that this moratorium be reconsidered for institutions that have not received any salary review or increment as observed above. 

Action taken by the votes to implement the recommendations of Parliament in respect to the report of the Auditor-General of the preceding financial year 2014/2015: Mr Speaker, the committee was unable to make a finding on this aspect, as Parliament had not pronounced itself on these reports.  

Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance
The committee noted that most of the policy statements under JLOS were certified as they passed the gender and equity budgeting assessment. To that effect, they identified gender and equity issues and included responsive interventions within the planned outputs and activities. Additionally, budgetary allocations were made to the listed gender and equity responsive interventions.  The scores are as below: 
    a) Director Public Prosecutions – 86 per cent;
    b) Electoral Commission – 72 per cent; 
    c) Uganda Law Reform Commission – 69 per cent;
    d) Uganda Human Rights Commission – 64 per cent
    e) Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - 60 per cent; and 
    f) Inspectorate of Government - 51 per cent.

Two institutions scored below the pass mark, and that is the Judiciary at 40 per cent and the Judicial Service Commission at 32 per cent. The Law Development Centre and the Uganda Registration Services Bureau did not submit their ministerial policy statements to the Equal Opportunities Commission for assessment. Some institutions informed the committee that they did not particularly appreciate the specific indicators for measuring the variables of gender and equity responsiveness.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Equal Opportunities Commission clarifies the indicators for gender and equity responsiveness with respect to each of the institutional votes so that the institutions may ensure compliance.

Cash Flow Projections and Donor Funding

The committee notes with concern that the funding gap between the projected and affordable figures generally remains high.  The third Strategic Investment Plan (SIP III) ends next financial year, 2016/2017, and the ministry plans to usher in SIP IV. However, while this must be informed by the availability of financial resources for continuity, the committee is concerned that inadequacy and uncertainty of funds still exists. The committee further notes with deep concern that the Uganda Human Rights Commission, vote 106, is largely donor-funded. 

For purposes of strengthening democracy, the committee recommends that Government gradually increases its funding to the sector, with a goal to self-sustenance.    

Vehicle Utilisation

The committee recommends that Government increases the budget for motor vehicles for the institutions or amends the law to extend the period of board-off. 
 
Asset Registers

After scrutinising the various asset registers, the committee noted that some institutions did not have proper internal auditors. Additionally, there are instances of untitled land, moreover which is not reflected in the asset registers.

The committee recommends that all such institutions recruit the requisite qualified personnel for purposes of internal audit.  Additionally, institutions are urged to process -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, time is up. Would you like to summarise?

MR TASHOBYA: I do not know whether it is in the interest of this House that I go to - Mr Speaker, may I be given some three minutes to read through because I have very many accounting institutions and I think it is fair that I read through the recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, three minutes.

MR TASHOBYA: The committee recommends that the Executive expedites the tabling of the Judiciary (Administration) Bill.  The committee recommends that in the event that Government continues to delay with the Bill, Parliament should take it up through a private Member’s Bill which is already before Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Bills mentioned above, that is the Legal Aid Policy Bill, the Witness Protection Bill and the Law Reform Revision Bill, be handled expeditiously and tabled before this House.

The committee recommends that Government urgently provides the much needed Shs 33.1 billion to enable the Electoral Commission conduct the important elections for lower administrative units, that is,  LC I and LC II elections, that have not been held for the last 10 years.

Vote 103 – Inspectorate of Government.  

The committee reiterates its recommendation that Government commences the project in a phased manner with the goal of completing it in the next three years.

The committee further recommends that the Inspectorate of Government explores the option of partnering with development partners to support it in the meantime; after all, Government as already committed itself to fund the project.   

Vote 105 – Uganda Law Reform Commission  

We recommend that Shs 6.25 billion be provided for printing the seventh edition of the Laws of Uganda. We also recommend that Shs 3.3 billion be provided for translation of the Constitution into Ugandan languages.

Vote 106 – Uganda Human Rights Commission 

The recommendations are on page 6 and can be read by Members.

Vote 119 – Uganda Registration Services Bureau

The recommendations are on page 10 and can also be read by Members. 

The recommendations on the Directorate of Public Prosecutions are on page 10, from (a) to (e), and Members can read them. The recommendations of the committee on the Judicial Service Commission - vote 148 - are on page 10 and end on page 11 and may be read by Members. The recommendations for the Parliamentary Commission, vote 104, are on page 11 and end on page 12. 

In conclusion, the committee appeals to various institutions in JLOS and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to prioritise issues in the sector, particularly those that the committee has time and again identified as emerging priority issues. The committee concludes the report with the recommendation that Parliament approves the budget estimates for financial year 2016/2017 for the JLOS institutions and the Parliamentary Commission as hereunder:

    a) Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - Shs 81,695,532,000 billion;
    b) Judiciary - Shs 117,781,888,000;
    c) Electoral Commission - Shs 43,385,392,000;
    d) Inspectorate of Government - Shs 45,421,135,000;
    e) Uganda Law Reform Commission - Shs 16,605,535,000;
    f) Uganda Human Rights Commission - Shs 13,201,525,000;
    g) The Law Development Centre - Shs 14,004,289,000;
    h) Uganda Registration Services Bureau - Shs 18,960,000,000;
    i) Directorate of Public Prosecutions - Shs 29,154,758,000;
    j) Judicial Service Commission - Shs 3,178,942,000;
    k) Parliamentary Commission - Shs 540,606,943,000.

As I conclude, let me make one small comment on the Parliamentary Commission. As a committee, we are cognisant and aware about the concerns of the public about the expenditure of Parliament and the Parliamentary Commission. In performing our work, we made sure that the budget of the Parliamentary Commission by and large remains the same, except to cater for the increased numbers of Members of Parliament that are coming to the Tenth Parliament, that will need office space, salaries and facilitation at a level that we had in the Ninth Parliament.

I thank the Attorney-General, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and his deputy, fellow Members of Parliament in the committee and the staff members that helped and worked hard to have this report processed. I beg to report, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson, for this very comprehensive report. Your sectors are many but we do not have time. I am glad you were able to make it within the timeframe. Thank you very much.

5.52
MR PATRICK MULINDWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My concern is to do with the Justice, Law and Order Sector. We have seen many of our brothers and sisters spending a lot of time on remand in prisons without getting to see a judicial officer or justice. I sit on the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and we have visited some prisons and the main complaint is that there are prisoners who have spent seven to 10 years without ever seeing a judge. 

To make matters worse, those prisoners who are committed to the High Court do not go out to work; they, therefore, place a high burden on the taxpayer to feed them. However, this would not be a very big issue; the bigger issue is that they are denied justice and their rights, and they are kept in prison for a long time. I hope the sector will address that in this budget. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.54
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara East County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the issue of domestic arrears and court awards, recently the Auditor-General expressed fear that all measures set up by Government to clear these court awards are not yielding any results. I would love to hear a recommendation from the committee on how this is going to be addressed. 

This seriously affects our businessmen or business community. I would like to know the plans Government has because the amount is almost coming to half a trillion shillings in domestic arrears outstanding to business people. What plans does Government have to clear this backlog of outstanding domestic arrears? I thank you very much. 

5.55
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga South Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson for that good report, although he did not have sufficient time to read the details. In my view, at this point in time your report is a very crucial one. 

We hear that the Law Development Centre, for example, is producing so many lawyers annually, but what surprises me is that the performance of judicial officers, especially those that serve as state attorneys, is not convincing. It seems we are spending lots of money at random and there is no value for money because more often than not, we lose cases. I am now placing myself in the position of Government. Most of the cases coming up between X and Government or the Attorney-General are lost on the Government side. 

Therefore, I would like to propose as follows, and this proposal is going to create change, if Government takes it seriously. I propose that the court awards caused by the officers from the ministry who are negligent and errant be charged from the ministerial votes of consequential budgets. Why am I saying so? Recently, you heard of the case about oil - Severino v the Attorney-General; it cost Uganda Shs 13 billion but out of nothing. Even if you have read law, you can see what nothing is and what it is not. I would like to propose -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it paid?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am told it was paid. I hope it is hearsay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we would to know because what goes on record should be clear.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Investigations should be carried out because the information I have is that it was paid secretly.

5.57
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work done. We realise that there are a number of votes here and this was the biggest report, therefore we thank them. 

We need to know about the performance of our judges. Under the judicial code of conduct, a case is supposed to be determined - after it has been equally presented by both parties, a judgment must be given within 60 days. However, we have seen a number of cases in Uganda that have been concluded before judges or other judicial officers but it takes 10 years before a judgment is got. If you have a delayed judgment for five years and you are an investor, it means you have lost a lot. The committee should have come out with strong recommendations on judges and judicial officers who do not comply with the judicial code of conduct.

Another issue I would like to say is that Parliament is a noble House but if you do not speak for yourselves, you are bound to be attacked. Parliament does not have a strategic plan. If there is a strategic plan, then it is not adhered to. You realise that for five years we were squeezed here and some Members would not even come to deliberate because of space. This means the Tenth Parliament will be worse because we will have more than 450 Members of Parliament. If some ex officio Members are also appointed as ministers, we are bound to have a very big number. How is the Parliamentary Commission planning to handle this? 

Also, the Parliamentary Commission considers Members of Parliament only and they separate themselves from the common cadre staff. If the common cadre staff are the ones who prepare the meals we eat here and you disregard their feelings, it means they might even undermine your performance. I appeal to the Parliamentary Commission that when considering the benefits of the Members of Parliament, you give the staff equal treatment, but do not call them “honourable” because they are not Members of Parliament. However, concerning welfare, allowances, non-taxation, please consider them because we are in the same institution. Otherwise, we would be abusing Article 21 of the Constitution about equitable treatment of people who are in the same field.

Another issue is about court awards. As my colleague has said, it is very bad for a common man to give a loan to Government forcefully; if there is a court award to me and I am not paid, then it means I have been forcefully asked to give Government a loan, or a grant if I will never be paid. Why can’t we get all these court awards in the Budget Committee, hon. Tashobya, and we ensure that they have the first call on the budget because that is what the law says? Let us get all the unpaid monies in the budget because they qualify to be domestic arrears. They should get the first call when we are going to supply. Honourable members, I think we should move the motion that we enter the financial year without a backlog because we are punishing our masses.

We have seen the performance of the Judicial Service Commission. The Judicial Service Commission has no chairperson; so, if there is a problem that warrants going to the Judicial Service Commission, how will it be handled? Why should there be a delay in the appointment of a constitutional position? The chairman of Judicial Service Commission is a constitutional officer; he has a constitutional mandate to perform. Why should we have delayed appointments?

Finally, concerning the office of the Inspector General of Government, I would like to thank them for what they are doing but they need to have more resources, both financial and human, in order for them to fight corruption. The number of people who are corrupt in this country is more than the Christians and Muslims altogether. Therefore, we need a lot of capacity to fight those who are corrupt.

If we have an agency of Government that fights corruption and you are not facilitating that agency, then it is like we have children we do not want to feed and yet we want them to perform. Honourable members, I appeal that you will support me in advocating for added resources for the IGG and DPP to be able to give confidence to all Ugandans so that they know that they are secure and even when there are people who are corrupt, they are handled well, and even when the criminals are arrested there is enough time to handle them. 

It is very shameful, Mr Speaker; recently, I heard that there would be a lecture in honour of the late lawyer and prosecutor, Joan Kagezi. You are going to have a memorial service or lecture after a year and yet you are still looking for the people who killed Kagezi. Are you expecting capacity or incapacity? What will you give the people of Uganda and Kagezi’s family in that lecture? I suggest that we should learn to reward those who have performed so that it motivates those who are in service. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.05 
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to respond to the question on remand prisoners. As I said before, we have got quite a sizeable amount of case backlog and this is a result of shortage of judicial officers. We will try to do our level best using the number of judicial officers available to reduce the case backlog. However, as we all agree, Mr Speaker and honourable members, the current list in the courtroom is elastic. As the judicial officers dispose of cases, new cases keep coming up; so, it is a vicious cycle. Unless something robust is done to increase the number of judicial officers available, we shall be like a dog chasing its tail.

On a happy note, we shall come with a resolution to Parliament to increase the number of judges of the High Court, Court of Appeal and those at magisterial level. We hope Parliament will respond. We will bring this resolution very soon and we believe that once we increase the number of judicial officers available, then the issue of case backlog will be tackled.

The question concerning servicing domestic arrears depends on the resources available to Government. Whereas we would like to reduce Government’s indebtedness to her citizens, the amount of money available to the state and in the budget is inadequate. Similarly, domestic arrears are also elastic, because as you seek out Shs 100 billion today, tomorrow another Shs 100 billion comes on board as a result of transgressions of Government departments and agencies. You can never get rid of arrears of court awards because every other day, somebody goes to court to demand for their constitutional and legal rights and occasions the court awards.

On LDC, I am happy hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi brought out this matter, that LDC churns out lawyers every year and yet the performance of the state attorneys is wanting. It is true, and I would like to inform hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi that LDC churns out legal officers or lawyers for both Government and the private sector. At LDC, we give knowledge like any other institution of higher learning that dispenses knowledge. I would rather have a thousand lawyers out of Government employment on the streets than have 200 lawyers employed by Government when the population does not know its legal rights and has nobody to intercede for them in the courts of law.

We would have had the number of required state attorneys and judicial officers for the Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Directorate of Civil Litigation, directorate of advice to the Government, First Parliamentary Counsel, Electoral Commission, Uganda Human Rights Commission, arbitration cases if we had the requisite resources to pay these people. The Judiciary, the Directorate of Public Prosecutions and others can only expand in consonance with the resources that Government puts at our disposal - (Interruption) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you for giving way, honourable minister. Aware of the fact that Uganda is one of the known democracies in Africa and it is even known as a democracy worldwide, don’t you think it is a shame for cases of human rights violation to be dominant in courts of law, where Government is still paying colossal sums of money? How do you explain that?

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: It would not be a shame if hon. Lukyamuzi was not encouraging citizens to break the law and get into conflict with the police on the streets. Since some of these things occur and we are a democracy, it happens. We are not the only ones who have paid because of the conflict between citizens expressing their legal rights and law enforcement officers sometimes exceeding their mandate.

Mr Speaker, yesterday I read about a situation where the United States Government was paying $6 million as compensation for the killing of a child who was playing with a toy and a police officer mistook it for a weapon. So if it can happen in developed countries like the United States, surely I do not think it would be a shame when some of these things happened in a least developed country (LDC) like Uganda without sufficient police training, aids and modern equipment. 

Sometimes some of these things happen and they are very unfortunate and we apologise. If we had sufficient resources, we would equip our law enforcement agencies with modern equipment, training and appreciation of some of these situations. Since we are an LDC, as you know, some of these things happen. However, every attempt should be made to improve the situation. 

I am not glorifying what is going on; do not mistake me. I quite often criticise the behaviour of the police, as you know. However, I cannot condemn them when I have not equipped them with the correct appliances for maintaining the law and order which is necessary for you to be in Parliament in peace as you are now.

In the same vein, I would like to assure hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi that the famous Shs 13 billion of the Severino Twinobusingye case has been appealed in a court of law. The award has not been paid and indeed it was appealed in the Court of Appeal. We are waiting for the decision of the judges.

I must admit that the award was – I do not want to criticise the judicial officer who gave it, but it was a bit on the high side. That is why we decided that it should be appealed and the appeal is pending in the Court of Appeal. I hope the Court of Appeal will be more considerate. However, I can assure you that the money has not been paid, so the taxpayer has not lost anything.

I would like to respond to the issue raised by hon. Kwizera, that cases are closed and judgement takes more than six months to be delivered -(Interjection)- I am not aware of the judicial practice of delivering judgement in 60 days. If you would update me, I would appreciate it, but I know judgement is delivered after the judicial officer – (Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Thank you for giving way. I want to refer you to the judicial code of conduct which you are well conversant with. It requires that when the matter is concluded in court, within 60 days the judgement should be given.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, hon. Kwizera. You said that within 60 days the judgment should be given, but it is not standard practice. Judgement depends on the appreciation of the judicial officer handling the matter. If the judge has to listen to 1,000 transcripts, certainly this judicial officer cannot deliver judgment within 60 days. 

A judge has to be diligent, consider the matter, cross reference, read the authorities, compare the arguments of the litigants, the appellants and defenders, and read the law before coming up with a well-thought-out considered judgement. If it can be done within 60 days, well and good, but it is in the interest of justice that judicial officers are not pressed to deliver judgment, otherwise there will be misprision of justice. 

Hon. Kwizera, when judges take long to deliver a judgement, it is not because they want to do so. It is because of the workload they have and the complex nature of the cases. Sometimes you have a judge who is not conversant with cybercrime and he or she has been listening to a case involving cybercrime. This is a judge who trained before or who is BBC like me - BBC means “born before computer” – and this lady or gentleman has to refer to people who are knowledgeable about some of these matters to get correct interpretation so that they can render a fair and balanced judgement. Therefore, sometimes it will occasion taking longer than what you expect. So, please, bear with the judicial officers when they do not deliver to your expectations and please, allow them to do their work fairly and deliver justice.

On the issue of the Judicial Service Commission, I am glad to inform you that the selection of candidates to serve on the Judicial Service Commission has been completed. We submitted nominees to the President for comment and forwarding to Parliament for approval. Once Parliament has finished its supervisory role, then the Judicial Service Commission will be appointed. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the chairperson have some matters to respond to?

6.20 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Our regret is that we did not have enough time for the report because a number of issues that Members have raised are contained in the report either as recommendations or observations. The main issue affecting the JLOS sector and the ministry rotates around the poor financing of the institutions falling under JLOS. 

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi talked about the performance of staff in the Directorate of Public Prosecutions. I say that we should commend the lawyers in the Directorate of Public Prosecutions and the Inspectorate of Government. This is because in spite of the meagre remuneration, they have withstood harsh conditions and done their job, and this is manifested in the conviction levels that have risen over time.  

Lawyers in the Directorate of Public Prosecutions are paid about Shs 1 million; when compared to lawyers in private chambers, it is peanuts. As we look for better performance and outturn from these lawyers, we must also look at their remuneration. We must look support these institutions. 

We have been pleading with Parliament and Government to approve monies for transporting witnesses to court. Some of these cases are lost because witnesses are unable to attend court. This is the same with state attorneys. Some of the cases are lost because the lawyers are unable to attend court upcountry and at times, we are unable to pay the big awards given to the claimants. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you. The court awards arising from state attorneys not appearing are up to Shs 10 billion and yet if a state attorney had appeared, at a cost of Shs 2 million or maybe Shs 500,000 to go upcountry, the state would have won the case. 

I want to know whether Government wants to pay Shs 10 billion instead of paying Shs 1 million. If that is what Gen. Kahinda Otafiire wants, let him tell us that he wants Government to pay Shs 10 billion instead of Shs 1 million.

MR TASHOBYA: I think that at an appropriate time, the minister will respond. Our plea has been that we must provide money to defend Government because if you do not defend Government, we shall pay heavily in terms of damages and awards. On average, we require about Shs 1 million to prosecute or defend a case but in the current budget we provide less than Shs 30,000 per case. This money is to enable a state attorney to attend court, feed them and also fuel the vehicle.

On the matter of the court awards of Shs 478 billion, in the next financial year Government only provided Shs 9.8 billion. At that rate, it will take more than 50 years to pay this Shs 478 billion without even accumulating more awards during this time. As honourable members have pointed out, some of these people are private individuals or business persons whose assets are being sold. 

Our committee, last year and again this year, recommended that Government should come out with a comprehensive programme of ensuring that within three years, these court awards are cleared so that people get their money. In any case, Government has been paying some of these awards after the mandamus orders. Why do you have to wait for an order of mandamus to pay this money? Why don’t we budget for these awards and pay them through the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs – (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_) - I can only give way with the guarantee of the Speaker that I will have more time.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: This is a very important clarification. Mr Speaker, most of these court awards are deliberately accumulated by Government itself through its reluctance to abide by the law. Supposing Dr Kiiza Besigye wanted to collect these awards, how much would he collect after all the terror that you have subjected him to? This is a serious matter because you do not care about what you are supposed to do in terms of democracy so as to preserve and protect the rights of people.

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On the matter of the case backlog, I think that this Parliament should also recognise and thank the Judiciary and the judges. I should say that in the last one year, the case backlog has reduced from about 170 cases to about 110. How can we help the Judiciary? We can help by appointing new judicial officers, filling the vacancies available in court, recruiting more magistrates from the current 39 to the established 69 and providing money so that the judicial officers that we have can have more circuits and hear more cases.

On the judges taking long to make judgements, I think the Judiciary under the Chief Justice is doing something about this. They have come up with instructions and orders to streamline the performance of judicial officers. Judges and magistrates must deliver judgements within a given time so that justice is not just done but is done expeditiously.

Hon. Kwizera talked about Parliament taking into account the welfare of staff members. As chairperson of the committee and a Member of Parliament, as I go home I will be very proud that the committee and this Parliament have been very mindful about the welfare of staff. Last year, for example, amidst all the protestations from all corners, the Parliamentary Commission and Parliament stood firm to improve the welfare of staff members, and I think that our staff are very happy because their terms of service are competitive compared to other public servants out there. (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to make some clarification on Parliament because I am an interested party. I think we need somebody to speak on behalf of Parliament here. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has talked about compensations and the Minister of Finance planning and Economic about Mid-Term Expenditure Framework MTEF, but nobody has come up to speak to Parliament about Members of Parliament.

People are saying that we are paid very well and we enjoy life. I have noticed – Before I forget, today is 26 April, the day that Prof. Kabwegyere was born; so it is his birthday. I am happy to announce that Prof. Kabwegyere is now 75 years of age after deducting a few years; he would have been 80 years. (Laughter) Happy birthday! What I was trying to say is that – (Interjection) - No, he just dyes his hair but he is old and I know him. (Laughter) 

What I was trying to say is that we need to have somebody here to talk for Members of Parliament. The reason as to why I am raising this is because we are going to have 458 MPs and we are not so sure whether some are going to sit in the gallery or in the offices. It is a very serious matter and I do not know how it will be handled. 

Mr Chairman, as much as you have improved the welfare of staff, you must also improve where they sit. When I was studying accounts, there was a paper called management which hon. Bahati knows about. It teaches that one of the motivators is a good office - where you sit. If you sit on the floor, that cannot be motivation. If you want to walk but you do not have enough space to pass, that cannot be good motivation. Therefore, the Members of Parliament you are bringing are going to be non-performers if they are not well looked after. Those Members who are speaking are even leaving Parliament, so you will be in trouble.

The best you can do is maybe reduce the number now or we debate in instalments; some debate in the morning and others in the afternoon like some schools where some study in the morning and others in the afternoon. What we are saying is that we need somebody to speak on behalf of Parliament. Mr Speaker, if you do not mind, you can appoint me to speak for this Parliament. (Laughter)

MR TASHOBYA: Just as I wind up, Mr Speaker, I should say that the Parliamentary Commission has addressed the matter of speaking for Members of Parliament by strengthening the public relations department of Parliament. Those of you that have been following what comes out of Parliament will know that a lot comes out in terms of explaining the work of Members of Parliament and the circumstances of our work.

Going back to hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concerns, we as a committee and I, personally, share the same concern that there is no evidence that increasing constituencies necessarily improves services to the people; I agree with you. However, the unfortunate bit is that it is Parliament that passes these constituencies. We are the ones that approve the increment of these constituencies. That is why in spite of not increasing the take-home package of a Member of Parliament, our budget is increasing because we must have a chamber, office space and remuneration. Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity and I thank honourable members for their contributions and for listening to me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and honourable members, for the contributions you have made to this debate. Honourable members, we still have three reports to receive but I am informed that some are still being uploaded- health, agriculture and natural resources. Once they are ready, we shall proceed for another 30 minutes. However, there is an item that we could consider while we wait for the uploading of these reports - item VI.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $200 MILLION FROM THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT BANK (PTA) FOR FISCAL PURPOSES

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that Parliament authorises Government to borrow $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for fiscal purposes. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the Member for Arua Municipality and Member for Mbarara Municipality. The motion is properly before the House; would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker and colleagues, the sources of financing the budget include domestic revenue and external borrowing. Domestic revenue for this financial year is projected to have a shortfall and domestic borrowing has become expensive due to high interest rates, hence leaving a financing gap. The shortfall in the budget resources is going to be financed through this loan that we moved here on the Floor of the House, and the committee has been considering this.

We must say that during the second quarter of this fiscal year, when the economy was faced with the rapid weakening of the shilling against the dollar, Government secured a window to borrow $200 million from the PTA bank. At that time the idea was to prevent further pressure on the foreign exchange market arising from the strengthening of the US dollar and poor performance. Since then, we are glad to inform you that the exchange rate has stabilised, though not to the level that we would have wanted. However, this window remained with the PTA bank. 

As you are aware, colleagues, our expenditure requirements have increased beyond the approved budget for this financial year, which has led to the supplementary expenditures that were approved on 7 April by this House. We are very glad that Members of Parliament approved these extra resources for Government to operate.

The alternative that would provide a quick source of financing to meet this budget shortfall would have been issuance of treasury bills and bonds, but they are very expensive. Currently, they are at 16 per cent but this loan is going to cost us 4.6 per cent per annum. Therefore, the cost of borrowing from the domestic market is very expensive as opposed to this source of financing. That is why, Mr Speaker, we have come here to seek your support to approve this loan request to support the budget in the remaining months from this relatively cheaper source - the PTA bank. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members that is the motion before you. I will propose the question and thereafter we shall receive the report of the committee. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for fiscal purposes. That is the motion before us. This matter had been referred to the committee. Mr Chairman, would you like to report?

6.38
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The committee did its work. I have an original copy of the report and I would like to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, I have copies of the following documents:
    a) A brief by the minister to Parliament; 
    b) The financing facility agreement in a draft form;
    c) The aide memoire relating to the same loan request;
    d) The half-year macroeconomic report (July to December 2015) by the Minister of Finance; 
    e) The URA revenue performance, outlook and strategies to curtail the revenue shortfall or deficits for financial year 2015/2016; 
    f) The indicative terms and conditions subject to credit approval and satisfactory documentation; and
    g) The Government foreign exchange requirement for the financial year 2015/2016. 

With your permission, Mr Speaker, I would like to lay all these documents on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture all those documents.

MR KYOOMA: I would also like to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee relating to the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR KYOOMA: Mr Speaker, this loan request was presented to this August House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 7 April 2016 and was referred to the Committee on National Economy. I would like to report.

With your permission, Mr Speaker, I can skip the methodology and background and begin with the objectives of the loan on page 5. The objectives of this internal borrowing are as follows:
    1) To finance the shortfall in domestic revenues projected at Shs 288 billion for the financial year 2015/2016.
    2) To substitute domestic borrowing amounting to Shs 280 billion.
    3) To finance the supplementary expenditure that was approved by this August House for the required additional financing amounting to Shs 156.37 billion
    4) To finance the expenditure pressures resulting from the exchange rate depreciation experienced during the financial year 2015/2016

Loan terms

The Government will borrow $200 million from the East and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for fiscal purposes as shown in the table on page 6. The loan shall be a revolving facility with an automatic renewal after 12 months, subject to no events of default. 

The facility shall be reviewed and renewed at each anniversary being one calendar year in accordance with the agreed terms and conditions of the facility. The terms as well as the level of concessionality are summarised in the table.

Mr Speaker, with your permission, I beg to get to the observation and recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you.

Justification for the Borrowing

The committee observed that the proposed four reasons for this borrowing are; to cover the revenue shortfall of Shs 288 billion, replacing domestic borrowing amounting to Shs 280 billion; financing supplementary expenditure that was approved by Parliament over and above 3 per cent amounting to Shs 156.37 billion and Shs 180.1 billion resulting from foreign exchange depreciation during the financial year 2015/2016. This totals to Shs 904.47 billion required in the Financial Year 2015/2016. This is an equivalent of $268.75 million at an exchange rate of Shs 3,365 per $1. 

However, URA intends to institute measures to reduce the revenue deficit by Shs 108 billion which is an equivalent of $32.09 million. Putting this into account, the total requirement reduces to Shs 796.47 billion which is an equivalent of $236.66 million, Mr Speaker.

The committee recommends that Government institutes additional revenue mobilisation measures that will reduce the revenue deficit.

Cost of the Loan

The committee observed that the loan has a negative grant element, implying that the loan is commercial. While the committee appreciates that the borrowing cost remains cheaper than the domestic sources through Government securities, it exposes the country to foreign exchange risks in the event of sharp currency depreciation at the time of repayment. Previously, Government obtained budget support loans through Poverty Reduction Support Credits from the World Bank to finance the budget. These loans were highly concessional and cheaper. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should in future look for cheaper sources of external financing and commercial financing should be only for projects with high financial returns in the medium-term as indicated in the Public Debt Management Framework, 2013.

Budget performance outlook for the financial Year 2015/2016

Mr Speaker, The committee observed that there were tax revenue shortfalls for the period July 2015 to February 2016 amounting to Shs 183.32 billion. Based on the above performance, the revenue forecasts for the end of the financial year 2015/2016 depict a deficit of Shs 288 billion. In the absence of borrowing, this will lead to under execution of the budget leading to maintaining the fiscal deficit within the programmed activities.

The committee recommends that in future budget adjustments be instituted especially on recurrent items in the event of revenue shortfalls rather than opting for costly domestic or external borrowing to financing such.

Approval of Domestic Borrowing

Mr Speaker, the committee noted that Government has been undertaking domestic borrowing for fiscal purposes without prior approval of Parliament as provided for under Section 36(5) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. In the financial year 2015/2016, domestic borrowing for fiscal purposes through the issuance of Government securities was capped at Shs 1.38 trillion. According to the background to the budget 2015/2016, these resources are meant to finance Government infrastructure projects. 

The committee, therefore, recommends Government to seek prior approvals for all domestic borrowing as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015

Budget Performance 2015/2016

The committee noted that revenue over-performed through to the end of the first half of the Financial Year 2015/2016 and expenditure pressures were reasonably well controlled. While some fiscal tightening had been envisaged in the late 2015 in the face of significant exchange rate pressures, the economy subsequently stabilised higher than expected, making Government to revert to the original budget targets. 

However, there were some renewed fiscal pressures in early 2016, including a slowdown in revenue collection coupled with additional spending requirements.

The committee further noted that during the Financial Year 2015/2016, Government made re-allocations to finance additional spending pressures. Some of these were consumptive in nature. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should always strengthen efforts to boost taxpayer compliance and support for domestic revenue mobilisation so as to avoid a slowdown in revenue collection.

The Government should also avoid within-year allocations from public investments to less productive Government spending.

Conclusion

Subject to the above recommendations, the committee recommends approval of Government to borrow $200 million from the East and Southern African Trade and Development Bank – PTA – for fiscal purposes. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, that is the motion before you. I have already proposed the question for your debate and debate starts now.

6.48
MR NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I would like to get clarifications from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 16 per cent versus 4.6 per cent. Does this take into consideration the depreciation of the Ugandan currency? He may have only looked at it today; however, tomorrow when the currency depreciates, that is also a cost which could even be more than 16 per cent.

Secondly, when you borrow domestically, the 16 per cent remains in Uganda, but when it depreciates, it leaves the country. Therefore, what would be better; to borrow and pay in Uganda so that Uganda is developed or to borrow and externalise the returns?

Thirdly, the minister is talking of budget support. We have two types of budgets: consumption and development. What is this $200 million basically for; consumption or development? If it is for consumption, we are in problems. Therefore, I would like to know before I append my signature what the Shs 200 million is for. What should I support in this budget? What is the problem? Should I support the money you used to work on rain in Arua and West Nile? What are you replacing? 

If you are not aware, Mr Prime Minister, there was no rain in West Nile and we took there Shs 6 billion to buy hoes instead of rain. I do not know what the hoes were doing and that is what I am asking. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, as we borrow, I would like to know from the minister what our indebtedness is now. We need to know how much we owe the outsiders. We have unutilised loans and yet we are paying commitment fees and other charges. Why do we borrow when we have loans we have not utilised? You are aware the Auditor-General’s report is saying, by such and such a period, we had paid Shs 26 billion in commitment fees for unutilised fees. These unutilised funds are there waiting for us, but again, we are running here to borrow more money. 

Therefore, I need to know how much the commitment fees are and how we stand in terms of indebtedness. Why can’t we use the money that we already borrowed which we have not utilised?

6.51
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion and also wish to state that not all consumption is bad. Indeed, with respect to this particular loan request, it is going to help answer a challenge we have in the purchase of drugs.

Right now, because of the exchange rate depreciation, National Medical Stores found that they now had to buy fewer drugs than we expected. That amounted to a shortfall of Shs 58 billion. This coupled with the domestic revenue deficits which also meant that the cash limits to a certain sectors were less than expected; National Medical Stores for this particular quarter is going to receive less Shs 14 billion.

Therefore, as a consequence, we are starting to see no drugs, gloves and eventually, we shall lose lives. Therefore, by Parliament passing this motion, although to some extent some of the money will go to consumption, Shs 82 billion will go to save lives. We know that saving a life is the highest ethical act one can ever do to humankind. Therefore, by passing this loan, you will save lives and increase access to safe medicine and vaccines.

Therefore, I support the motion. Of course, I would have been happier- In the past, we used to get budget support from concessional loans from the World Bank. This loan, for sure, is quite high compared to what we would have got from the World Bank. 

Government should also explore alternative loan sources because there are also available loan facilities globally with less interest rates. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health is saying Government should explore other methods to get money. I thought you are in Cabinet and you are the one to advise them; would you like to tell us you are incapable of exploring other methods of getting cheap loans? Is he procedurally right to come and tell Parliament that they need to explore other means and we should help them and yet he is a member of the Cabinet?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member stayed in the backbench for a while, so he might have still forgotten that he is now on the other side. (Laughter) 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just wanted to inform my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, who is looking at me -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, all the Members are looking at you. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: However, I am not sure if those behind me are looking at me -(Laughter)- Mr Speaker, I just wanted to remind the House that last week, as we were discussing loans, Opposition Members were saying we must account for all the loans we have already borrowed including the unutilised ones. They said until we account for those ones, they are not going to approve this loan.

Therefore, my argument is, if you go to Mulago Hospital, you will find many people admitted for various diseases. Assuming you were the boss of Mulago Hospital, would you stop new admissions and allow only the already admitted patients to be worked on, whether they are going to die or not, before you can admit more people? This is a very negative argument -(Interjections)- I understand it that way. 

We said we should establish an implementation committee on a full time so that it follows these loans that have been borrowed. If you do not want us to borrow because we have not utilised the money we borrowed yesterday, then that is a negative and misleading argument. It is like you don’t want this country to grow – (Interjections) - I meant you. It is because you said we should not borrow- (Laughter) (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I am aware Gen. Moses Ali was a Minister of Finance in the 1970s. A few minutes ago, he was telling me that we, Bagisus, sabotaged his Government by taking coffee to Kenya. Is he in order, instead of raising his hands, to point his fingers at me? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is enjoined to the decorum of this House to be courteous to another Member.

6.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much. I would like to thank the former Leader of Opposition for supporting the spirit of this loan and also raising some specific issues which we need to provide some clarification on. 

I will take on one and hon. Matia Kasaija will take on the other two. The first one was on what this loan is going to support. Actually, if you read the report of the committee, it has gone deep to say Shs 157 billion of the supplementary budget we passed here is also going to support the certificates that we have for the civil works that have not been cleared. 

This will go a long way in complying with what we passed here in the amendment of the Public Finance Management Act, which requires that at the end of the year, our book should be clean.

The second issue that he raised was the cost of depreciation- (Interruption)

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, when the Act demands that at the end of the year, we should clear any offshoot, it does not mean that we should not comply with some of the controls that we have put in place.

Therefore, I would like the minister to clarify to me whether this particular loan complies with the Public Debt Management Framework, which was put in place in 2013. You realise that for budget support, we should always go for the cheapest option. This one, according to the committee, we are actually getting this as a commercial loan. This already implies that it is very expensive to the economy. 

In this spirit, we support the loan but you must also allay our fears. You need to tell us what mechanism you have put in place in order to cater for some of the scary outputs that might come out of it. How have you insulated the Ugandan economy from foreign exchange risks? 

This report implies that we are borrowing from a speculative perspective. They are saying that URA has promised to put in place mechanisms to reduce the deficit. You are telling us that there is already a mechanism in place and by calculation. We are likely to reduce our revenue deficit by so much. In that circumstance, we would use mathematical figures which we do not have.  Therefore, I am seeking clarification on that. Thank you. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for supporting the loan. You have raised some specific issues which I would like to respond to as follows:- 

It is true we have on record the URA estimated deficit of the revenue collection, which is close to Shs 288 billion. We estimate that they will not be able to raise that and this is done scientifically over time. The predictions that we have done year in, year out have been accurate and URA has predicted that. That is the reason as to why we are going into that to bridge that gap. The other one was Shs 157 billion which we approved here through a supplementary. 

On the debt portfolio, the honourable minister is going to respond to that. Concerning hedging for the foreign exchange risk, we are convinced that this is the safest route in the circumstances now. This is because the cost of domestic borrowing now stands at 16 per cent. It does not only stand at 16 per cent, but even if we opted to go and get money from the domestic market, we would hurt the private sector and compete with the private people who would need this money. In the end, we would increase the interest rate. 

This one is at 4.6 per cent; what if there is some tabulation in the foreign exchange; will it affect us? It will affect us minimally. Even if there was any change for example 2 or 3 per cent, still it would go to 7 per cent, which we do not anticipate it to be. It would be far below 16 per cent in the market. I think it is cheaper. It is- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let us use figures. Supposing we borrow Shs 200 million and there is a fluctuation in the exchange rate by Shs 300. If we get 300 times Shs 200 million, that is already Shs 60 billion. I am just giving examples. Now Shs 60 billion is already more than 10 per cent. 10 per cent plus the 4.6 is 14.6, yet all this money is being externalised. 

If I had known that would be your argument, I would have come with numbers in the- (Interruption) 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has a point because the exchange rate can escalate. In this case, the interest rate is fixed for the first one year, but can be renewed after that one year elapses. In the circumstance where the interest rate is fixed, that means there is no risk of escalation of the exchange rate. If it does, then that means it is actually the lender who will now suffer this loss. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: When we get money in local currency, we change it to dollars. The moment there is depreciation in our currency, we will pay more. How can you avoid it? Please be an Economist. We would like the minister to help us. Have you hedged this money? Have you insured it? 

7.07
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Mr Speaker and colleagues, I think you need to look at the mathematics to be able to appreciate the fact that this could be the best thing for the market for the time being. If you are borrowing Shs 200 million at an interest rate of 4.5 or 4.6, the interest alone in the first year will be close to about $ 8 million. If you converted that at the current exchange rate of about Shs 3,350, if borrowed domestically at a rate of 16 per cent and converted it back to US dollars, we will be looking at about $30 million in interest charges alone. That is from domestic borrowing. 

I can see there is quite a huge saving by borrowing in US dollars. Some of us borrow money from the banks, but we opt for it in US dollars. If you compute the savings on that loan by borrowing using US dollars compared to the domestic one, you will find that it is a huge amount of saving. You can do the calculation; you will actually, in this particular case, save well over $ 20 million just on the interest charge alone. Forget about the principle. 

Therefore, if you do it on reducing balance, the option that we have right now in the market is the best. If you look at the exchange rate, the agreement was what happens if the Ugandan shilling appreciates? In the net analysis, it will help us for the simple reason- (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Mr Speaker, I am surprised that Government is not moving with the global trend. I have just googled this up - I read it from the Financial Times; all the European banks are now applying what we call negative interest rate. That includes Sweden and Denmark. Japan has also adopted this. Why are we, therefore, borrowing when there is cheap money around the world from commercial banks?

The other day when I was coming back, I was seated next to the lady in charge of the European Investment Bank, who lends money to the commercial banks. Nowadays the commercial banks borrow directly from the European Investment Bank. She told me the money is available, but the only problem is that the commercial banks here are just robing people. Government is not intervening and they cannot get involved in micro-issues. 

Anyone can go to Google and put interest rate and you will find all this information- Bloomberg and so forth. Why are we going for4 per cent when other countries are applying for negative interest rates? Do you understand what negative interest rate is all about?

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, I am certainly one of those who know that Europe is in the state of deflation. In other words, the cost of money is actually either zero or in the negatives. That is what is called deflation. 

The question now is, could the Government of Uganda just go and borrow from any of the financial institutions there? The answer is no. There are financial institutions that we as Government can borrow from. That argument that we could have gone for cheap options, will not apply in this particular case.

Remember that, to be able to borrow from those institutions, one of the things they will require is a sovereign guarantee.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, one of the ministers came late – the one who is interested in this money; the one who wants Shs 68 billion to pay for drugs, which drugs are far more expensive than they cost in other pharmacies.

He was trying to say that we should explore other options to borrow. Did you explore them before you came? This loan is for three years, if you wanted other cheap sources, they could be available. The issue which we are raising is, have you explored all other options that we should end at 4.6 per cent?

MR BAHATI: I think the issue that you raised, hon. Nandala, was to do with exposure of the foreign exchange. Even if you assume that in the West there is such a scenario, which we do not actually expect to happen because the exchange rate has been going down and we shall actually gain in the long run.

Even if it happened, still the cost of this money will be much cheaper than the cost of domestic borrowing; it will still be below 10 per cent, which is much cheaper than 16 per cent. Thank you. I hope we have now narrowed the risk.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you; the matter is for debate. I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow up to $200 million from the East and Southern Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for fiscal purposes. That is the motion that I put for your decision. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we go back to health now? Let the chairman propose on the Committee on Health – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The Minister of Health is running away. We would like him to sit here because we want to see him. Is he in order, Mr Speaker?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, can you do it in 10 minutes? If you can do less than 10 minutes, that will be good.

7.14
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are dealing with the Ministry of Health, which everybody in this country is fighting for. We are also dealing with very many votes and that is the report on the Committee on Health, on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2016/2017.

Before I go further, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of proceedings we had with the variety of stakeholders, before we reached our conclusions. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I beg also to lay the original report which we have made and the other reports are uploaded on the iPads of Members.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

DR BITEKYEREZO: In accordance with Articles 90 and 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the sectoral Committee on Health considered the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the votes under its mandate and hereby present its report.

We have looked at: 
Vote 104 - Ministry of Health 
Vote 114 - Uganda Cancer Institute, which is a very contentious Institute 
Vote 115 - Uganda Heart Institute 
Vote 116 - National Medical Stores 
Vote 134 - Health Services Commission 
Vote 151 - Uganda Blood Transfusion Services 
Vote 161 - Mulago National Referral Hospital 
Vote 162 - Butabika National Referral Hospital 
Vote 304 - Uganda Virus Research Institute 
Votes 163 - 176 for 14 regional referral hospitals; Arua, Fort portal, Gulu, Hoima, Jinja, Kabale, Masaka, Mbale, Soroti, Lira, Mbarara, Mubende, Moroto and Naguru 
Votes 501- 850 for local governments in charge of Primary Health Care

For purposes of keeping time, I would like us to go to page 6 of the report. The health sector budget excluding, arrears is projected to increase by 44 per cent to Shs 1.829 billion, from 1.271 billion in 2016/2017, which was approved in the financial year 2015/2016 as it can be observed in figure 1 below. 

The increase is mostly attributed to an increase in external financing to the sector, although the Government allocation is projected to increase by 12 per cent, as it can be observed in figure 1 and table 26 attached. 

The budget share to the health sector reflects a 30 per cent increase from 6.9 per cent, approved in the budget for the financial year 2015/ 2016 to 9 per cent, in financial year 2016/2017. Eighty one (81) per cent of the sector budget is projected to be spent under the various Central Government votes, while only 19 per cent will be spent on Primary Health Care, under various local governments. The Ministry of Health will maintain the largest share of the sector budget, although it is projected to increase to 56 per cent, in Financial Year 2016/2017 from 43 per cent in financial year 2015/2016 as can be observed in figure 2 below.

This increase in shares is due to projected increase in external financing by 98 per cent. I would like to go to page 12 and look at Vote 014, Ministry of Health. There is an issue of wage provision for bonded health workers. Getting health workers into Government hospitals is still a problem. Even when we were interacting with a variety of stakeholders, everybody was talking about absenteeism and this is very common in the lower health centres.

The committee observed that, following Parliament’s recommendation to automatically bond graduate health workers, in order to address the human resource shortage, the ministry requires about Shs 13.5 billion to recruit and bond about 300 health workers, who will include doctors and pharmacists to enhance better service delivery, in health centres IV and hospitals.

Here, we are talking about giving the Ministry of Health money to make sure that every student that finishes internship is pushed to a health centre, whether he wants it or not because he has to go there for two years, as we prepare space for others to come in so as to have a constant presence of health workers at health centres IV and hospitals at all times.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that Shs 13.5 billion be availed in financial year 2016/2017 to ensure that health facilities have these health workers since the presence of health workers is a key determinant when people are choosing health care facilities.

Again on page 12 of the report, we have a problem of recruitment in the Ministry of Health. The committee observed that the recruitment procedure in Ministry of Health headquarters is not yet very clear. I am happy the Minister of Health is here. For example, the committee received reports that some human resource recruited in the Ministry of Health did not follow the known public service recruitment procedures. This practice creates a bad image which ultimately breeds corruption and nepotism.

The committee recommends that the Auditor-General carries out a forensic audit on the recruitment of staff at the Ministry of Health Headquarters with keen interest on contract staff because these are people who encroach on the development budget for the ministry. Mr Speaker, I would like to move to page 13 of the report.

Recruitment and Deployment of Health Workers and District Health Officers 

The committee notes that most local governments have failed to manage the recruitment, posting and supervision of health workers in health centres IV and in general hospitals. The same applies to District Health Officers being recruited by the Local Governments. This has led to increased absenteeism of health workers in health facilities in most local governments, while in some instances, some districts have failed to recruit even health workers. 

The committee recommends that the recruitment and deployment of senior cadres in the general hospitals and health centres IV mainly doctors and other senior staff be recentralised and the necessary amendments to the law be effected to provide for this position.

In addition, measures should be instituted to track the attendance of medical workers to reduce absenteeism rates. 

Page 13, uniforms for health workers: The committee notes that 60 per cent of Health workers do not have uniforms. When money is taken from patients, the patients cannot give the names of the people who have taken the money. This has resulted in some people masquerading as health workers and extorting money from unsuspecting patients. In addition, the committee observed that the ministry received a donation of 7,000 beds and mattresses from the Chinese Government in financial year 2015/2016. 

Further, it was observed that a number of health facilities visited had received beds and kept them in stores. Furthermore, the committee observed that the ministry was to purchase more beds and mattresses this financial year and by the time the ministry interacted with the committee, the procurement for these beds and mattresses had not yet been undertaken. 

The committee now recommends that the Ministry of Health undertakes a needs assessment of beds and mattresses in various health facilities in light of the donations and underutilisation in various facilities. 

In the meantime, the committee recommends that the funds that were meant for procurement of beds and mattresses under Ministry of Health, be diverted to the procurement of name tagged uniforms so that every health worker has got a name on his/her uniform, plus qualifications to minimise extortion of money from patients by health workers whose identity cannot easily be got. A case in point is Mulago Hospital. Mr Speaker, when you go to Mulago, everybody, even a cleaner masquerades as a doctor. We would like to minimise this. 

Training of Medical Workers in Universities on Page 14

The committee observed that the quality of intern doctors received in hospitals across the country continues to depreciate. The committee received information that the majority of doctors trained in the Kampala International University Medical School are significantly lacking in their training.

The committee reviewed a Medical Schools Inspection Report issued by the East African Community Medical Partner States National Medical and Dental Practitioners Boards and Councils containing recommendations for institutions across the region. The report recommended, among others, that Kampala International University halts enrolment of medical students until it meets the minimum requirements for training of health practitioners because the university did not have the recommended number of teaching consultants, among others. This recommendation appears not to have been complied with at all.

Mr Speaker, five days ago, I got information that a patient went to a hospital in Western Uganda and the doctor took off –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, would you like to roll up?

DR BITEKEYEREZO: Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Use the microphone please.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker. I would like to go to the issue of medical equipment. This is very important.

Storage and utilisation of health equipment delivered to health facilities.

Mr Speaker, machines are being put to waste. I will give you a case in point. Kamuli Hospital has had an X-ray machine that has remained in boxes for 12 years.

The committee recommends that the infrastructure/engineering and quality assurance departments under Ministry of Health, should expeditiously visit the health units and ensure that medical equipment is put to proper use and the suppliers of the equipment under the defects liability period be requested to rectify the defects as soon as possible. 

In addition, the committee recommends that Government should dispose of all non-functional medical equipment like the X-ray machine for Kamuli Hospital and replacements be made as soon as possible. 

Mr Speaker, there is an issue of dual practice. The health workers in Government hospitals are giving the health sector very little time and most of the time is given to private practice. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Health develops a strategy to implement this core project during the second National Development Plan. What we want here is that doctors in Government hospitals be given contracts and they should retire at 5.00 p.m. They should be given a Private Practice Partnership License by the Medical Council to go after 5.00 p.m. so that they can work in our Government hospitals.

Mr Speaker, I would like to go to remuneration of health workers. The committee has learnt that the doctors in Kenya are receiving Shs 10 million. The ones of Tanzania are receiving Shs 7 million. In Uganda they are receiving Shs 1.5 million.

The committee is requesting the Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports, in collaboration with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Public Service that any of us is liable to get an accident, and you would need the services of a doctor and a nurse. This should be expeditiously handled because if we do not, health workers are continuously going to our neighbouring countries. They are training under the Government yet Ugandans are left to die unattended to. 

I would like to request you to allow me continue because there are some issues that need reallocations of money from the Ministry of Health headquarters; because you have heard that the Ministry of Health has got money in the headquarters yet people do not have money. So, I would like to remove some money from the headquarters so that this money goes to helping Ugandans who are in the villages.  This is very important and I am even very sure that when we remove this money, your voters will benefit from it. I hope the Minister of Health will agree with me – (Interjections) - page 22.

Mr Speaker, there is also a problem with Mbale Regional Referral Hospital. It does not have a functional theatre yet. I am requesting the former Leader of the Opposition to help me on this one. 

The committee is planning to re-allocate funds from the Ministry of Health; we analysed the ministry budget and proposed the following reallocations that amount to Shs10.414 billion from the following items from Ministry of Health headquarters. 

    1. Shs 8 billion from medical and agricultural supplies under the Government of Uganda component. 

The Justification is that these funds are for the procurement of vaccines and test kits for Hepatitis B which this Parliament passed.

In addition, the mandate to procure medical supplies lies with the National Medical Stores. The budget for the same item under the external financing has more than doubled.

I am also requesting this House to allow re-allocation of Shs 400 million from travel abroad under Government of Uganda component.

Justification: There are more pressing sector needs like X-ray machines in many Government hospitals including Mbale and Kamuli.

The item has remained with Shs 1.2 billion for travel abroad and I would like to thank the Minister of Health, Dr Elioda Tumwesigye, he agreed - he has no objection. He wants to remain here; we do not want him to over travel. 


Mr Speaker, Shs 100 million for welfare and entertainment under Government of Uganda component at the ministry.

Justification: There are more pressing sector needs and this deduction modestly affects the budget since the development component has increased. We have left them to entertain themselves with Shs 480 million.

Mr Speaker, we are requesting this House to reallocate Shs 1.5 billion from the item of maintenance and others.

Justification: it is not clear what these funds will be used for yet there is Shs 5.3 billion for maintenance of vehicles, machinery, equipment and furniture.

We are seeking permission that this Parliament should re-allocate Shs 255 million from item of other utilities namely fuel, charcoal, firewood, gas under Government of Uganda component. 

Justification: The budget item has activities that are covered by other items such as fuel and yet the ministry does not use charcoal and firewood.

Mr Speaker, we would like to re-allocate Shs 159 million from item, hire of venues, chairs, projector, and others. On several occasions the Ministry of Health has got meetings-they have been given money by this Parliament; we expect them to have bought projectors for themselves. 

So we would like to re-allocate Shs 159 million from item hire for venue under Government of Uganda component. 

Justification: The Ministry has a projector now and there is Shs 50 million under external financing to cater for this activity.

The committee recommends that Shs 10.414 billion realised above should be allocated to the following votes if they have some issues they can arrange themselves within the ministry. But this is what we think.

 Now, the issue of cancer is very important; the committee observed that the only cobalt-60 radio therapy machine that was operating at the Cancer Institute broke down and this left cancer patients with no immediate alternative.

The committee also observed that this machine was in a very sorry state making it potentially harmful and yet the new machine that was purchased in 2013 awaits the construction of a radiotherapy bunker in Mulago.

 The committee further observed that the recommended ratio of patient to radiotherapy machine in Mulago now is one machine for 250 patients. This means that the institute needs more than one radiotherapy machine, so that when one breaks down there is an alternative instead of talking about sending them to Kenya. 

The committee recommends that the cobalt-60 radiotherapy machine that broke down should be urgently decommissioned. What I mean is that you remove that machine and it must be removed by those who installed it because there must be a contractual obligation.

We also recommend that they decontaminate the bunker of Mulago within the stipulated time. When health workers come here, they speak jargons which we do not understand, but now let me help you understand.

Decontamination means that you have to give ample time for this bunker to get rid of the radioactive elements because they can harm human beings later on.

The machine was purchased; the money was provided by the Government of Uganda in 2013. Therefore, they should bring the new machine and put it in the old bunker so that the patients that urgently need this machine can access therapy, while we dig other bunkers for the now linear accelerator machine.  This is what should have been done right from the beginning.

Secondly, we are also requesting this Parliament to allocate $4.5 million for buying a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machine plus a very sophisticated CT scan for Mulago National Referral Hospital.

Mr Speaker, why do I say this? All of us in this Parliament are candidates that will need an MRI machine at an appointed time. This is better than even a CT scan but now all Ugandans are going to Nairobi and India for MRI which is very easy.

I would like to assure you, Mr Speaker, that when you consider a voter in Agago, nobody can manage an air ticket to India and nobody even has a passport; very few people have; that is why we are requesting this Parliament to do this for them.

Mr Speaker, out of the money we were trying to remove from the Ministry of Health headquarters, the committee recommends that the Shs 10.414 billion should be allocated to the following votes:

National Medical stores: Shs 8 billion for the purchase of Hepatitis B vaccines and test kits.

Mbale Regional Referral Hospital: Shs 2.414 billion to renovate the main theatre in Mbale Regional Referral Hospital and repair of the X-ray machine that is going to cater for very many people of Mbale region.

Mr Speaker, there are so many other things which we wanted to talk about but we do not have time. However, I would like to interest you in expiry of drugs in Government hospitals.

Mr Speaker, when you consider the disease burden of Uganda, drugs should not be expiring. If they are to expire, they should not exceed 5 per cent. There are so many drugs expiring because of artificial shortage created by people prescribing them – especially those that are not within our national treatment guidelines.

The National Medical Stores received the last amount of money to incinerate expired drugs in 2010. This means we do not know the whereabouts of the drugs that expired in Uganda from 2010 up to date.

That means that either these drugs are still in stores or they have been thrown in waters which we drink or they have repackaged and sold them to patients for consumption.

Now, if that is the case, it means that all of us, regardless of whether you are the Leader of the Opposition or NRM or FDC, once you take these drugs, you will die and meet your creator. This could even be the cause of rampant renal and liver failure in this country, which is causing people to go to India for hepatic and kidney transplants.

We are urging this Parliament and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to look for Shs 2.5 billion, specifically for incineration of expired drugs in our Government and non-Governmental hospitals for our safety and for the safety of this country.

The report is very comprehensives. All those things - subject to recommendations that are advanced above, the committee of health urges the committee of supply to supply the following votes under the health sector with the other changes I have talked about:

Vote 014 - Ministry of Health	
Shs 42,704,629 for recurrent expenditure 
Shs 951,766,218 for development expenditure. 

They are very many, there is the Ministry of Health, Uganda Cancer Institute, Uganda Heart Institute, National Medical Stores, Health Service Commission, Uganda Blood Transfusion Services, Mulago Hospital Complex, Butabika Hospital, Uganda Virus Research Institute, which is a new vote, Arua Referral Hospital, Fort Portal Referral Hospital, Gulu Referral Hospital, Hoima Referral Hospital, Jinja Referral Hospital, Kabale Referral Hospital	, Masaka Referral Hospital,  Soroti Referral Hospital, Lira Referral Hospital, Mbarara Referral Hospital, Mubende Referral Hospital, Moroto Referral Hospital, and Naguru Referral Hospital.

Mr Speaker, because of time constraints, I pray that whatever I have put in this report regarding remuneration and retention of health workers; curbing extortion of money from people, regarding our people going out of this place, giving lunch allowances to health workers that are commensurate to the Budget problems of this- because nurses are being given only Shs 44,000 for lunch for a month and doctors Shs 60,000. At least let a health worker be given Shs 300,000 as lunch allowance so that they can work in these Government hospitals. 

With all these things, I beg to report and to request the entire House to support my report. I thank you very much. For God and My country. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairman, for the presentation. Can we debate this? What we would like is finish with the reports so that the Budget Committee can comprehensively handle this matter tomorrow and we move on. Debate is open for short contributions. Please, let us make them short.

7.41
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I have not heard the chairman of the committee talk about the Shs 5.5 billion that we gave last year for oxygen supply to 14 referral hospitals. I would like to know whether the money has been utilised and if not, why? 

Secondly, I would like to know whether the Shs 10 billion we gave for Hepatitis B has been fully utilised and if not, why? 

Thirdly, I tried to lobby for additional funding for Hepatitis B. I do not know whether it has come to your committee. I am seeking those clarifications.

7.42
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman of the committee for the report and I would like to address myself to 5.3.6; training of medical workers in universities. 

The chairman says that the committee received information that the majority of doctors trained in Kampala International University Medical School are significantly lacking in their training. I would like to know from where you have got this information. This is a very serious statement; the institution we are talking about does not have the opportunity to defend itself here.

Secondly, the committee reviewed a medical schools’ inspection report issued by the East African Community Medical Partner States, National Medical and Dental Practitioners Board. I would like to know which report this is as you might be talking about a report, which has been overtaken by events. 

You go ahead to say that this recommendation appears not to have been complied with. You seem not to be sure whether the report has been complied with or not. These are serious statements that appear in this report. You can even prompt patients to start asking from where the doctor has graduated. Before we reach at these statements, let us be very sure otherwise we will create a problem for this institution and also to the graduates who pay school fees to be educated in this institution.

Therefore, I would like to have these clarifications so that the institution that is not in the House can be informed of this so that the issues are addressed. I thank you very much.

7.44
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To the best of my knowledge, I know we have a national incinerator and Col. Mwesigye was the chairperson of the board -(Interjections)- the managing director. I am wondering about the proposal of the chairperson that we need to give National Medical Stores money to incinerate drugs.

Does that mean that the drugs are too many? Why are they too many when we have shortage of drugs in all our health centres? Are you telling us that National Medical Stores imports expired drugs? As we speak, National Enterprise Corporation has the best incinerator that can even incinerate bullets.

7.45
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank the Committee on Health for having brought us this good report. I was insured in IAA and I used to go to Kampala International Hospital but in the process of putting a cannula for a drip on me - I hope Members have seen me limping as I had that effect. Therefore, when I saw this report, I thought it must be true because I am better at putting a cannula than those people.  

Mr Speaker, I would also like to thank the committee for having recommended uniforms for health workers. This will eliminate a lot of forgeries and corruption in the hospitals. The proposal for increase in their salaries is also good.

However, I would like to state that we need to revisit the Government policy of health centres IV being at constituency level. Busia Municipality has a health centre IV and looking at the location of Busia Municipality, it is at the border and has long haul truck drivers and all sorts of people. We even treat people from Kenya. We should give such hospitals priority or special status without looking at the allocation for health centres IV per se. Rather, we should look at allocations according to the number of patients, which that unit services. 

We have a hospital, which is very far away and whenever there is an accident, all the corpses are brought to the health centre IV where we do not have facilities. We have all sorts of people like traders who come to the health centre. As a result, the drugs are never enough. 

I would like the committee to recommend that we should give allocations according to the number of people served in a particular location. I thank you. 

7.48
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I would like to recommend that, if the committee agrees, we should have a forensic audit in National Medical Stores. The reason is simply that the price of medicine from National Medical Stores is higher than the price of medicine from other pharmacies. Why, when there are economies of scale?

Secondly, I would not have agreed if I had known that they wanted Shs 68 billion for exchange. The minister must tell us why their medicine is more expensive than others yet they come from the same area, there are economies of scale and many other things.

I recall when I was growing up in Mbale that there were quarters for health workers even in the Indian quarters, which is near the hospital. What happened to houses for doctors and health workers?

Mbale hospital is sick, the workers there are sick and they are treating sick people. You only have luck to come out. There is no x-ray, no scanner and we do not have oxygen. In fact, Mbale is the worst place. I am happy that the committee went there and you are lucky that no one of you fell sick because you would not have survived.

Mr Speaker, I would like to ask the minister to tell me the procedure of looking at these hospitals. After he was appointed a minister, I counted the number of times he has been in the House and they are not more than 10. I assumed that he had gone to rectify problems in the hospitals. Instead, he has been doing other things. If he was rectifying the problems that we are talking about, we would not be talking about them. He must explain to us what he has been doing to leave the sector – it may lack drugs but there must be a way to mediate these things. I thank you.

7.50
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the work well done. However, I have not heard the chairman talk about the Lacor cancer machine that was decommissioned. We are talking about Mulago cancer machine while forgetting the one in Lacor Hospital. We need information concerning this.

Secondly, the chairman talked about the machines in Kamuli Hospital but let me assure you that we have so many machines in Uganda, which are not operational. However, you did not recommend to the Ministry of Health to provide money to retrain the technical staff.

We found machines in Lugazi lying idle while some in Busolwe Hospital had no technical staff to operate them. The machines, which were provided by JICA have not been operational for many years in many hospitals and we do not understand why. Why don’t we retrain these technical staff? Even in Mulago Hospital, these machines are lying idle and they said that they do not have staff to operate the machines.

Mr Chairman, take note of this and we need some more money to train civil servants. Thank you.

7.52
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask for clarification from the honourable minister and to also thank the committee for the good report and for the drastic measures that they are proposing.

It is said somewhere that for every release of funds by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, only 80 per cent was utilised and most of the 80 per cent goes to salaries. Otherwise, the consumption is low and it is said that specifically, there is low consumption on capital development. 

How can there be low consumption on capital development with all the challenges that we have in the Ministry of Health and with all the machines and hospitals rotting away? I think something needs to be done. It is not enough for us to sit here and allocate funds. Something must be done to revamp the health services because we are doing badly and our people are dying at a higher rate than they should.

National Medical Stores used 100 per cent of the allocation. I am sure that if we went to National Medical Stores now, the stores are full of drugs but there are no drugs in the hospitals. Why do we keep medicines in the central store when people are dying? I think the element of supervision is lacking and it should be strengthened.

Lastly, I know that some of these things may be minor and cannot be discussed in the Budget but use friendly services. We have a high rate of teenage pregnancies and we need to do something about it. I hope that you captured this in the Budget. Thank you.

7.54
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and chairman for the report. 

I have not heard, from the report, plans for new health centres IV in the new constituencies. We would like to be clarified on that. For example, in Kyankwanzi, I have Temba Health Centre III upgraded to a health centre IV because it is a new constituency.

Mr Speaker, I would also like to know from the minister why National Medical Stores or the Ministry of Health does not provide essential reagents for testing typhoid, brucella and other common diseases in health centres III as well as the relevant drugs to treat such diseases.

Lastly, there is a problem in the Ministry of Health in terms of medical supplies because even in Kampala, I have health workers who work in Kisenyi but they go there just to sit because they do not have even Panadol at the health centre. You find that by mid-month, there are no drugs in the health centres. What are we doing as Government? Mr Chairman and honourable minister, please clarify on these issues. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

7.56
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report and I would like to talk mainly about the chemotherapy machine. Recently, I was in Kenya and met a doctor who had a patient from Uganda. The patient had a swollen head and it was a woman.

Many tests had been carried out but they had not yet discovered what she was suffering from so they sent some samples to Nairobi and the samples were there for about two to three weeks. The results came out when I was in Eldoret and the doctor was excited because the results showed that the woman had non-malignant tumours and he thought that he would refer this patient to Mulago Hospital where the chemotherapy machine was.

Before referring the patient, he received the news that the machine had broken down. He got so disappointed and said that this was the only machine, which was serving the whole of East Africa. The one they have in Kenya cannot be compared with the one in Uganda. The patient was sent back to Uganda and she is rotting in Kapchorwa.

The way the chairman of the committee has explained, I would like to know whether this machine, which was put in the old bunker is working so that we can save the life of this woman. Thank you.

7.58
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The question in Ministry of Health is beyond resources. The ministry is a technical one and performance of a Government is to finish the provision of health services. However, we have more politicians taking political decisions in the Ministry of Health.

I would like to say that among the ministries, which are in a coma, the Ministry of Health is among because its functionality from the grassroots to the top is questionable. Even when you provide the machines, the human resource to operate the machines is not there.

Therefore, you do not have the machines and you do not have well paid human resource. It should be holistic; we need the money, the machines and the doctors. When you look at the conflicts in the ministry, they undermine each other. The other day, I was somewhere and one of the commissioners – honourable minister and honourable members, it was very shocking because some of us go and sit privately and they do not know us. 

The commissioner was bragging after meeting the Public Accounts Committee. He said, “These Members of the Public Accounts Committee were questioning me but I have a fixed deposit of Shs 5 billion on my account.” How does a director or a commissioner; a civil servant, have a personal fixed deposit account of Shs 5 billion? (Interjections) It is true. 

If the Government functions and the most important things are health and security, Government has the capacity to investigate and find out who has this money in the bank because we have anti-money laundering laws and the financial services securities, which were passed. Is Government using them to force people to declare their wealth and account for it? Therefore, as long as people do not account for their wealth, we are not doing much. Some people in the Ministry of Health are disgruntled because they see others getting wealthy and yet they are not questioned.

Another issue is standards of our medical officers. I would like to come back to the issue that was raised by the committee chairman about some of the training institutions. Actually, graduates from different institutions cannot perform. Can we develop standards as a country and say, “Unless you teach this and that, your students cannot be called doctors or nurses.” 

When we do not have standards, you find people saying, I was in (X) or (Y) nursing school and they have certificates. Someone says, I have a private university and I am teaching medicine and surgery.

One of the people in Kisoro went for an operation in a hospital but the doctors forgot gauze and scissors inside the abdomen. Later, the patient had to be flown to South Africa. When they investigated, they found out that these were some of the doctors from substandard institutions and they spoil the name of other good doctors and institutions. 

We have to look at performance and not to be selfish. Even if Kwizera had an uncle who has a university, it should be clear – because there is evidence here that someone is challenging the committee report without knowing that the committee investigated. What the committee is reporting here is a report from the ministry, which made the complaint. I do not think that what we are hearing from the committee is a creation of the chairman.

Mr Speaker, another issue is the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the committee chair. Please be brief.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, there are very many issues that have been raised but I want to help on this one. Tomorrow, if time allows, I want you to allow me to come with documentation of complaints from the East African Society of Doctors and Dental Surgeons who went to KIU and found the place wanting. 

Besides that, I am a trained medical doctor with a Master’s degree in Internal Medicine and I am a clinician. I know exactly what a university needs. The case in point is that as we speak, there is one university; KIU that produces more doctors than all the Ugandan public universities combined including Makerere, Mbarara and Gulu University medical schools. These are the first universities to have the best consultants in this country and Mulago is the biggest hospital we have in this country.

Training a doctor is not just a matter of putting him in class; you must take him to the ward and theatre so that you operate on a patient when he is seeing. This way, he can learn. You can also allow him to work while you are watching until when he can do it very well on his own. 

That is why we have a problem of interns in this country where you find over 1,000 interns produced but more than a half come from one university, which is relatively young. The documentation is there and tomorrow, Mr Speaker, I promise to come with all the letters that we got from the Drugs Monitoring Unit of the President’s Office. I called them and they gave me those documents.

Mr Speaker, I will now respond to hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s request on the money for oxygen plants. This Parliament had allocated more than Shs 5 billion for oxygen plants for all the 14 regional referral hospitals in this country. The money was given but they had a problem with procurement, as possibly, the minister will tell you. We found out that this money was given in corrigenda and that it was going to be double payment because the oxygen plant of Mbarara cost us only Shs 343 million and we wanted every hospital to have that because that is the money that we could afford.

The committee observed that Shs 392.9 million had been allocated to an item called “medical and agricultural supplies” in all regional referral hospitals in financial year 2016/2017, except Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital because they have it. They received the same funds in the financial year 2015/2016 for the purchase of oxygen plants. 

However, the committee further observed that the mandate to procure medical supplies lies with the National Medical Stores. In addition, the committee observed that the corrigenda for financial year 2016/2017 seeks to reallocate these funds to the development budget of these regional hospitals yet when the executive directors of all regional referral hospitals came to me, they were complaining that patients were being told to go and buy drugs from outside. 

Right now, patients are buying gloves. In Mulago, which is a national referral hospital, some doctors are prescribing on gloves. That is why the committee has recommended that this money: Shs 5.1 billion that has been allocated to regional referral hospitals, on top of what we gave them that time, should be reallocated to the National Medical Stores specifically to procure the same medical supplies worth Shs 392.9 billion for each regional referral hospital so that we can cater for shortages of drugs in these hospitals. 

Mr Speaker, on the issue of – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairman, I think you will help us by summarising so that we can move forward. I have two other reports to receive.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes, I would like to make two statements. There is a management problem at the Ministry of Health headquarters. The big people – not the ministers – and I think hon. Elioda Tumwesigye is a gentleman but surely, he was posted to a tough ministry. There is a problem between the permanent secretary and the Director General of Medical Services. There is also a gap between the Permanent Secretary and the general manager of the National Medical Stores and these are the top three very important officers in this ministry.

Mr Speaker, I recommend that the Minister of Health, since he is the oversight man, goes and calls these people, looks at them in the eye and tells them. If they cannot work together, ask for a transfer of some of them. There is no way we can compromise quality service delivery and giving healthcare to the people of Uganda just because of conflicts caused by egos.

Mr Speaker, lastly – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairman. Honourable minister, please try and summarise.

8.07
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Elioda Tumwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. Of course the report raises a number of issues and Members of Parliament have also raised a number of other issues. It is only fair for me to comment at least on a few for record purposes.

With respect to the committee recommendation of reallocating Shs 8 billion to the National Medical Stores for Hepatitis B, we had a discussion with the committee and the Budget Committee this morning and we indicated that most of that money had actually been got from PHC development earlier and that it is important that it remains reflected in the Mid Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) of the Ministry of Health. This is because the agreement was that after two years, it would go back to the local governments. 

Therefore, it was a considered opinion this morning that, that money remains in the health sector, although it would be transferred for purchase of vaccines and laboratory reagents to National Medical Stores (NMS), as had been the case earlier on in this financial year.

The other comment is on uniforms. They are suggesting a reallocation of money meant for beds and mattresses to uniforms. We need to first undertake a needs assessment. It is worth noting that when the Chinese gave us 7,000 beds, we carried out an assessment, which identified a gap of about 9,700 beds.

However, we are in agreement that we go and practically evaluate this gap that was highlighted by the District Health Officers (DHOs) and therefore, we might agree that this money can be allocated to uniforms because we still have a shortfall of about Shs 12 billion on uniforms to ensure that every health worker gets a uniform. We had already indicated it as an unfunded priority with the Committee on Health. 

On the issue of who should be training medical workers, our recommendation, which has been discussed in the ministry and will soon be taken to Cabinet is, we believe that the training of medical workers is done under the supervision and jurisdiction of the ministries responsible for the health sector, like in many other countries. This is an issue that we need to take on otherwise now, we do not have jurisdiction and we may not be able to take the necessary action.

With respect to dual practice whereby health workers dedicate a short time to Government and then go for private practice, there is a suggestion of performance-based remuneration, which is being proposed. However, this will require significant civil service reforms, which we are now discussing with the Prime Minister and will be tabling to Parliament at an appropriate time.

There are a number of items listed like agricultural supplies, charcoal and firewood. I think that somebody reading the Hansard may think that the Ministry of Health is run by mad people trying to put items – these are codes that are provided for within the BOTs, which are provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Therefore, you find a heading already there and you have to fit it where it falls in your sector. You may find that this refers to medical supplies but maybe when it comes to Agriculture, they will fill it in their portion, which refers to agricultural supplies. I thought that this should be clarified for the record otherwise in the future, somebody will wonder how we can spend money on agricultural supplies within the health sector.

With respect to Mbale, it is unfortunate that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is not here. I have visited Mbale Hospital several times and I was there in the last three weeks. We are suggesting that Mbale Hospital requires a lot of money specifically for capital development and we are in the process of establishing or building a surgical complex for Mbale Hospital.

The President has also directed that we build a cancer treatment centre for Mbale Hospital. Mbale is ‘alive’ and the health workers are not sick; they are actually very strong. Mbale Hospital has one of the best endoscopy units in the country and it is providing care. I hope that the Member of Parliament from Sironko District will support Mbale Hospital to a large extent rather than demotivating the health workers.

We also want to put on record that people do not travel outside Uganda for MRI services, except if they want. In East Africa, we have one of the best MRI machines in Mengo Hospital. It is a 1.5 tesla; a very good type. We also have a 1.0 tesla at Bethesda Hospital and another MRI machine of, I think, 1.2 tesla at Kampala Hospital. 

However, it is worth noting that these are private institutions and the committee is right to recommend that we need to have MRI machines in our hospitals in order to cater for people who may not be able to pay. We are in the process of purchasing MRI machines. However, we got a deficit in the sense that we also had to procure equipment for Makindye and Kawempe Hospitals and eventually ended up with a deficit in terms of how much money we have available for purchase of equipment.

We support the committee’s recommendation that money be allocated to procure MRI machines, not only for Mulago – we actually have plans to significantly increase the capacity of our hospitals that provide teaching services. Therefore, we are going to provide MRI and CT scan simulators, cobalt machines and others for Mbale, Mbarara, Gulu and Arua Hospitals. Therefore, our plans actually go beyond MRI for those areas - (Interjections)- why don’t I finish, hon. Cecilia Ogwal?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I just want to know the rationale of making the choice of Mbale, Gulu and the other hospitals forgetting that Lira Hospital is one of the oldest in the country.

DR TUMWESIGYE: I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal. I was actually doing a ward round in Lira Hospital yesterday. I have been there three times and I know what the hospital wants but it is a process.

Our plans are to ensure that all regional referral hospitals are equipped with capacity to provide specialised health care but it is a process. We are starting with these mainly because they also provide training facilities for medical students and we believe that medical students should be trained on state-of-the art equipment. 

As we get more resources, we shall expand to all regional referral hospitals. As you can clearly see, Mbarara, Mbale and Gulu have medical schools and Arua has a training school that has been training nurses although it wants to upgrade and train other health workers. That is the criteria that we are using for the time being but increasingly, we shall go to all of them. Lira and Soroti are starting and if we get more resources, we shall move there.

The other comment from hon. Cecilia Ogwal, which was re-echoed by the chairperson, is on the oxygen plants. We thank Parliament for providing the Shs 5.5 billion for purchase of oxygen plants. The procurement process has dragged on with a lot of administrative reviews. We hope that we are in the last lap of concluding the procurement process. 

However, we do not support the idea of taking Shs 392 million for each hospital to NMS since we do not know how much the oxygen plants will actually cost because we are still in the procurement process. We have indicative figures that show that the money will only cater for the oxygen plant itself and yet the regional referral hospitals would also like the piping of the oxygen to the ICU and various departments to be done.

Therefore, we have considered and discussed this with the Health and Budget Committees and we believe that this money should remain in the budget for these hospitals for oxygen plants and related equipment for the next year and after that, it can be reallocated to other areas. 

It is also worth noting that the Shs 5.5 billion to NMS is almost like a drop in the ocean with respect to requirements for drugs. As indicated in the ministerial policy statement, NMS would require significant resources, including Shs 50 billion, for laboratory reagents alone because I know it was also asked by a Member in relation to brucellosis and typhoid.

Hon. Ekanya asked about the national incinerator. By and large, we need to minimise the expiry of medicines and we are requiring the NMS not to import any medicines that have a short shelf life. We are also now trying to enforce our health workers to follow clinical guidelines because what happens is that even when a particular drug is available, they may opt to prescribe another drug. 

Increasingly, we shall ensure that we only supply drugs that have been requested by the facility rather than giving a flat specific package to all health facilities, health centres III specifically.

With respect to health centre IV upgrading, and this was from Busia, the location of health facilities has sometimes been done in the past with political considerations. However, we are increasingly saying that if you are to start up a hospital, you need to see where there is concentration of people and also consider other logistics, for example, how people will be moving.

What we are recommending and what we are going to do is that instead of having the same amount of drugs going to the same health facilities at the same level, we are going to link this to population and the burden. Maybe that will take care of the health centre IV in Busia as opposed to Masafu or wherever.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi certainly had a very good point with respect to medicines being expensive in some respects. What determines the price of medicine varies. However, in short, we are proposing to have an independent pricing committee, which can look at the cost of the drugs that have come, the cost of handling the medicines and supply and come out with an appropriate indicative price that can be used by National Medical Stores.

For the quarters in Mbale and what happened to accommodation, I do believe that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is aware of the earlier policies, which I think had come from the World Bank. At one time, they said that Government has no business accommodating staff and houses were actually sold to sitting tenants.

We certainly think, with respect to health facilities, that we need health workers to stay nearby and there has been a big move to ensure that we put up staff houses. I think hon. Nandala-Mafabi has seen the apartments that have been built in Mbale and we shall continue to build more. 

Of course it is debatable whether we shall be able, in the short term, to provide accommodation because sometimes, it is done at the expense of improving health services. Yesterday, in Lira, we were saying that maybe we should first take care of the maternity services. On Saturday, I was in Moroto Hospital and they had put up significant apartments. I also said that maybe next year we should look at the maternity ward.

In future, especially after Parliament has passed the PPP law, wouldn’t it be appropriate to get private individuals under BOT arrangement to actually build staff houses and then we budget for rent? After they have got what they put in, they can leave the houses to the hospitals. Right now, it is a huge challenge, which we are trying to handle.

I noted that hon. Nandala-Mafabi is very good; he has been monitoring me and knowing where I have gone, when I have come to Parliament or not come. I really like him for trying to follow up. However, I would like to reassure him that I spend most of my time on the Ministry of Health work, including leaving office at midnight as well as going to all these hospitals.

I can tell you that on Friday, I was in Soroti, on Saturday I was in Moroto and on Sunday, when most of you must have been enjoying your weekend, I was in Kotido. Sunday night at 8 p.m., I was doing a ward round in Abim Hospital. I take your issues but certainly, I am doing whatever it takes to ensure that we visit all these facilities.

Regarding the cancer machine in Lacor, although this is a private facility, because it has radioactive material, we are concerned as a sector and we are in discussions. Last week, we had discussions with the experts to see how we can decommission and remove that machine from Lacor and store it safely. We talked to the Atomic Energy Council, which is looking at both machines at Lacor and Mulago.

Regarding many machines not being used and lying idle, it is true that to some extent, sometimes you go to facilities and find equipment lying idle. First of all, it is a question of capacity. For example, our infrastructure division has no bio-medical engineer and only one trained mechanical engineer. We are now in the process of restructuring and providing for bio-medical engineers at the Ministry of Health headquarters but also the regional referral hospitals. We are working with Public Service.

We are also in the process of taking stock. We said, let us go and take stock of all the equipment that we have in the country in our facilities and redistribute them. I hope that you will support us in this because for example in Apac, there was an instrument, which we wanted to bring to the regional referral hospital but it was a tug of war to get it from there. Some people say, “Now that this equipment has arrived here, even if we are not using it, we must keep it.” 

One might ask why it went there in the first place but the issue is that we are going to do redistribution and I want to assure this Parliament that all equipment will be utilised once we have the relevant technical staff and training.

The Member from Mitooma said something about only 80 per cent of funds being released. I think there is good progress and improvement in the ministry with respect to utilisation of funds, judging from the past. 

Many people are showing despair that the sector is dying. Surely, you cannot measure the performance of the health sector by what you see only in hospitals. Health is defined as a state of complete physical, mental, social and spiritual wellbeing. Health is made in the home and only repaired in hospitals. The interventions that we carry out and that have the hugest impact are actually not necessarily in hospitals or health facilities.

As we speak, you might know that life expectancy has improved from 47 years in the 1980s to 63 years. How come? Regarding infant mortality, for every 1000 children born, we were losing 133. This has reduced to 54. Maternal mortality was over 630. Now we have reduced to this to less than 360. These are indicators that Members of Parliament might want to check on to see the state of health. 

I want to tell you that actually, the health sector is very vibrant and Ugandans are healthier than they were before. You should have a lot of hope based on those indicators, which are  the objective and can be assessed by the census.

Regarding teenage pregnancies where youth-friendly services can help, what will help most is education; having more of our girls in education and staying in school for long.

For Kyankwanzi and money for health centres IV in the new constituencies, I think we have recently estimated the costs and given the information to a manifesto committee to look for resources. However, to put maternity services: wards and midwives at every sub-county in Uganda, we need 225 sub-counties to be supported to upgrade to health centre III and 93, which have no health facilities to get a health centre III. For this, we need Shs 445 billion, just at health centre III level.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please wind up.

DR TUMWESIGYE: Can I end with the cancer machine? For whatever I have not been able to respond to, Members can always ask me and any member of the Ministry of Health.

With respect to the chemotherapy and the radiotherapy machines, I think it is just the radiotherapy machine. What is happening now is, first of all, we have contacted the Atomic Energy Council and the International Atomic Energy Agency to technically assess our bunker and we are expecting a report this Thursday. That report will give us a way forward. 

There is a strong belief that this bunker can still hold a new cobalt machine but not a linear accelerator, which is the most modern radiotherapy machine that we need. Therefore, if on Thursday it is technically proven and there is a technical report that the bunker can still hold a cobalt machine, we shall go ahead and bring the cobalt machine that was purchased and put it there to help our patients. 

However, going forward with steady progress, we shall be able to complete our bunkers. Once we have the new bunkers in Mulago, they will also contain linear accelerator, which is the most modern radiotherapy machine. The linear accelerator requires three metres of concrete while the cobalt machine requires 1.5 metres. What we have in the old bunker is not more than 1.5 metres. Therefore, we cannot put newer machines in there. 

However, once we complete the bunkers in the Cancer Institute, we can be able to bring in the linear accelerators, the PET scan, the cyclotron and other equipment as required. I would like to assure colleagues that everything is being done to ensure that our cancer patients do not die needlessly. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Thank you, honourable chairperson. I think this has been a very serious matter before the House; the matter of health. Can we take the next one? Honourable chairperson, would you like to shorten it and we see how to proceed?

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

8.30
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you do it in five minutes?

DR EPETAIT: I will try. Mr Speaker, I am the shadow Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and this is the first time that a shadow minister is presenting the main report.

Mr Speaker, I presented our alternative statement to the committee and for nearly all the issues that we raised, we were in agreement. Therefore, there is no point of contradiction. In the absence of the chairperson and the vice-chairperson, I will ably do the needful. (Applause)

Mr Speaker, before I proceed, I would like to lay on the Table the signed report and minutes of the committee along with the documents that were presented by the various entities that the committee interacted with.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, we are all aware that agriculture contributes 26.2 per cent of our national GDP and accounts for about 53 per cent of Uganda’s total export earnings. Therefore, we are dealing with an entity on whose backbone the economy is hinged. 

This report is for:
    1) Vote 010 – Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
    2) Vote 142 – National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO);
    3) Vote 152 – The National Agricultural Advisory Services Secretariat;
    4) Vote 155 – Cotton Development Organisation;
    5) Vote 160 – The Uganda Coffee Development Authority;
    6) Vote 121 – Dairy Development Authority;
    7) Vote 125 – The National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Data Bank;
    8) Votes 500-850 – Local government Votes for the district extension services and the district agricultural production.

Mr Speaker, I will go straight to page 19 of the report and indicate that the budget estimates for the agriculture sector this year stand at Shs 814.87 billion out of the National Budget of Shs 21.28 trillion. It is, therefore, representing 3.8 per cent. That is the share that agriculture receives out of the National Budget but remember that it contributes 53 per cent of our total export earnings.

Mr Speaker, I am going straight to the observations and recommendations.

The committee noted that currently, most of the agriculture sector policies are in draft form. We recommend that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries fast-tracks the National Agricultural Policy, the Irrigation, Seed, Extension, Mechanisation and Fertilizer Use policies to clearly guide the sector. The policies have remained stuck; we are told that they are before Cabinet while some are under review.

Regarding regulation of the seed industry, we recommend that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should expedite efforts to increase the number of seed inspectors required for efficient regulation of the seed industry. 

Mr Speaker, we had a challenge with Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD). Over the years, we have always been appropriating certain monies, which were literally like a drop in the ocean in as far as FMD vaccination coverage in the country is concerned. This year, the ministry required Shs 12 billion but only Shs 4 billion had been provided for in the Budget, leaving a funding gap of Shs 8 billion.

I will give details later during the intra-sectoral allocations but the committee recommends that an additional allocation of Shs 8 billion for vaccines for FMD be availed to avert the reoccurrence of the disease.

We also strongly recommend – this is for emphasis because it appeared in the last financial year – that in the medium-term, Government should undertake efforts to establish a vaccine-processing plant in collaboration with scientists from NARO. This way, we would have easy access even for the relevant strains of the vaccines that we would require rather than relying on vaccines from Kenya whose strains of the virus may, in most cases, not be the same as ours.

In regard to KCCA, the committee observed that we have continued to give grants to KCCA under agriculture. This year, Shs 6.36 billion was allocated as a KCCA grant. However, we discovered that out of that money, Shs 5 billion is actually earmarked for construction of USAFI market and only Shs 1.36 billion goes for urban agriculture. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that Shs 5 billion from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as KCCA grant must be budgeted for directly under Vote 122 of KCCA instead of disguising it under NAADS yet it is a specific activity for USAFI market payment.

The committee observed that we have a problem of lack of agricultural inspectors at our airport and border points. We, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development avails additional funding of Shs 8.5 billion to boost the regulatory function of inspection and certification of agricultural exports and imports in order to improve the value of our exports.

We also observed with concern the lack of the irrigation policy. At the same time, there has been some degree of duplication of duty between Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in as far as water-for-production is concerned. The Ministry of Water and Environment is planning for dams and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is planning for the same.

The committee, therefore, recommends that a multi-sectoral taskforce be formed urgently to harmonise this issue in order to assist farmers with water-for-production.

We further request the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to focus on investing in the promotion and availability of appropriate irrigation technologies that can widely be adopted by smallholder farmers rather than relying on only the large-scale water sources for agricultural production.

In terms of agricultural financing, we observed that a majority of the farmers have found it very difficult to access financing for agriculture. The agriculture credit facility that was established is really targeting well-to-do farmers. We, therefore, ask Government - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your time is up. Would you like to summarise now?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, we have a number of underfunded priorities, some of which I had already alluded to and that is to do with FMD vaccination programme. We have a funding gap of Shs 8 billion. FMD is a very big economic disease that really brings down our revenues. 

I am glad that this time round, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has provided the committee with comprehensive information on the planned activities, areas of coverage and the doses to be procured. 

The committee, in its wisdom, has agreed that out of the allocation to NAADs for this financial year, which is mainly for input, we get Shs 20 billion to take care of certain shortfalls. Shs 8 billion of the Shs 20 billion would be allocated for procurement of additional vaccines for FMD, which had that funding gap. 

There is a funding gap of about Shs 13.5 billion for NAGRC. NAGRC is basically handling all our Government farms and there are several of them including Njeru, Kasolwe and Nshaara. The list is long and I cannot mention all of them for want of time but most of those farms are dilapidated.

We agreed in the committee that Shs 12 billion be re-allocated to cover that funding gap in order to enable NAGRC to restock and revamp the agricultural farms that are getting dilapidated.

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, we recommend that funds be sought to address the critical and yet underfunded areas within the sector. Issues like policies, as I had already mentioned, should be fast tracked. Extension services are badly needed at the local governments. As we speak, we have personnel coverage of less than 25 per cent at both district and sub-county levels. We have funding gaps to cater for recruitment of extension staff. 

Mr Speaker, you guided that issues about the figures will be harmonised by the Committee on Budget. Subject to the committee’s recommendations, we pray that the House adopts the report and also approves the planned intra-reallocation. We request Government to address a number of the funding gaps for which we have not been able to go in detail but they are in the report. We pray that if we have to maintain and boost our economy, agriculture is the way to go. Remember, a hungry man can sometimes be angry. We need Ugandans to be happy and so we should feed them well. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and honourable members. This is a good report but we have that time issue. When we are dealing with the figures, there might be an opportunity to have some debate on this.

Therefore, I am seeking your indulgence that if it were possible, we receive all the reports now and then the Budget Committee can also finalise. Tomorrow when the Budget Committee comes, we can have a little discussion on the specific proposals for reallocation. I do not know what the Members think about that. Can we do that? 

Can I ask the minister to make some responses on this issue?

8.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col. (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. We have gone through the report with them and most of the recommendations are okay; they are rational and well thought out. We shall take it upon ourselves and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make sure that we consider those recommendations.

There was something mentioned in the report about the DDA Training School. It is proper; it is one of the areas that are very underfunded and yet we have made tremendous achievement in the dairy sector. It is important we also take that recommendation because if we do not do it, we are frustrating the gains and the farmers where we have reached so far. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Thank you, the Shadow Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for standing in the gap and delivering such a very well presented report. 

PRESENTATION AND CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

8.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Eddie Kwizera): Mr Speaker, the Committee on Natural Resources was looking at six Votes:

    a) Vote 017 – Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development; 
    b) Vote 123 – Rural Electrification Agency;
    c) Vote 019 – Ministry of Water and Environment;
    d) Vote 150 – National Environment Management Authority;
    e) Vote 157 – National Forestry Authority;
    f) Vote 302 – Uganda Meteorological Authority.

We interacted with a number of agencies and I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings and the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, this is a 41-page report and I beg to request that we go to the recommendations.

Mismatch between Electricity Generation and Uptake 
Over the years, the Government of Uganda has invested a lot of funds in the expansion of generation capacity, which has grown by 8.45 per cent but in some areas, you find that we have hydro capacity of about 135 megawatts.

The committee noted that the mismatch between the supply and demand has been mainly due to low uptake as a result of limited distribution and network.

Mr Speaker, the committee further noted that the two plants: Jacobsen and Electromax are on standby and yet the Government continues to pay capacity charge amounting to approximately Shs 68 billion annually although they are not contributing power to the grid.

The committee recommends that Government aggressively stimulates growth in the demand of electricity through expanding power transmission and the distribution network. The committee recommends that the contract between Jacobsen and Electromax and Government be reviewed to accommodate the standby requirements of those megawatts because they are not contributing to the grid.

Un-surveyed Land Owned by the Ministry 

The committee recommends that in order to avoid encroachment on the ministry’s land, all land be surveyed and titled. 

On the Electricity Sector Development Programme, the committee recommends that the ministry expedites the implementation of the project and ensures that the procurement process is streamlined to improve the effectiveness of the implementation of the project. This is because in the Auditor General’s report, we found that when we borrowed $ 120 million in 2011, we only used 10 per cent of the loan. Therefore, we found that as much as we borrowed money for the sector, we did not consume it. 

Promotion of Energy-Saving Stoves
    (a) The committee recommends that the ministry prioritises sensitisation of energy-saving stoves and initiates behaviour change campaign for increased adoption to improve the usage of energy-saving stoves in Uganda. 

    (b) The ministry should come up with an incentive in promoting energy-saving stoves like subsidies, which would reduce the cost of acquiring stoves. 

Promoting Transparency in Extractive Industries
The committee recommends that the ministry expedites outgoing processes of putting in place various regulatory framework in order to facilitate Uganda joining global transparency forums like EITI. 

Upstream and Mainstream Petroleum Regulations

The committee recommends that regulations be expedited and be gazetted to be operationalised and to also operationalize the petroleum law. 

Inadequate Stock for Strategic Reserves

The committee strongly recommends that the ministry reviews the terms and conditions of the agreement to streamline the operations of the strategic reserves in view of the limited capacity of the current operator. In addition, the ministry should invoke the sanctions as per the contract.

Lack of Petroleum Technical Committee 

In order to operationalise the Petroleum Supplies Act and regulations, the committee recommends that the ministry urgently constitutes a petroleum technical committee within three months. 

Petroleum Fund

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should urgently put in place regulations, guidelines and procedures to operationalise the provisions of the Public Finance Management Act in general. 

In addition, the Government should fast track the full implementation of the petroleum institutions for management of oil and gas in order to effectively operationalise the new legal and regulatory framework in the oil sector. 

Formalisation of Regulations of Artisan and Small Scale Mining

The committee recommends that Government expedites the review of the mining policy and the amendment of the Act and that the Government establishes and promotes mining cooperatives by consolidating artisans and small scale mining associations. 

Inadequate Inspection and Monitoring of the Mining Operations

The committee recommends that the ministry should develop inspection and monitoring work plans to guide and provide direction. In conjunction with the ministry responsible for public works, weigh bridges should be installed at the epicentres of mining activities to enable the inspectors accurately ascertain volumes of mined materials. 

Inadequate Provision of Laboratory Services
The committee recommends that the ministry expedites the development of national minerals laboratory policy, prioritises the purchase of laboratory equipment and trains its staff in ISO certification. 

Atomic Energy Council

Honourable members, the committee observed that as much as atomic energy was in place, it was not well facilitated. In the Budget Committee, we shall provide the allocated figures to provide sufficient funds for them to be able to operate. 

Karuma Hydro-Power Project

The committee recommended that there should be proper coordination of the project in accordance with the signed contract between the contractor, the ministry and the owner’s consultants. 
Government should institute investigation into how AF Consultants for Uganda Generation Company were procured because this consultant was procured outside the law. 

The Government should develop a deliberate program to build local capacity of local engineers for inspection of hydro-power projects. This would save the Government of the future funds and provide for local consultants. 

Supply of PV Solar Systems by Contracted Companies

The committee recommends more aggressive and routine monitoring mechanisms to effectively and efficiently ensure that the solar companies adhere to the set agreements. In addition, companies that had immaterial anomalies should rectify their anomalies. Companies that were implicated in the fraud by the Rural Electrification Agency should recover the funds and these companies should be blacklisted.

Non-remittance of five per cent transmission levy to Uganda Transmission Company by Umeme.

Honourable members, we found that whereas Umeme remits money to the Uganda Transmission Company, Uganda Transmission Company does not remit money for transmission levy. As a committee, we have decided to transfer about Shs 30 billion from transmission to Rural Electrification Agency to achieve their objectives.

Water and Environment Sector

Our committee recommendations are on page 28. 

Rural Water Quality

The committee recommends that the ministry develops a framework for water quality management and regulation that should clearly define a model for water safety plan in order to protect water sources from contamination and define protocols to take action on contaminated sources under the routine and emergency sanctions such as fraud. 

The ministry should develop a catchment management plan to manage activities in the catchment in order to minimise pollution of drinking water sources. 

The ministry should also enhance promotion of a policy shift from developing points of source that are vulnerable to pollution to piped water as outlined in the Vision 2040.

Nile Basin Cooperative Framework Agreement

The committee recommended that Government expedites ratification of the Nile Basin Cooperative Framework Agreement within six months. 

Accreditation of Laboratories for Water Quality Testing
The committee recommended that the ministry expedites the development of a national laboratory policy that provides a scheme for recognition of the competence of national water and environmental laboratory.

The committee intends to re-allocate Shs 200 billion from a different sector to another sector to provide for the resources required for this laboratory.

Stagnation, sanitation- (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, your time is up. Would you like to summarise now? We usually summarise with a conclusion.

MR KWIZERA: Honourable members, on human resource capacity in the Ministry of Water and Environment, we found that they are performing at 21 per cent. As such, we need to provide them with human resource since we are also going to give them financial resources. Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson for presenting this report and thank you, honourable members, for sitting this long from 2 o’clock. It is now coming to 9 o’clock. I think we have done very well as we have been able to achieve all these things. 

Honourable members, four active items have remained on the Order Paper and we need to accomplish them by tomorrow. They include the motion for the supplementary schedules 1, 2 and 3, which we should be able to finish by tomorrow so that the Supplementary Appropriation Bill can be prepared, gazetted and brought back to the House for closing the other financial year. 

We received the reports already for items No. 7, 8 and 9 on the Order Paper today. If you recall, all the reports were presented to the House and were scheduled for debate. We should therefore come ready to debate and conclude those items tomorrow. 

That applies to item 7 in the notice of business to follow; the report on the petition by former prisons’ officers of Kasese District Local Government. The report of the committee was conclusive that there was no need for this petition. You may also remember that it was also deferred that we should come back and take a decision on it. We should be able to dispose of this matter tomorrow.

There are also two resolutions: one for the establishment of the East Africa Standby Force and the other one is on the ratification of the East African Protocol on Cooperation in Defence Affairs. This matter has been there for a while and I think there were preliminary discussions on this subject. We could also be able to finish this tomorrow, if we are ready.

Tomorrow, we will also receive the report from the Budget Committee. If we come early at 2.00 p.m. like we always do, we will be able to roll these things out and finish with the Budget process so that by Thursday, we do what we told ourselves that we will do; deal with the budget on Thursday, 28 April 2016. 

We will be able to achieve that as we have done very well. I congratulate and thank you for doing this, honourable members. For those purposes, I have mentioned, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 9.00 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 27 April 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)
