Wednesday, 25 April 2012

Parliament met at 2.25 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. First, I would like to appeal to the sessional committees to work expeditiously on the issue of the indicative budget framework so that we try to keep as close as possible to the statutory deadline.

I am delighted to report that as a result of our bilateral meetings with various delegations in the Inter-Parliamentary Union, I have received a request from the Parliament of Turkey to form a Uganda-Turkey Friendship Association so that Members who are interested should register with the Clerk. I have also received another one from the Shula Council of Saudi Arabia. Again, those Members who are interested in forming the Saudi Arabia-Uganda Parliamentary Friendship Association can register with the Clerk. 

I will be informing you as the confirmations come in. I will be amending the Order Paper slightly to allow the chair of UWOPA to make a statement on domestic violence.

In the public gallery, we have pupils and teachers of Apac Model Boarding Primary School represented by hon. Maxwell Lakora and hon. Lucy Ajok. We are delighted to see you in Kampala. (Applause) I understand on this side we have members of the civil society. You are welcome.

2.27
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to make a statement on behalf of Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association and a consortium of women organisations and human rights activists, who are seated in the gallery up there, condemning the sexual assault on Ingrid Turinawe and other women suspects.

On Friday, 20 April 2012, Ugandans were shocked by the barbaric, brutal and despicable indecency that the Police displayed during the arrest of the Opposition FDC woman leader, Ms Ingrid Turinawe. This was one of the most shameful acts by a force that claims to be committed to the highest standards of professionalism.

Over the last two years, Madam Speaker, we have witnessed intrusive, abusive and most inappropriate handling of various women protesters like Ann Mugisha, who last year complained of being manhandled by Police officers at Jinja Road Police Station; Kampala Woman MP, Nabilah Naggayi, who was stripped by Police officers; and Kitgum Woman MP, Beatrice Anywar, who was assaulted by Police officers on Entebbe Road.

This kind of brutal behaviour is not only affecting women leaders, but also ordinary women who have been arrested during protests and other peaceful demonstrations in the recent past. Despite all this, we opted to dialogue with the Police, writing protest letters and appealing for humane and respectful treatment of women by Police during arrest, and adhering to rules and regulations that govern different forms of arrest in Uganda.

However, the manner in which the officers acted in the case of Ms Turinawe, clearly indicated that they had selectively targeted her on the basis of her gender. She was travelling in a convoy that had Kampala Lord Mayor, Lukwago Erias, Mubarak Munyagwa, MP Ssemujju Nganda and others. The cars carrying the above protestors were allowed to pass and that of Ingrid was stopped.

It was visible that even though Ingrid had a male youth in the car, identified as Paddy, dressed in a similar T-shirt, the male passenger who was next to her in the same car was not arrested. The manner of the arrest by the Police officer was unlawful and violated her dignity, privacy and bodily integrity.

We condemn in the strongest term possible this unlawful act by Police officers, and call upon all right-thinking Ugandans to join us in condemning such acts on the following grounds:

1.	This kind of arrest amounted to cruel, disgraceful, indecent and inhumane treatment contrary to the Police Act, as well as Article 24 of the Constitution of Uganda, and the Criminal Procedure Code, section 5. A similar incident of humiliating treatment has been recently condemned in courts of law. In that particular case, the court ordered the demotion of Assistant Superintendent of Police, Mr Andrew Gidoi, to the rank of inspector for the scandalous manner in which he handled a female complainant. This was in Jinja, where this particular officer manhandled a woman suspect during the 2001 election.

2.	The Police Act stipulates that Police women shall be responsible for searching and arresting women suspects. This provision was violated when Ms Turinawe was sexually harassed and physically assaulted by the Police officer who effected her arrest. We have the clip of her arrest clearly showing a male officer squeezing her breast. I know all of you have watched, but in case this evidence is needed, we are in possession of the clip.

3.	The manner in which Ms Turinawe’s arrest was effected contravened internationally recognised standards for the treatment of accused persons during arrests and detention, because it did not follow legal procedure, was unduly intrusive, and was not reasonable or appropriate in the circumstance.

Unfortunately, the integrity of the Police force was put to question when Kampala Metropolitan Spokesperson, Mr Ssenkumbi attributed this to a female Police officer. Whether or not it was a female or male Police officer, we still condemn this act!

In addition to the above concerns, we detest the shielding and the protecting of perpetrators, as well as denying public access to information, by attacking journalists who were covering such protests. 

We note with concern that this brutal behaviour is being picked by ordinary citizens, where recently, in another national television, an ordinary woman, who was suspected to have stolen a phone, was undressed in public by men. It is unacceptable for any person to treat women in this manner! 

We bring this issue to this House in order to call attention to the mounting public anger and grave concern against the Police, which was exemplified by women exposing their breasts in a protest on Monday this week. This is culturally an indicator that things are not moving in the right direction; when women start stripping their breasts for the Police.

We, therefore, demand the following:

1.	The Police officers who were involved in the arrest of Ingrid should be named, suspended and prosecuted.

2.	The Minister of Internal Affairs and the Inspector General of Police make a public apology and assure Ugandans that they will rein in their officers to adhere to the rules and regulations of arrest, especially those of women.

3.	We demand vigilance on the part of Police in all public arrests to ensure that all citizens are handled in dignity and according to the law. This includes informing the public on how to handle suspects as part of community policing.

4.	Immediate implementation of the law, which stipulates that women Police officers conduct such an arrest of women.

This statement was drawn together by the following:

1.	UWOPA
2.	Uganda Women’s Network
3.	Institute of Social Transformation 
4.	The Human Rights Centre, Uganda 
5.	Action for Development 
6.	Centre for Women in Governance 
7.	Association of Women Lawyers(FIDA Uganda)
8.	National Association of Women Organisations in Uganda.
9.	Forum for Women in Democracy 
10.	Health Rights Action Group
11.	MIFUMI Tororo 
12.	Action Aid International 
13.	Isis-WICCE and individual women rights activists:
i.	Stella Mukasa
ii.	Norah Matovu Winyi
iii.	Jackie Asiimwe
iv.	Allen Asiimwe
v.	Irene Ovonji. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table, and state that as women activists and women Members, we do not say that when people commit crimes they should not be arrested. We are saying, arrest them according to the rules and in a dignified manner.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for making the statement by the UWOPA on behalf of a consortium of women organisations and human rights activists, on the issue of Madam Ingrid Turinawe, which happened on 20th April, Friday last week.

All I can say for the moment is that the matter is under serious investigation. I made a statement to that effect yesterday. When the investigations are complete, the full force of the law will apply according to the Police and according to the laws of this country. Until the investigations are complete, I cannot say anything more than this. So, I urge the presenter of this statement and all the people on whose behalf she presented, to please wait for us to complete the investigations and to report back.

THE SPEAKER: That request is out of order; you cannot stop people from expressing their concern until you are ready.
 
MS KABASHARIRA: I was asking for guidance. I thought you would give us chance and then the minister would reply. It is so unfortunate that today our morals have degenerated so much so that people have lost respect for each other. 

I got the chance to see the clip of what happened on that day on NTV. Women used to be respected so much. I do not know what happened, because even when you have committed a crime of that magnitude like what Ingrid was trying to do, that should not have necessitated the policemen to handle her in that manner.

It was demeaning a woman so much. You men, maybe it is because you are men, you do not know how sensitive abreast of a woman is, because you only touch and maybe you at times suck, but you do not know how it feels when it is pressed. I felt so bad when I saw her whining. We women are weak naturally; even if they had wanted to remove her, they could have pulled her hand; you are normally stronger than us. 

I think if morals have degenerated in our forces, then we do not know where we shall run to. I have always respected the Police. This morning I was in a traffic jam near the traffic lights. I think there is an operation that is going on. The policemen who were in this uniform with many colours were stopping every boda boda. I took a keen interest in what they were trying to do. One boda boda man was carrying three cans of milk; they pulled him and put him on the side. I kept watching; they went somewhere behind and he pulled out money to go and give. I called the policeman that was there and I did not even introduce myself, but I was just bursting against my seat. I asked, “Is this the picture that you are trying to show about the Police of Uganda? What are you trying to do?” And they said that they were on operation to get these boda bodas. I asked them for what, and if they were getting them to extort money from them. They started saying that they do not do it and then someone said that they saw them openly. 

So, it is not only even harassing the women, but they are committing crime by extorting money from boda bodas. These people also earn their money through the hard way. I witnessed and I can even quote the boda boda and whatever although I did not get the particulars of the policeman. 

We do not want the good picture of our Police to be squandered and spoilt by a simple mistake. We heard what Arinaitwe did, and now you get this policeman, whom I do not know, on women. We may not easily differentiate what is happening to the A4C vis-à-vis our Police. I also do condemn what the A4C is doing because they also caused the death of that policeman. But that does not necessitate that they bring the anger onto the innocent parts of women’s bodies. Women should be handled as women and we should have respect for women. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, two minutes.

2.46
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to condemn in the strongest terms possible the way that Ingrid Turinawe was mishandled by the Police. I would like to thank the chairperson of UWOPA and the civil society organisations that have rendered support to this cause. I thank you chairperson for reading this statement on behalf of the women parliamentarians. 

This was an attack on the sanctity of motherhood, the women of the nation. The least that this Parliament and the people of Uganda can expect from the Minister of Internal Affairs is an apology, but not for the minister to stand here and tell us that there is nothing much he can add. (Applause) We the women of this nation expect an apology from the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

It was shocking to see an officer in the ministry defending the people who did this act, saying that the arrest was done by women. When are the officers of Uganda going to take responsibility for their actions? The right thing to have been done was to own up to the mistake and say sorry, and then we would know that the officers are taking responsibility, but not to cover up mistakes and encourage the policemen to go and make more of these similar acts to the women and people of Uganda. This also showed that the Police lack training in gender sensitivity. The culprits must be found and they must be brought to book. (Applause) Secondly, the Police should be given the necessary training so as to handle women and all Ugandans with dignity.

I would like to send an appeal to the women activists out there. It is okay for you to defend your rights, but let us also be mindful of the integrity of women. As women leaders, we need to shine the torch and lead the way and not lead people into chaos. If you have a cause, why do you resist arrest so as to be molested? The right thing Ingrid Turinawe would have done was to give herself in and then she would have defended her cause. I stand here to defend the dignity of the women of Uganda. I also want to condemn the acts of the now 4GC -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, just close your presentation and then we go to hon. Mutyabule.

MS KAMATEEKA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. God does not need anyone to defend him and it is no wonder that he let this person be treated like this. The God I know is the God of order and peace, and so do not claim or purport to be fighting for God when you are involved in chaos. Let us respect ourselves and respect the law of the nation, and then God will defend us. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We have a lot of work today; so, just two minutes. (Laughter) Yes, the men are here and you are also here, but I am coming. Two minutes.

2.49
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleague in condemning this act of mishandling or sexually assaulting Ingrid Turinawe. I was actually watching on NTV and I saw the pain Ingrid was going through. She was even trying to bite her lips and teeth, which showed that she was actually in agony. When they touch your breast, I know how you feel. Even twisting it, and more so, if it is mishandled by men. 

I would like to add my voice to what the previous honourable speaker has said. My fellow women who are out there trying to fight for your rights, let us do it decently. Now, like when Ingrid was told to get out, she would have got out and maybe she would not have gone through that agony and mishandling. 

I would also like to call upon my fellow women out there; if you are going to demonstrate or show solidarity that what has been done to your colleague is bad, do not face the Police half naked. It really hurt me when I saw the women with their breasts out and trying to incite the Police and telling them to come and see it fresh! I was actually sympathising with those policemen when they saw it fresh and what actually happened. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order honourable members. Mrs Mutyabule is saying something very serious. Okay, hon. Todwong, two minutes. 

2.52
MR RICHARD TODWONG (NRM, Nwoya County, Nwoya): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I know that when our mothers speak and the men do not answer, they also do not like it. I am a son to a mother; and I am a husband to another woman; and a father to a daughter. 

Whereas we condemn what happened in the strongest terms possible, we also like to register our disappointment in the way some other women went to the Police to harass the policemen – (Interjections)- whether sexually or boob wise, I do not know. But we know that the Police over reacted. We are aware that women should be respected just like men should be respected. The person in particular has been on the news for the last one month or so and it appears that she must have been a little stubborn to the Police officers. So, we also need to find that out, just like the minister said they are investigating, because I don’t think any normal person would just go to a lady to press the breasts. There should have been something that could have happened before the breast was touched. But nevertheless, we condemn that act. 

We also request the women, especially the women movement, to respect their bodies. Before you expect others to respect you, we request that you respect your bodies. The women that we saw on the news going to the Police station yesterday while showing their breasts voluntarily, also disrespected themselves and they disrespected the women movement. So, we request that the women leaders should restrain their colleagues from abnormal activities in the open. Thank you. 

2.57
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Ingrid Turinawe is my constituent. She was born and was raised in my constituency. Although we don’t agree ideologically on the question of politics, she comes from my sub-county and we are here talking about indecent handling of women. I want to assure my sisters that even we, the men, appreciate the sensitivity of the human female breasts. Actually, when hon. Mutyabule touched her breasts, I chemically felt it. (Laughter) So, as men, we are equally concerned and, therefore, this is not an issue to do with women alone, but both men and women, when it comes to indecent handling of individuals, particularly the women. 

Madam Speaker, when AIP Ariong died, during the requiem mass, the person who spoke on behalf of the Police said the red lines had been drawn, and some of us felt that was very unfortunate, because the Police shouldn’t start acting unprofessionally simply because one of their colleagues died. They should still remain professional and I thought Gen. Kayihura had actually recruited very many Police officers because when you look at the deployment at Parliament here, we have very many women Police officers and I thought the force has enough women. Professions are usually guided by a code of conduct. I come from the medical profession. In our profession, if you are a male medical doctor and you are going to examine a female patient, the ethics demand that there must be a female nurse in your presence. You cannot, as a male doctor, examine a female patient, just the two of you; there must be a female nurse. That is part of our regulation and ethics.

So, similarly, in the Police profession – I don’t know whether it is a profession - we all know that females should be handled by female officers. I don’t know why in this case, the men enthusiastically took on the role which should have been done by women officers and also indecently handled Ingrid Turinawe. Like my colleagues have duly voiced, we condemn this kind of act. Even when the actions of Turinawe may not be agreeable to some of us, that should not make the Police act unprofessionally.

This incident occurred on 20th April, which was a Friday. Today is Wednesday. I don’t know how much time the minister and the Police need to investigate such a particular incident –(Applause)- I would have expected the minister by now to have some facts. Really, do you need a month to investigate a singular event? So, we want the minister to tell us when he will be ready with that report and I think without wasting the time of Ugandans, you should apologise and take action on the Police officers who acted unprofessionally during that incident in Nansana. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

2.59
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I take the opportunity to join the chairperson UWOPA in condemning the action. I think by nature, women are a weaker sex and accordingly, we would expect the policemen to act professionally and it is highlighted that actually, there was even sexual assault. I wonder whether the intention of this Police officer was that, and should it be found out that it was, then he will deserve the biggest punishment with impunity to that effect. 

Madam Speaker, while we actually condemn this act, shall we also request ladies to always preserve and protect the dignified heritage of their dignity, while they are involved in such protests. We have seen these protests for quite some time and it is always hurting that there are these voiceless who are always not talked about - the ordinary Wanainchi - whenever these protests occur, there are those who suffer and little do we mention them and it is also painful to find that the same personality is involved each day. I think we also have to condemn the actions of - it was formally A4C and now it is “For God and My Country”- I don’t think that God would really condone such –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: I rise on a point of order, Madam Speaker. Is the honourable colleague in order, when talking about an issue that has appalled the whole country, to raise issues on a person as to why she always comes? She has offered herself to do what she is doing. So, is he in order, when talking about what happened, to insinuate that somebody was there and she maybe deserved it?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know, even in law, when you are a habitual offender, the court takes judicial notice of that conduct. Please conclude. 

MR KYOOMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling –(Member timed out.)

3.02
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to associate myself with the statement made by hon. Betty Amongi, the Chairperson of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, together with the other civil society organisations that have accepted to stand and be counted as advocates for human rights and in condemning the violation of the various human rights of the so many Ugandans, not singling out exactly the sexual assault that was gravely meted on Ingrid Turinawe and other women of this country. 

Madam Speaker, you will realise many Members have condemned the act and possibly echoing out the issue regarding the professionalism of our Police. Like others have said, it takes a human being to say, sorry. But it is the real human being who will own up to their mistakes. It wouldn’t have cost anything for the minister to say, to the Ugandans and women of this country, sorry -(Applause)– because of the way in which the Police misconducted themselves in the arrest of Ms Ingrid Turinawe. That would have cost the minister nothing other than an appreciation of the fact.

As we talk about Ingrid Turinawe, I would like to ask you to reflect on your homes and look at the wives who you so much cherish. Look at your daughters and sisters and imagine how you would have felt if they were the ones in such circumstances. Look at the beautiful ladies in this House and imagine they were the ones being squeezed the way it was done to Ingrid Turinawe.

I know that Ms Ingrid Turinawe is a law-abiding citizen –(Interjections)– yes! I am saying this because every time she has been arrested, she has always submitted. She always complies with court orders and that is why she has never abused her bail rights by jumping, for example, a court bail.

At the time she was being arrested, Ms Ingrid Turinawe was in her car driving. She wasn’t at the launch of the, “For God and My Country Campaign”; she was in her car driving. And I would like to say that Ingrid knows her rights. Because of that, she always moves with her driving permit. That is why she was not being arrested for a traffic offence. 

Because she knows her rights, when the policeman tried to arrest her, she said no, “I want a woman to come and arrest me.” But what the Police officer thought or needed most was her breast. That is why instead of touching any other parts of her body, the Police officer resorted to squeezing her breasts. No wonder the other women later on said that, well, since you the Police are so much interested in the breasts, let us bring services closer to you –(Laughter)- by walking naked with our breasts exposed. It is also unfortunate that women really did that, but we need to understand that this showed how far the women of Uganda have been pushed in regard to this situation.

I would like to say that the Police in Uganda is pushing the women in this country too much and we are about to believe that this is a deliberate effort intended to dehumanize the female race. Let me cite another incident where there was a launch of a book at the square. A man and a woman were involved. The two people were later arrested, but the man was released on bond while the woman was taken to court and remanded to Luzira Prison. Why? What a coincidence that even in Ingrid’s circumstances, while she had males with her, they were left to go, but she was treated the way she was? Can we say the Police are just targeting women? You men, don’t you know that you also have sensitive parts? I don’t believe in people who say that women are a weaker sex. The men, you know that when those weaker parts are squeezed, you will definitely cry for help. (Laughter) We know those weaker points, which when squeezed you will also forget that you are a man. So, it is not about calling a woman the weaker sex, it should be about the sensitivity of the matter. That is why I started with the point of professionalisation of the Police.
 
Madam Speaker, I have never forgotten a situation when I saw a man who had been arrested in a demonstration being bound onto a Police pick-up car, but with the other Police officer squeezing his private parts. I saw that man yell in pain. I saw the agony that the man was going through. Why go for the private parts of the man and squeeze them even when he is already under your custody?

MS ABIA: Thank you very much, Opposition Chief Whip, for giving way. The information I want to give is that even when the man’s private parts that are delicate are being squeezed hard, they don’t constitute baby food. But in this case, what was molested is actually the food that our children take. So, that attack did not only go to insult womanhood; it also insulted the integrity of a mother who is breastfeeding. Thank you.

MS WINIFRED KIIZA: Thank you so much, my dear sister. That brings us to the fact that the issues are very clear. It is really a shame – and you know that when you are handling a woman, just know you are handling the entire nation. I am saying this because, from the information we have just received, when the breasts are squeezed –(Member timed out.)

3.10
MS LUCY AJOK (UPC, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the voices of the others who talked in condemnation of this violence. But first, I would like to thank our chairperson, the civil society and all the colleagues here - both male and female. 

I want to say that what we read about and watched on television has distressed most of our children in this country. This is because we all know what a woman is to children. What that policeman did to a woman on the street in that manner has distressed our children. That is not what should happen in a civilized country.

Secondly, I notice that this has become a trend. Last week, in Jinja, a lady was arrested in a way – thrown as if she was a sack. Actually, even a sack can be loaded onto the pick-up in a much smoother way. Anyway, if we can get these cases on camera, how many cases of a similar nature take place out there without being covered by the camera? I am saying this because I don’t want to believe that this is a one-off. 

I would like to call upon the civil society to establish a line for women to call whenever they get mishandled by a policeman or even a policewoman. This is so because even if this arrest had been done by a policewoman, I don’t think she should have handled Ingrid in the manner it was done. That was being very insensitive; it violates human rights and creates a trend in this country that makes everybody violent. I know that we are known for being a violent nation, but I think we should be on course to cooling down and respecting ourselves.

About women being condemned for having gone to the Police station with bare breasts, I would like to say that I don’t condemn that act. There are situations in this country that the minority, or even things that affect the majority that are not listened to. Just this month, we had a group of women in Amuru District who undressed in protest. Who is condemning that? They undressed because they were not being listened to. Their lives are being affected and nobody is bothered. The government is not listening. I call upon the government –(Member timed out.)  

3.13
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The pride of any nation is seen in terms of how women are respected in that particular country. Women are the mothers of this nation. I strongly condemn the way Ingrid Turinawe was arrested. 

I think this should be a little bit broader. Professionalism in Police is lacking. I understand they have what they call a professional standards agency. When you look at the way all these arrests are carried out, it leaves a lot to be desired, as to whether we have any professionalism in Police. 

It is not only about how brutally Ingrid was handled. It is not only about Ingrid, but even the men; as the Chief Whip has said – we men have lost our private parts under the hands of Police officers. Some men have had their private parts weakened, while others have lost it completely because of the way Police handles men. A case in point is a DP activist, Mr Kayizzi. He was squeezed by Police officers. 

So, this happens even to the men. How the Police conduct arrests leaves a lot to be desired. At times you wonder, in a situation where we have so many killings in the city – of recent we lost a prominent Sheikh in the city, and we did not see Police coming in as quickly as they do when there are demonstrations. 

It is my humble appeal that if we are to cure this problem, we must ensure that we put a lot of funds in professionalising the Police so that they know that when you are going to carry out an arrest of a male, make sure that male Police officers are there and when it is a female, it must be handled by female Police officers. Short of that we shall continue seeing situations of this kind. 

Finally, I believe that as members of this nation, we deserve to be treated humanely. I do not think there is anybody who has been told by the Police that please, stop; we want to arrest, and he or she refuses. We always go to Police, and we always accept genuine arrests. It is not true that it was because Ingrid refused to get out of her vehicle that she was treated that way.

3.17
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Betty for the statement. This act must be condemned in the strongest terms it deserves. All of us here have gone through the hands of women and mothers. We have wives and we have daughters. But the way Ingrid was arrested and mishandled should be condemned. 

The Police, who should have protected Ingrid, are the same people who are harassing innocent people in this country. The institution of the Police is headed by a military man. And you see these people putting on military uniform have not been trained on how to handle people. We know that the work of the military is to defend the borders of this country, but we see them arresting our people and how they handle them. This was a terrible act and it has embarrassed this country! It has been seen all over the world. 

I want to thank the press who managed to capture the pictures and showed it. The whole world has seen these pictures. (Applause) 

My good friend, the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, instead of accepting – because it was seen - how do you come and tell Ugandans, “We are investigating”, when everybody saw what the man did! It is very shameful to this country for you to come and deny infront of everybody that it was a woman doing it. What a shame!

Hon. Oryem, the Minister of Foreign Affairs and all our missions outside, have a big job to do to explain the barbaric way things are done in this country; that Uganda has no respect for women; no respect for our wives; no respect for our mothers; no respect for our daughters. What a terrible thing! What an embarrassing situation. We should all own up and say this was terrible! 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I would like to give my Colleague, hon. Wamai, is derived from Article 24 of the Constitution of Uganda and I beg to read it verbatim: “Respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman treatment. No person shall be subjected to any form of torture…” in the way Ingrid was tortured. That is the information I want to give. (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. Madam Speaker, when you sit in that Chair, I have got great respect for you. I have respect for ladies. When you sit in this House, I will definitely let you pass first, as a lady; and this should be condemned by everybody and even my good friend – (Member timed out.)

3.21
MR MICHAEL OROMAIT (Independent, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to join Uganda on behalf of the people of Usuk in Katakwi, in condemning this act in which Ingrid was molested. 

The touching of Ingrid’s breasts was an abuse to women in this country. Who of us here has never sucked a breast of a woman? A woman’s breast was our first plate that we used to feed on when we came to this earth. Why are you now tampering with that breast? These policemen are sexually starved -(Laughter)- that is why when they go to the streets, they end up touching breasts because four policemen share a room!

Mr Minister of Internal Affairs, I would like to ask one question. Are these policemen who are putting on these uniforms, really policemen or they are military police, because in a Police training school, a policeman is instructed never to search a female and vice versa?

Fellow Ugandans, as we join our fellow women in condemning what happened to Ingrid, let us also – Why didn’t we also demonstrate when the late Ariong was killed? The men were seated here and they did not demonstrate. Which offence was heavier; the squeezing of the breast or the killing? We have to be very fair. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

3.24
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I rise to inform this House that when this happened, it was immediately brought to my attention. I looked at the clips and it looked bad. As I have said in another forum, to the extent that it really looked bad, I want to say sorry. (Applause)

I did contact the Police authorities immediately and I was informed by the Inspector General of Police that the Police authorities immediately acted and suspended the Police officer who happens to be a woman. (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the pictures of the incident were well-televised and reported in the newspapers absolutely clearly. The person that directly mishandled Ingrid was a man; so, do not divert us. If you do, after talking apologetically, we could move a motion of no confidence in you. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I would not be surprised if my dear friend and old brother, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, while looking at a woman, could mistake her for a man. (Interruption)

MR SEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I did not intend to intervene or disrupt the Rt Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi. He has told Parliament that immediately the clip was brought to his attention - which presupposes that he actually watched and saw it for himself. He has actually said sorry.

In the second statement, he is saying they told him it was a female Police officer. Is the Rt Hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi in order to deceive Parliament that he saw the clip himself for which he has said sorry, and in the second sentence, he is actually saying he did not see, but he was told it was a female Police officer? Is he in order to make two contradictory statements on the same matter?

THE SPEAKER: Now, Prime Minister and honourale members, whether it was a man or a woman, no one was allowed to arrest a breast. That is the whole point. (Applause)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Honourable colleagues, I really stood up to make a serious statement and indeed, I looked at the clips and saw Police officers who were involved in the arrest. They were all clad in uniform and they had helmets. It was not possible for me to tell whether the arresting officer was a woman or a man and if the hon. Ibrahim Semujju was listening to me, which obviously he was not doing, he would have heard that I said I talked to the Inspector General of Police who told me - that is precisely what I was told, but I concur that actually, if there was something at fault, it does not matter who did it and what gender he or she was. So, the point I am making is –[MR LUKYAMUZI: “Point of order.”].
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to go. Leave the Prime Minister, we have got other work.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: On what? But he has not said anything.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: He has been looking at you and has not said anything. Let him conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, I was saying that the Police authorities acted, the officer  and it does not matter what gender it is - was suspended as investigations were to be carried out to determine whether the arrest was in accordance with Police procedures or not. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for his statement so far. He has informed this House that the Police officer was actually suspended and there is already a controversy as to who this Police officer was. Was it a female or male? Is it procedurally correct for the Prime Minister to continue keeping this officer anonymous? The country deserves to know which Police officer committed this breach. (Applause) So, Madam Speaker, we demand to know who the suspended Police officer is.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, who is this man or woman who was suspended? (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, what I am telling you is a simple narration of what happened. I was not given the name of this person, but do not worry because we will get the name. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order in relation to the powers of the Speaker under Rule 73 of the Rules of Procedure. You asked the Prime Minister for the identity of that Police officer in your capacity as the Speaker of this Parliament and the third most important person in this country. And Members of Parliament want to know, basing on the question you asked. Is the Prime Minister in order to desist from responding to your question? And subsequently, if he is incompetent, are we in order to continue debating a useless report, which does not disclose the substance of the matter this Parliament is interested in? Is he in order to disregard the Speaker’s question and directive and pose as if he is not the Prime Minister, saying he does not know the person? (Laughter) Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance lest I should move a motion that the Prime Minister no longer be heard in this Parliament. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, can we know whether or not you know the name of the officer.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I just said, Madam Speaker, and I want to repeat that I was not given the name, period. So, I do not know it. I just said –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I first thank you for allowing me to seek clarification from the Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think we are all in agreement that if we were to give this matter the attention it deserves, then Parliament should be given full information. I appreciate that your technocrats might not have given you the name, but it has now come to your attention that we need this name. Can you make a commitment in this House as to when you can bring that name so that we can fully appreciate your information?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes, definitely, when this report is ready, we as Government will come to this House and will give you the name and the findings of what happened. Now, I just want to make one more point. Whereas, as I said from the beginning, this incident is obviously regrettable and I know why some of my colleagues are behaving the way they are doing because I said so. The point I want to make is that in this country, it is unlawful to resist arrest. Like it is in many other countries governed by the rule of law, no person is allowed to resist arrest by Police recklessly or by force. And if you think you should be treated with respect – if hon. Odonga Otto was to expect Amama Mbabazi to treat him with respect then he must behave respectfully. (Applause) If you behave like a goon you will be treated as a goon. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have spent enough time on this matter. I now want to move to another item on the agenda. Prime Minister, please conclude.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I wish to inform you that the Police authorities and Government are determined to logically investigate this matter and this country will be informed what exactly happened. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Internal Affairs Minister, you said you were investigating; when are you coming back to this House?

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, we would like to do a very thorough, comprehensive and efficient investigation. Secondly, we appeal to anybody with information, including the media houses with video clips, to present them to us so that we can complete this investigation. As soon as these are availed to us, we shall come to the House. We can come here next week, but we need supportive information. That is my commitment.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you know this session will close on May 18; so we need that information before that date.

MR BABA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That is now an assurance. Next item, please.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR DAY CELEBRATIONS, 1ST MAY 2012

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker, 1st May every year is celebrated by many countries the world over as the International Labour Day. This day was declared as an international holiday by the second international conference of the International Labour Organisation in 1889. Since then, many countries celebrate this day in remembrance of the historical struggle of the working people to have their working conditions improved.

On the global scene, this day dates back to the period between 1882 and 1889 when the knights of labour from New York City in USA propelled parades from the sociologists who were at that time demanding for recognition of the Labour Day. The parades were violent and marked by loss of lives. Persistent labour unions continued their agitation for improved working conditions to counter the bonding and poor working conditions that were being meted on the workers at that time.

In Uganda, the International Labour Day is a gazetted public holiday and ceremonies are organised at national and local government level. The importance given to the observance of this day in Uganda lies in the commitment by Government to recognise the dignity of labour and the important contribution that labour makes to the social, economic and political development of our country. On this day, Government, employers, employees, workers’ unions, community groups, civil society organisations and the public, reflect on the achievements, lessons learnt and challenges of work and socio-economic development.

This year, the national celebrations will be held at Kaunda Grounds, Gulu Municipality, under the theme, “Social Dialogue: A Tool for National Development.” The theme has been chosen based on Government efforts and commitment to promote social dialogue and industrial harmony as one of the strategies for sustaining decent employment.

The theme is premised on Government concern about the industrial unrest and the need for industrial peace in workplaces and the nation at large. Government recognises that social dialogue and tripartite co-operation between Government, employers and employees based on equal footing is the foundation for consensus on the matters of interest to the nation, including increased productivity, enterprise growth, employment and improved living conditions. 

The D-day is being preceded by activities which started on 23 April 2012. The activities include, among others, cleaning of Gulu Municipal Council and Gulu Regional Referral Hospital, blood donation, planting of trees, talk shows on social dialogue and public processions.

In this regard, all actors in the various sectors, including political leaders, civil societies, Government departments and the private sector, are expected to participate in the commemoration of this day. I, therefore, call upon honourable members to show solidarity with the workers of Uganda and join us to observe the International Labour Day in Gulu District, Kaunda Grounds.

For God and My Country!

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. That is an invitation to go to Gulu. Let us just have three.

3.47
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for his statement. It is good that we are celebrating Labour Day. As we are celebrating the International Labour Day, there are some issues which need to be addressed.

We are all aware that a number of graduates are moving around in the towns and villages looking for jobs. When we look at the district structures, the staffing levels at districts are too low. Some local governments’ staffing levels are as low as 40 percent. We know that the vacancies exist at the districts, but the districts are not allowed to recruit because of the wage bill. It is even in the Auditor-General’s report that the vacancies exist at districts. Madam Speaker, we request the minister to say something about that.

The other issue is that districts have been created and the officers are seated in their offices waiting for their salaries. They cannot move to the field to monitor, to supervise and to evaluate the activities that are being carried out there because they have no funding to do that. Now, if you are expecting good service delivery, you cannot get anything if at all the services are not being supervised. 

The last point is about the problem of salary scales for the civil servants. We are grateful that the teachers’ salaries have been revised, but there is need to revise the salary scales for all the civil servants because the scales were set some time back. Today, they cannot meet their standards of living because of the poor salary scales. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.51
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement. Labour Day is an important day because it is good to recognise the contribution of the workers to the development of our country. I have attended several national days in my district, Bushenyi, the last one being the International Women’s Day, and I would like to seek clarification from the minister. On several occasions, I find my district constrained in terms of financial resources, to organise and manage these international and national days. It is not proper when days are known in advance and they can be budgeted for, to assume that the local governments have the resources to organise and manage these days. 

I would like to seek confirmation and assurance from the ministry that resources have been availed to the local governments for the Labour Day, so that we do not have the same concern as I found in the last two or three occasions on national days.  

3.52
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister for the statement. When you look at the welfare of the workers in this country, honestly, very little can be celebrated. If you look at the conditions that most workers in this country operate under, especially those who are working in the sector of forces, this I mean the Police, the Prisons officers, the soldiers and even the nurses and the teachers, it is very deplorable. No accommodation; some walk very long distances to reach their places of work; honestly, Government has to come out to address this problem if you want the workers of this country to celebrate and feel this Government really cares for them.

Even after working for donkey years, when it comes to the issue of their pension, workers suffer a lot in order to get their benefits. So, what is there for a worker in Uganda; someone who provides services very diligently for the good of this nation? So, Government has to come out and really see that workers of Uganda enjoy serving this country with a good heart. 

This Parliament has always voiced the issue of a minimum wage, especially for the issue of people who work on contract. Most labourers are paid Shs 40,000. If you try to bring this issue - one day the President ordered the minister to keep off the issues of minimum wage. It was one Labour Day, I think two years ago. 

The President supports the investors so much at the expense of hard and painful expectations of the nationals of this country. The Ugandans who are working under most foreign companies are not treated with decorum. In fact, most of them just endure because they have to get what their families will live on.

So, the question of minimum wage has to be re-tabled and brought to the discussion table. We do not want all the investors to keep on exploiting our own and at the end of the day, their families keep on suffering. 

In the last financial year, the budget of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Welfare talked about the issue of Industrial Courts. The Industrial Court is completely not operational because in the first place, the funding is not there to make this Industrial Court effectively function. So, where do you expect the workers who have problems with their bosses to take their concerns? It is not until the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Welfare tries to sort out some of these problems that Uganda will move a step forward to celebrate the International Labour Day just like any other country that really protects and defends its citizens.

Lastly, there is this question of occupational hazards. One time, we had the pleasure of visiting Hima Cement, Tororo Cement and some other places. Most of these industries do not have adequate protective gear to protect the workers that diligently serve their industries. At the end of the day, we leave Ugandan residents so susceptible to contracting diseases out of the work they do. You are working in the cement industry for 40 years, by the time you retire, what is there left of your health? So, it is not until some of these issues are sorted out that Ugandan workers will celebrate. 

We hear and still remember very vividly the death of Dr Lukwiya, who died because of treating ebola patients. We have now heard of this deadly hepatitis disease. Not all the nurses and doctors are immunised, and even when you talk of immunisation, the process is going and coming in so slowly. At the end of the day, people who are serving the country end up losing their lives. So, will Government streamline the issues of -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and my honourable colleague, for giving way. I think on this note, the worst form of employment would be found in Government. We have had Dr Lukwiya; we saw one Police officer, Ariong, who died because he did not have a helmet on the head, the other year; we had nurses in Mityana who refused to touch a mother in labour because they did not have gloves. And the next move that was taken by Government was to charge them in courts of law for neglect of duty. I think the minister or the government should be addressing this matter wholesomely and looking at the employees in both the public and private sectors. The laws are there; I am told the policy is also there, but implementation is the problem because we do not prioritise this sector. I think it is time the Minister for the Elderly and Government address this matter. Thank you.

MRS EKWAU: Thank you very much my colleague for the information. Madam Speaker, as I wind up, the Ministry of Gender gets only one third of the budget of the Ministry of Defence, and it is the second least funded of all the ministries of this country. Will Government this time try to beef up and scale up the budget of the Ministry of Gender such that some of these concerns that have remained - every district has a problem with the issues of the labour office. Will the government this time try to increase the budget of this ministry such that some of these concerns are addressed. I would be very grateful, Madam Speaker, and thank you very much.

4.00
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County South, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My point is to appeal to all ministries and employers to recognise their employees on such a day by giving them certificates, gold medals and gifts in recognition of their performance.  This will be an incentive to them, but on some occasions like Heroes Day, this happens and I am telling you, Madam Speaker, people do not have interest because they are not appreciated when they are working. 

That is why we get sharp words when we intend to recognise these people after death like the previous musician. You have heard this. 

So, I would like to appeal to the ministries to find a mechanism of giving morale to these people when they are still working. You can recognise three people from the top ministries and the lower level so that people really feel the day for recognition.

When you say they are going to celebrate, I do not think they can use their own pockets to celebrate. Some cannot even buy bread to say, “My family come”. Instead, they will be saying, “What are you doing on such a day?” So, I feel the government should find a way of recognising people when they still have the enthusiasm. They should be improving when they work knowing that maybe next time such and such a person - if possible, we should have a committee to find out this. This is very simple. 

In each ministry, one can say, “Sincerely, this man has been very punctual; he has been committed and he has done this and this. He deserves this” so that it is a national day which is meaningful. This is my contribution, Madam Speaker

4.03
MS NABILAH SEMPALA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appeal to the minister that next time we have an opportunity like this for an International Labour Day, the ministry should have a comprehensive statement on the status of the sector – especially the labour sector. 

What we see here is a very shallow statement; they are saying: “This is going to happen”, and so forth. But we are interested in knowing the challenges; how you have derived the theme; which sector of the labour sector do you seek to cure; is there a shortfall? Some honourable colleagues were talking about the under-funding of the ministry. Can’t this opportunity of the International Labour Day be used to highlight the shortfalls in the ministry’s funding? 

We have had employment challenges in this country; how has that sector progressed in the last 20 years? Are our graduates being employed; is it better with the diploma holders or the certificate holders? What is happening in the sector? 

We also want to know, are the rural areas performing better in terms of access to work than the urban areas? We want to celebrate each year knowing that we have finished certain challenges and this year we are facing this challenge which we need to overcome.

We would also like the ministry to show us what is happening to external labour. We are exporting labour and they are facing challenges there. Is the ministry in charge of the export of our labour to Dubai, Sudan and other countries? We want to know your intervention and what we can do. Has child labour stopped or is it still a challenge?

We know that the minister has technocrats behind the scene in each department. Have they briefed you and incorporated all this in the state you are giving to Parliament? 

I, therefore, appeal to the minister that next time he should draw the attention of this House to the issues surrounding the labour sector in this country.

4.06
MR ARINAITWE RWAKARAJA (NRM, Worker’s Representative, Workers): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for the statement. As workers of this country, we will join others in the world to celebrate the Labour Day. However, the workers are not supposed to join others in celebrating Labour Day for the following reasons:

The ministry chose a good theme, “Social dialogue”, and we have been doing this with Government”. But the Government has refused to listen to the workers of this country. We have requested Government for a long time to give us an independent ministry to handle our issues as workers in this country. As some Members said, there is nobody in the ministry that can tell you the external labour issues; nobody can explain the Industrial court issues; nobody can explain the minimum wage – and I want to inform the Government that on Labour Day, we are going to read our speech. And I think this is going to be the last Labour Day that we are going to attend as workers of this country. The reason is that if they do not want to have dialogue with us to reach consensus, then we shall not attend Labour Day again.

We have realised that the government is less concerned about the workers of this country. We have seen abuses in every work place; we have had workers being forced to eat plastic and clean carpets with their tongues and all other sorts of abuses in this country. We have been very lenient to the government and know all these cases, yet you have decided to keep quite. 

We, therefore, request that this time, Government recognises the contribution of the workers in this country and gives them a ministry and a minimum wage. In this region, it is only Uganda which has no minimum wage – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issues that are being raised by the workers are very important, but I do not think we can exhaust them today. I think you need to ask the minister a question so that we can give proper time because you are raising very serious issues and they should not be glossed over. So, minister, please respond, but I would encourage the Members to ask questions so that we can understand more because what you were saying is shocking.

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELEDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking you all for raising these pertinent issues to do with our workers in this country. For you to care for our workers, this is very important; it is a demonstration that Parliament as an arm of Government has strong feelings for the workers in this country. 

I want to assure you colleagues that this Government is concerned about the conditions of workers. The beginning point is to put in place legislation and policies before you get to activities. And I want to assure you that as we speak today, there are a number of legislations –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read the statement of the honourable minister and he has committed himself to improving the conditions of the worker. But I want to ask him a question, how many are these people he is talking about? Do you even know the number of people you are talking about? In your statement, you could not even tell us the number of the workforce in this country.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I want clarification from the minister. On page 3, paragraph 7; you talk about “planting stress” and I think indeed you are planting stress. (Laughter)

The second point that I would like the honourable minister to clarify is that while I appreciate the point you made about the government doing its best for the workers, in this document, there is no indication anywhere for a minimum wage. So, can you please advise us about the minimum wage that we can use for guiding employment in the market at the moment?

Finally, is the minister aware that while teachers, doctors and lecturers are crying for an increase in salaries, we are aware that the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda is about to drive a Mercedes Benz costing Shs 600 million? Is the minister aware? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable minister, I wanted to suggest that he concludes on this matter, but you undertake to bring us a paper on the issues being raised.

MRS BAKIREKE: Further clarification. I thank you. I do appreciate that hon. Sulaiman Madada is a State Minister in the Ministry of Gender. We all know that the Cabinet Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development, resigned. In addition, the State Minister for Labour, hon. Mwesigwa Rukutana, also stepped aside. The clarification that I am seeking is that people would love to know how is the ministry running –(Interjections)- either in – yes, the portfolio, because questions have been asked here and we all appreciate that the very reason why the President appointed several ministers in this ministry was because of the nature of its work and the varied number of issues it covers. 

It would be very nice for that reason to have a minister for every sector as it was provided for and as those ministers were cleared by this Parliament. The clarification I am seeking is that who is now running this ministry in acting capacity? Ugandans would love to know. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: But on the issue of who is the Minister in charge of Gender, I have written to the Leader of the Opposition to inform him that for issues of gender, hon. Rukia Nakadama is the acting minister. I think I have written that and I was expecting that he had passed on the information to all of you. I informed the Leader of the Opposition several months ago. I do not know about the labour portfolio, but for the whole ministry, it is hon. Rukia Nakadama. 

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: I thank you very much. I am seeking guidance from you, Madam Speaker. The statement of the Minister is about ceremonies that will be held in Gulu and activities that will precede the ceremonies. It actually says nothing about labour in the country. The guidance that I am seeking from you is that will the minister bring a statement about the sector and we debate it or we concentrate on debating the ceremony? (Laughter)

The reason I am asking this - maybe to him, labour issues are about the ceremony and marking the International Labour Day. Shall we have an opportunity through you, Madam Speaker, to get the minister to bring a statement that speaks about labour issues and not about the ceremony and what they will do before the ceremony and invitations, because in the end, the minister has turned Parliament into a radio station where people come to make announcements but not to brief Parliament on the serious issues affecting labour in this country?

THE SPEAKER: My understanding is that he was informing us about this event that is an annual one. I do expect that later on; he should come and brief the country about - I do not know what statement he is going to make there and perhaps he will bring the statement, but I do not know. This was for information and it is not the –

MR MUKITALE: I would like to seek further clarification from the minister, who is also my good old friend, hon. Madada Sulaiman. I entirely agree with the issues raised by the Workers’ MP, hon. Nabilah and others, that we should get a detailed statement. At times, our ministers make it difficult for Parliament to help them because when you are talking about a sector like Gender, which we know is not well funded, and you say things are okay, then what do you want Parliament to do for you? 

I would like to request that in that comprehensive statement, the minister finds courage to tell us how unfunded they are so that as Parliament – we are within the budget time – you do not just say that you are making laws and policies, but without the finance, what are you going to do? So, it is important that the minister gets that courage to come out and tell us, because we know you are underfunded and yet you need the money. 

At the beginning of your response here, you are giving us an impression that things are okay in your ministry, which we know is not true. So, can you help yourself by talking to Parliament the language that will make Parliament understand that you need money from the Ministry of Finance? I thank you so much.

4.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think from what my brother from the oil region was saying, this report shows that the ministry has no problem. I think it is important the Minister now goes and thinks through it and the issues he should look at are the employment policy in Uganda, which we have been yearning for in Uganda.

Having said that, from paragraph seven, he is talking about the cleaning of Gulu Municipality and Gulu Referral Hospital: This clearly shows that Gulu Municipality and Gulu Referral Hospital are the dirtiest places and that is why you want to go and clean them -(Laughter)- If it was clean, there would be no reason for activities which involve labour activities to go and deal with cleaning Gulu Municipality and Gulu Referral Hospital. 

If that is true that the Labour Day will look like that, then there are other areas – what happened to other towns? Are you telling us that other towns are very clean and they do not need cleaning? If that is true, you are now telling us that Gulu and other towns are dirty; then it looks like there is a total failure on the part of Government –(Interjections)- that is what I am saying; there is a total failure on the part of Government. This country is very dirty and you have not taken interest to clean it and that shows –

THE SPEAKER: We need to finish this matter.

MR SSEWUNGU: I thank you, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition. I am a member of that team of workers, I think, and if it is Labour Day, I would be celebrating. 

My information is that even when you look at the theme – unless I do not know English very well - “Social Dialogue: A tool for national development.” The theme has been chosen based on Government efforts. Now, if you want to build anything in workers, the theme must have run long ago and not in three days. Who is going to master this theme? How are they going to get the message from 23rd to 1st May? 

I would like to know what has been done since 23rd April to 1st May because we are workers. How do we know what is being done in the country about Labour Day? I think whenever you celebrate Labour Day, you should organise and produce the theme on that very day so that people go back with it and internalise it for a whole year and come back when there is something learnt so that Labour Day can have some sense. That is the information I wanted to give. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to conclude that it is clear on that day, the labourers who labour for peanuts, are going to labour again for free, but what is of interest to the Industrial Court? I don’t know when we last had the Industrial Court working because it is not constituted and if it is not constituted, you are aware of the procedures. People who complain go to the District Labour Offices and from there to the Industrial Court. If it is not constituted, that clearly shows that you are not interested in the workers of this country – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, this is just one point and I want to speak passionately about this. Madam Speaker, Gen. Moses Ali, who has lately resorted to studying and practicing law, will learn from those of us who went there first - (Laughter)- Section 93 of the Employment Act provides that all labour complaints go nowhere, but to the district labour officer and that appeals from the district labour officer, who in all cases is not a lawyer, go to the Industrial Court. These people cannot appeal to the High Court or to any court in this country. In the absence of the Industrial Court, the workers have no forum for justice. 

Secondly, I am also aware of districts in this country that have no labour officers meaning that if these poor workers cannot go to the High Court, which has unlimited jurisdiction and because of the procedures, they cannot access justice, and when this is said, Gen. Moses Ali is offended. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to conclude that you can see for yourself that we have a problem for the workers. I don’t know what our colleagues who represent the workers in Parliament have done about these issues. We get complaints about workers, day-in, day-out. They have been cheated of their wages, but this ministry here is very free, and is coming up to sasy, “We are going to celebrate.” Are you going to celebrate the pain of the workers? Even our colleagues who are workers’ MPs have done completely nothing. They have never raised issues of the workers. I don’t know why they come to Parliament and don’t do anything. You have joined the minister to really kill our people. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.27
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns of colleagues about composition of the Industrial Court, but as we may all be aware, not long ago, Justice Tabaro was in charge of the Industrial Court. The only challenge was that his appointment did not go through the Judicial Service Commission, and in fact, personally, I wrote to that effect to the Minister of Gender before the constitution of this current Judicial Service Commission. When we were in the process of regularising his appointment or having another one appointed, that is when the Judicial Service Commission expired and we all know the challenges we went through in having the Judicial Service Commission constituted. (Interruption) If I may finish - 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I don’t want to turn this into an argument with a senior colleague. We all know that all the employment laws we are talking about came into force in August 2006 and these are the laws under which the Industrial Court was meant to be established. Six years down the road, we are talking about appointment of just one single member, the chairperson, who is supposed to chair the Industrial Court. He was appointed in contravention of the rules. The Attorney-General is pleading default on the part of Government and particularly his docket, that this was done in error and because of that we have not been able to do in six years; a sector to which the government accords respect and priority. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know. Please conclude. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I think what is causing a bit of confusion is because I laboured to give the background to the matter, to which I am saying that now that we have got the Judicial Service Commission in place, and in liaison with the relevant ministries and the judiciary, we are going to address that matter expeditiously. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude.

LT. GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very happy that this House is televised. When we speak here, we don’t speak to ourselves; we speak to the whole country, especially those who have coverage. Therefore, the way we behave here is marked and seen by the public. Therefore, some of us are constrained. I have constrained myself when my learned colleague jumped on me –(Laughter)- for no reason. But the way I controlled myself was because of fear. In the village where I come from, we have shelter for taking baths outside and we have some mad people in the village, and when they come and find you taking a shower, they go away with your clothes and instead of asking for another cloth, you have to come out naked and chase this mad person. So, who will be seen naked? Is it you or this person? (Laughter)

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament, this statement is meant to give you information on the International Labour Day. On matters of child labour and the status of the ministry, we are going to present this in our policy statement. This policy statement will be before Parliament and the details of the status of this ministry will be given in the policy statement, but for this particular statement, it is meant to give Members information on the activities that are happening, but we are focusing on the national venue.

On the issues of externalisation of labour, I would like to say that we have an externalisation labour unit established in the ministry. We will be able to give you detailed information in our policy statement.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I would like to point it out that what you cited was just an error. We meant trees and not stress.

In terms of why this date, I would like to respond to that by giving you its background. It is not just a day of cerebrations. This is when stakeholders in matters of labour share their achievements, challenges and the way forward. So, when we cerebrate, we are not merely talking about that; it is the time we get civil society organisations, Government departments, and actors in the labour sector to share information and forge a way forward. So, it is important for us to have this date for such social dialogue.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that responses to the other issues that were put up have been included in our ministerial policy statement. And for any other detailed information that has been requested, I would like to say that we will be addressing those sensitive issues, which I know Members of Parliament are interested in. Otherwise, being a big ministry, if one came here to talk about labour issues, they can take a whole day doing that. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Minister. Let us move to item No.4.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. Let me take this opportunity to present to Parliament, a proposal to borrow Kuwait Dinars 3.5 million, equivalent to $11.9 million, from the Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development for financing the construction and equipping of four technical institutes in the Technical, Vocational, Education and Training Programme of Government. This borrowing will be additional to other financing arrangements. The borrowing will cover the districts of Kayunga, Tororo, Agago and Ntungamo. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the request is hereby committed to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, in the same vein, allow me present a proposal to borrow SDR 74.1 million, equivalent to about $120 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group. This is to support the electricity sector development project. This money will go a long way in the expansion and reinforcing of the Kawanda-Mutundwe-Masaka High Voltage line, the expansion and service of the communities – in respect of the areas to be covered by the project – the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company, and the reinforcement and expansion of the Gulu-Nebbi-Arua Transmission line. I beg to present.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. Let us move to item No. 5.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 65.9 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE NINTH POVERTY REDUCTION SUPPORT CREDIT (PRSC IX)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members that report was presented to this House and debated, but there were issues that the House wanted the minister to make clarifications on before conclusion. So, the Minister of Finance is ready to make those clarifications.

4.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members will recall that on Tuesday, 17 April 2012, the Committee on National Economy presented a report on Government’s request to borrow $100 million from the IDA of the World Bank Group for the Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC IX). After a lengthy debate, the report was withdrawn in order for the minister to clarify on some issues.

In that regard, I would like to seek your indulgence that I offer the explanation to clarify on the key issues that were raised during the debate on this loan.
One of the issues that were raised was about the concept of budget support. I would like to say that the Government Budget is funded by mainly two sources – one is domestic revenue and the other is external resources – loans and grants.

The external financing of the budget comes in two types. One is project aid and the other is budget support. Both of these can either be grants or loans, and until the end of the 1990s, most of the external aid received by Uganda was in the form of project aid.

However, after sometime, Government made a decision to move away from project aid because such projects are often expensive. They tend to be influenced by priorities of the donors rather than the recipient Government, and also often require complex and burdensome administrative accounting and reporting mechanisms, which are separate from those of Government.

The budget support on the other hand is channeled directly into the government budget where it contributes to the pool of resources available to fund all Government expenditures. It is not earmarked to fund any specific pre-determined expenditure.
Aid through budget support is preferable to project aid because it is much easier to align to Government’s budgetary objectives because that gives Government more flexibility in its allocations. In our case, this is done by Parliament through budget appropriation.

In the current financial year, the external financing of the budget was projected at Shs 2.887 billion, which is approximately 30 percent of the budget. Of this amount, Shs 1.012 billion is budget support, including the loan before this House now.

The general budget support through the poverty reduction support credit is necessary to bridge the gap between our own domestic resources from the URA and the activities we need to undertake to run Government affairs.

Donors normally have two main pre-conditions for providing this budget support. One is that they must be in general agreement with the Government’s expenditure priorities. Two, they must be satisfied with fiduciary standards of the budget; and three, procedures for budget reporting, accounting and auditing must be strong enough to give budget support donors confidence that the budget resources are actually spent on the items budgeted for.

Why does Government prefer budget support? 

On this I would like to say that there are a number of reasons for doing this. One is that it is easier to maximize the utility of the budget allocations by pulling together all budget resources including domestic revenues and aid, before allocating those resources. 

Competing expenditures can then be considered based on how they rank with Government priorities. Earmarking budgetary resource for specific expenditures, as in the case with project aid, distorts optimal expenditure allocations.

Secondly, project aid tends to be biased towards capital rather than recurrent expenditure, hence capital projects are sometimes undertaken if the equivalent value of the expenditure in the recurrent budget offers higher social rates of returns. A good example is investment in recurrent aspects of education such as salaries of teachers.

Thirdly, budget support allows Government flexibility in the budget to reallocate resources to meet strategic expenditure priorities. 

Issues were raised as to the name of this credit. The answer is, following the launch of the Poverty Eradication Action Plan, the World Bank supported the plan by providing the first Poverty Reduction Support Credit, which was designed to provide direct budget support to Uganda to implement its poverty reduction programmes. 

Since then, Government has been securing annual budget support grants and loans as poverty reduction support credits from the World Bank, to support implementation of the poverty reduction strategies. These have been approved by Parliament annually to finance the budget of that financial year. 

The name, therefore, of Poverty Reduction Support Credit arose out of the need to link the World Bank’s lending instrument to Government of Uganda’s Poverty Eradication Action Plan, which was Government’s main strategy to address poverty. 

Using the Uganda experience, PRSC was adopted by the World Bank as the standard instrument across the developing world. It is not only Uganda, but in the whole world where this grant is given, it is called PRSC. 

With the replacement of PEAP with the National Development Plan, the objectives of PRSC were aligned to the objectives of the National Development Plan. 

However, given the World Bank’s focus on poverty and the link between poverty and national development, the name of the credit remained unchanged. With regard to whether the name of the credit can be changed, given that the negotiations for PRSC 9 are advanced, it may not be possible to change the name. However, we shall consult our partners to discuss and review the name in the subsequent credits. 

Clarification was sought on the components of this loan. Honourable members, I wish to clarify what was stated in the committee report on page 5. What is stated as programme components are not areas that will directly benefit from PRSC 9 funds, but rather the policy reforms the government of Uganda is expected to address, which are conditionalities for addressing this credit. 

The reforms fall under many policy clusters like reform in public expenditure management; public finance management; and Public Service management, that improve service delivery; and improving value-for-money for the four core service delivery sectors of health, education, water supply and sanitation, as well as road construction and maintenance. 

Therefore, the 9th Poverty Reduction Support Credit was designed as a financing instrument, to provide general budget support to Uganda. Access to credit is based on Government meeting a number of conditionalities, which are agreed upon between Government and the World Bank as prior actions. These prior actions are based on policy and institutional reforms that Government commits to undertake. 

Overall, PRSC is conditional on Government’s commitment to improve the quality of service delivery, and the disbursement of funds is conditional to fulfilling a number of agreed priorities. 

This loan will, therefore, be contributing to the achievement of the budget priorities for this financial year, and these priorities are in the areas of infrastructure development in roads, railways and energy; enhancing agricultural production and productivity, which were read out when we passed the budget for this financial year; employment creation, especially for the youth, women, and small and medium enterprises; human resource development; and improving Public Service delivery. Those are the areas of focus for this loan. 

The implications of not approving this loan would have adverse effects on the performance of the current financial year’s budget. Given the revenue shortfalls being experienced by URA, if this loan was not approved, there would be a further deepening in the revenue shortfall since this is part of the revenue to finance the budget. As a result, the quarter for cash releases, will be subject to more cuts in order to remain within the agreed financing programme. 

In addition, Madam Speaker and honourable members, you recall that at the time of approving this budget, I laid in Parliament corrigenda for the thermal energy subsidy as was shown in my letter dated, 15 August 2011. The corrigenda arose out of the need to address the shortfall on the thermal power subsidy, and it was agreed that the resources to finance that subsidy would come from this loan which is before the House. 

All we did in order to address the problem of these subsidies was to re-arrange our allocations, pay some subsidy so that once this loan was realised, then we would replace this funding in the areas where it had been budgeted. 

In conclusion, in light of the above, I request that we note that this loan is necessary because Government needs the resources to finance the budget deficit. 

Secondly, I request that we support this proposal to borrow the $100 million from IDA. Madam Speaker, this is also to inform honourable Colleagues that these resources are within the financial year’s budget 2011/2012 that has already been appropriated by Parliament.  I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we received this report and we had a lengthy debate. We raised queries and they have been answered – you still have queries? Raise it and we finish the matter.

4.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, in paragraph 20, the minister says this is supposed to address the shortfall in the thermal power subsidy, and yet in paragraph 18, he is telling us what the loan is going to address - infrastructure development, agriculture - What does he mean? He first mentions the sectors he is going to address and then he turns and says a thermal subsidy. He is just using English so that he can get away with murder. 

In the report, he talked about strengthening the reporting of internal auditors to the PSST. How do you strengthen that? It is just a policy of telling people that from now onwards you are not supposed to report to the Accountant General, but to the Secretary to the Treasury. How do you strengthen that? It is a matter of a letter. Do you need to borrow to strengthen that?

Secondly, I recall we got money for Public Service; you remember the money we got for Public Service, which is being used to develop Public Service and have pensioners paid on time - so many reforms. How is this loan again going to address the same loan we have already borrowed, because we borrowed the money for Public Service and gave them? Is it a matter of borrowing for the sake of it?

In my view, this $100 million might mean another thing. It is not meant to address a budget because all the items like Public Service and strengthening the Auditor General’s report are already covered and the money has been availed. Some do not need money, but a policy change.

In that regard, I do not see why we should approve $100 million for items we have already covered. It is too much, and even the period remaining, I think, is one or two months. Why don’t we borrow it next financial year to cut the costs of borrowing? Because when you borrow, you pay a commitment fee and interest, and if we do not absorb this money, they will charge us costs for undisbursed funds.

That is why the Auditor General said that we have costs to the tune of over UgShs 300 billion going in repayment of interest and commitment fees, and we are not utilising the money. Why should we borrow when we have money which is already unutilised? Madam Speaker, I think we should borrow this money after 1st July and not now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we debated this report for about two hours last week. We asked questions and they have been answered. I also took the opportunity to discuss with the minister that there is a problem with the structure of this loan, including the name, and he agreed with me that both PSRC8 and PSRC9 suffered the same fate in this House. The same questions were being asked and we agreed with the minister that they are going to change the structure of this loan in the next process.

I told him that I do not want to hear this name of poverty reduction when it is actually budget support. So, he told me that this is PRSC9 and it is a name, but not necessarily addressing the areas which are named there. It is general support for the budget. So, I said, can you come back and re-name it general support so that Members understand in the future what we are doing? (Members rose_) No, honourable members, we had a lengthy debate on this matter. I put the question that this House approve the loan as requested.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: So, Minister, next time you come, do so with the right name and the right structure.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Order Management Bill, 2011” be read for the Second Time.

THE SPEAKER: Just before the minister comes, sorry to disturb you, but I have just received information that our colleague is not in very good condition; hon. Omolo. If Members do have time, they should check on him at Nakasero Hospital. I just thought I should let you know early enough to find time and check on him.

MR BABA: We should all pray for our colleague’s speedy recovery. I just want to give some brief explanatory notes on this Bill. The Public Order Management Bill, 2011 is mainly aimed at regulating public meetings, outlining the duties and responsibilities of the Police, as well as those of the organisers and participants in public meetings.

The government’s sole motivation in presenting this Bill to the House is to safeguard public order, while protecting the principles of democracy, freedom of association and freedom of speech.

I want to re-state – these are my explanatory notes, which are actually on the Public Order Management Bill and I am just elaborating on them. I want to re-state the commitment of the government in protecting the constitutional rights of all Ugandans, especially those who disagree with the government. We have nothing to fear from sincere expressions of genuine disagreement. In fact, we welcome it.

This Bill offers us the opportunity to reflect, consider, persuade and be persuaded on the merits of the Bill. Nothing in this Bill will do anything to limit opposition to Government or its policies. Rather, through effective regulation of public assemblies and political rallies, we will ensure that opposing views will be clearly heard rather than drowned out by the din of breaking glass, bouncing rocks, riot shields, frightened children and children going to school.

We should all admit that the current regulating of assembly and public protest in Uganda fails to facilitate meaningful discussion as so many assemblies have descended into public disorder. This public disorder not only blocks meaningful discussion and debate on issues of public importance, but also causes disruption to business, death and injury to participants and Police officers like we have seen in the tragic circumstances of Assistant Inspector Ariong, and the small girl in Masaka, Abigail Nalwanga, in the recent past.

Madam Speaker, I wish to urge and ask my fellow honourable members to keep in mind the need for protection of the often forgotten bystander, the trader who has merchandise vandalised or stolen during public disorder assemblies, our mothers whose tomatoes are trampled upon or roads blocked with burning tyres obstructing the flow of traffic and the general travelling public.

As Government, we will always and we must welcome constructive opposition. We need only to look back to our history to see the danger of unchallenged authority. It saddens me that all too often, political opposition in this country is overwhelmingly negative. I believe opponents of the government have a great deal to contribute to political discourse, and I beg them to engage in dialogue rather than destructive engagements.

Madam Speaker, it is the obligation and duty of Government to find and create solutions to the ongoing problems whereby the people of Uganda are constantly subjected to the nefarious fallout of those with criminal intent bent on hijacking legitimate, I repeat legitimate, public and political activism for criminal gain.

Madam Speaker, it is in the light of this that this Bill of Public Order Management is being considered today. I am particularly proud to present to you a Bill which balances the freedom of expression necessary to facilitate political dialogue and debate with the right of all citizens to be secure and safe in their persons, and to enjoy the right to livelihood and movement without interference. This Bill places squarely, on the shoulders of each and every citizen and on all of us wishing to lawfully assemble in groups in public places, the obligation to consider the right of his or her fellow citizen. 

The Bill requires organisers to balance the wish to assemble in a large group in a particular public place, with the relevant harm it may cause others. 

The Bill places the onus on the Uganda Police Force to regulate such meetings with careful regard for such considerations as crowd and traffic control, interference with trade, and potential threat to the security of the state. 

In exceptional circumstances, the Police may determine that an assembly is incompatible with the rights of others and they will have power, under the law, to refuse such permission for such events. The Inspector General of Police and his colleagues will use this power, under the law, in extremes, while fully taking cognisance of the constitutional values enunciated by the high court in the Muwanga Kivumbi v. Attorney General in 2008.

Let me be very clear on this, Madam Speaker. The purpose of this Bill is to regulate public meetings and not to ban them. The Public Order Management Bill will achieve this by requiring a notice of intention to hold a public meeting in respect of a meeting of three or more persons to be held in a public place to be filed with the Police. This must be filed not less than seven days before the proposed meeting, to allow the relevant time to balance the rights of the applicant with the rights of others who might be affected by the proposed event. It is also to allow for time to the relevant authorities to take any preparatory measures which may be necessary for maintenance of public order during the public meeting.

Upon reaching an understanding of a public meeting, there rests upon the Police and the organisers of such a public meeting, many responsibilities. The Police will be responsible for preserving law and order, and for protecting the participants as well as members of the public likely to be affected, to carry out risk assessments, to identify appropriate traffic plans and others. These responsibilities are contained in clause 10 of the proposed Bill. The organisers will also have responsibilities. They will be required to ensure that all participants are unarmed and peaceful; to ensure that the meeting is concluded by 6.00 p.m.; to ensure that there is coordination with the Police for ensuring there is public order safety and others. These responsibilities are contained in clause 12 of the Bill.
	
Certain areas will rarely lend themselves to public meetings of 25 or more persons. These places shall be subject to special considerations and shall be known as “gazetted areas”. And these defined areas will be subject to annual review, and special conditions may apply for public meetings. It remains open to the applicant to propose an alternative means, place or time of meeting, thus eliminating or reducing the public order concerns.

Madam Speaker, under this proposed Bill, any applicant who is aggrieved by the determination of the Police, is entitled to appeal to the high court. Just as the Uganda Police Force are subject to the rule of law when they fail to fulfill their statutory duty, the organisers of an event will also be subject to the rule of law when they fail to execute properly their statutory duties as set out in the proposed bill. 

The level of accountability is an incredibly positive step and it affords members of the public and organisers re-assurance that any disruption or destruction suffered by them at the hands of participants at a public gathering will be subject to recourse. 

Madam Speaker, I never miss an opportunity to state my commitment to ensuring that the very highest professional standards are to be the norm within the Uganda Police Force. I am confident that this determination is shared by the Inspector General of Police. It cannot and it will not be denied that in some circumstances, the conduct of a small number of Police officers has contributed to public order problems in the past, like we saw earlier this afternoon. This will not be tolerated. 

Any officer who engages in improper or unprofessional behaviours brings shame to the Uganda Police Force and to this country. We have strong legislative provisions for dealing with such people and we shall rely on the Police Act in the sections dealing with unlawful or unnecessary exercise of authority, to ensure that misconduct in the Police Force is dealt with. 

The Bill, if enacted, would be used in conjunction with the Police Act, the Traffic and Road Safety Act and the Penal Code, among other laws in this country. I am confident that through collaboration and partnership and willingness between those seeking to organise a public meeting and the Uganda Police Force, they will find necessary compromises in arranging those public meetings. Madam Speaker and honourable members, I sincerely commend this Bill to this House and I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question that the Public Order Management Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

5.12
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I present this report, permit me to make some clarification for purposes of our records, and also for purposes of the integrity of this report and the committee. 

In today’s newspaper, The Observer, Wednesday, April 25-26 2012, volume 7, there is some misinformation to which I would like to shed some light for purposes of information and the integrity of the report I am about to present. 

In this newspaper, it is reported as follows, verbatim: “A rift has emerged in Parliament’s Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs over its report on the Public Order Management Bill, with some members accusing chairman Stephen Tashobya of leaking vital information to his party before the report is tabled in the House. The Observer has learnt that although the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure forbid lawmakers from making parliamentary reports public before tabling them before the Floor of Parliament, Tashobya Kajara reportedly revealed the contents of the committee’s reports to the NRM caucus on Monday. During the caucus meeting at State House Entebbe, NRM legislators debated the Bill, but sharply disagreed when Tashobya spilled the contents of the report. Some said this was a breach of parliamentary procedure. The NRM MPs are due to meet today to agree on a final position on the report.” 

It goes on to say, “Opposition MPs, hon. Balikuddembe of Busiro South, hon. Abdu Katuntu (FDC, Bugweri) and Medard Sseggona (DP, Busiro East) told The Observer that by prematurely presenting the findings of the committee to the NRM caucus -(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this Bill has been read the second time and we have pronounced ourselves. I had thought that the chairman of the committee was going to lead us through the report, but now I am hearing him present defence over an issue some of us are not aware of. So, I want to be guided whether it is in order for the chairman to, instead of guiding us through his report, he is talking about a matter where his committee has not sat down to agree. I want to know from you, Madam Speaker, whether the subject of this paper has been brought to the attention of the Members who have signed this report, so that we can attach The Observer report to this report and the chairman will, therefore, be in order to start from the newspaper before reading the main report. 

So, I would wish for guidance, Madam Speaker, on whether the honourable chairman of this committee is right to be reading a subject that the committee is not aware of, and I do not think even you as the Speaker is aware of, but now you have to preside over a newspaper article which is not attached to this report. So, I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my understanding was that he had a preliminary issue to inform the House before we go to the text of the report. That is what he is doing.

MR AYENA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to inform my senior sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, as a member of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee, that this morning, the chairman drew our attention to this very libellous and destructive piece of information in The Observer. We internalised the information and we found that it has absolutely no basis. 

So, for the information of my senior sister, I would like to put it on record that this matter was brought to the attention of the committee and we disregarded it, but we also advised our chairman that for the sake of the integrity of this report he should come and raise this matter on the Floor of the House. I thank you.

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The point I was trying to raise is that this is a very important legislation and very serious allegations have been made. It is important for Members to get clarified on what has been reported for purposes of the integrity of this report. 

But what I wanted to say, without going further into this report, is that it is true our rules provide in rule 189, part two, that no member should divulge information and reports before they are presented to the Floor of Parliament, and I subscribe and agree to that rule. I want to say that it is true I attended a caucus meeting, but no such a report was presented and I would not present it because I am very conversant with this rule.

Having cleared that, Madam Speaker, let me now read the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Public Order Management Bill, 2011. 

The Public Order Management Bill, 2011 was read for the first time on 25 October 2011, and it was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with Rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders: the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Justice, the Security ministry, Ministry of Defence, Uganda Police Force, Uganda Human Rights Commission, Uganda Law Reform Commission, Kampala Capital City Authority, Law Development Centre, the United Nations Office of the High Commission for Human Rights, the Uganda Joint Christian Council, the Foundation for Human Rights Initiative and hon. Betty Amongi who is the UPC Whip, the Democratic Party, Uganda Peoples Congress, the Conservative Party, the Forum for Democratic Change and the National Resistance Movement Organisation.

Permit me, Madam Speaker, to report that I think this is the Bill that has received the widest responses and public hearings in the history of this committee.

The Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to provide for regulation of public meetings, the duties and responsibilities of the Police, the organisers and the participants in relation to public meetings; to prescribe measures for safeguarding public order without compromising the principles of democracy, freedom of association and freedom of speech. 

The Bill in particular, seeks to manage public order in partnership with organisers and participants in assemblies, demonstrations and processions, the local authorities, owners, or custodians of the venues at which public assemblies, demonstrations and processions are held, and the Police. 

The Bill seeks to specify the procedure to be followed when organising an assembly, a procession or demonstration, as well as the penalties and sanctions to be imposed upon those found in breach of the proposed law.

The committee made the following observations:

Article 92 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda enjoins Parliament not to pass any law to alter the decision or judgment of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgment.

Article 128(3) of the same Constitution imposes a duty on all organisations and agencies of the State to accord courts such assistance as may be required to ensure the effectiveness of the courts, which enjoins Parliament to refrain from passing legislation that would have the effect of undermining binding decisions of courts of law.

Clause 8(1) empowers Police to stop an organiser of a public meeting from holding such a meeting for reasons specified in clause 8(1)a. 

The Constitutional Court had the occasion to pronounce itself on the constitutionality of such a power in the case of Muwanga Kivumbi v. Attorney-General (Constitutional Petition No.9 of 2005). It was among others held that:

“The right to freedom of assembly and to demonstrate together with others in a peaceful manner is a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 29(1)(d), which briefly says that, ‘As already pointed out, the Police have powers under the provisions of the law to maintain law and order to deal with any situation for instance the one envisaged under section 32(2) of the Police Act. The Police will not be powerless...-(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, rule 193 of our Rules of Procedure says, and I want to read it, “The minutes of the proceedings of a committee shall be brought up and laid on the Table of the House together with the report of the committee by the Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson or any member of the committee nominated by the committee when reporting to the House”. 

The guidance I am seeking is, the Chairperson is already reporting. He has not laid the minutes of their meetings. I am wondering at what stage - because the rule talks about reporting - he will be laying the minutes of the proceedings of their committee meetings?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chair, do you have the minutes?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is a common practice that reports are read, but if the honourable member would like to look at the minutes, I want to assure him that the minutes are available and we undertake to produce those minutes at the next meeting. We also have in my file, here, presentations from the institutions that are quoted in the report, but the minutes are available and they can be availed at a future specified date.

THE SPEAKER: I think it has been customary to bring them alongside the report. You can report, but I think your deputy can go and bring them while you present so that by the time you finish you lay them.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, I thought the reason these minutes are laid on the Table of Parliament is for anyone of us who wants to access them to do so.

If the rule talks about when reporting, and the chairperson wants to do the reporting and at leisure, he can bring the minutes; Madam Speaker, I need to be guided whether we can proceed and violate this rule or maybe we suspend it and then allow the Chairperson to follow the practice not the rules.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, just as you guided, one of the members of the committee, hon. Odoi, has gone for the minutes. In the course of my presentation, they will be laid here.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying there are no minutes?

MR SSEGONNA: No, Madam Speaker, I am a member of this committee. I think it is honourable to concede and take the guidance that we can suspend this and we get the minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Can we stand over it for a few minutes? Let us go to the next item while you produce the minutes.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PROHIBITION AND PREVENTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: I believe this is a Private Member’s Bill.

5.30
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Are there any seconders? Okay, it has been seconded.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, this particular Bill which comes at a right time, especially in our political history, is premised on the following principles:

Uganda is a state party to several regional and international human rights instruments, which prohibit torture in no uncertain terms. These instruments include but are not limited to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948, the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights among others. Uganda as a country signed the United Nations Convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment in 1986.

Further to the extension to the United Nations Convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, our Constitution of the  Republic of Uganda of 1995, particularly Article 24 thereof, provides for freedom from torture, cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment or punishment, and this right is made a non-derogable right under Article 44 of our Constitution. 

The policy objective of this Bill is, therefore, to bring into effect the obligation of Uganda as a state party to the various human rights instruments, and particularly, the United Nations Convention Against Torture and other Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. 

The Bill seeks to provide a comprehensive definition of torture; make torture a criminal offence; provide sanctions for the offence of torture and regulate the use of information obtained by means of torture; and provide for individual, criminal and civil responsibility for the offence of torture. 

Although our Constitution guarantees freedom from torture through cruel, degrading treatment of punishment and makes this freedom and a non-derogable right, there is no comprehensive definition of what amounts to torture in our statute books, or cruel or inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment. 

Torture itself is not a specific offence under our Penal Code, and there is no individual responsibility for acts of torture, but rather, we tend to find Government being pressed under the doctrine of vicarious liability by paying damages to victims of torture committed by specific individuals. So, this Bill intends to address these policy issues and fill the gaps in the existing legal framework. 

This Bill has eight parts. The first part deals with interpretation of the words and expressions used in the Bill. The second part provides a comprehensive definition of “Torture”; provides for torture as a criminal offence; provides for functions of the offence of torture; and also provides for individual criminal and civil responsibility for the offence. This part also provides for compensation, rehabilitation or restitution as court may so order.

The third part incorporates clauses that provide for the responsibility and liability of third parties in respect of the offence of torture, and also deals with the institution of criminal proceedings and the control by the Director of Public Prosecutions of a private prosecution. 

The fourth part deals with the use of information and admissibility of evidence obtained by means of torture. The fifth part provides for prohibition of transfer of prisoners to places where prisoners are likely to be tortured. The sixth part deals with the powers of the Chief Magistrate and the jurisdiction of the Chief Magistrate’s Court to try cases of torture. 

The seventh part makes for general provisions, particularly in respect of prosecution of non-citizens; the duty and protection of persons reporting torture; the restriction and extradition or deportation, and also provides for amnesty to persons accused of torture; amnesty which is prohibited in respect of convicts of torture.

The last part deals with miscellaneous provisions relating to the power of the minister - who is assumed to be me as we speak - now to make necessary regulations and amend the schedules and the Bill has only two schedules. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Bill be passed. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I note that the Bill is also from the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs - 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I think the Vice-Chairman of the committee is ready with his report and ours has no controversy in anyway whatsoever. 

THE SPEAKER: So, Vice-Chairman, could you present your report and comply with Rule 193?

5.37
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I wish to assure you that the minutes are in the Clerk’s Office and they will be here in a few minutes –(Interjections)– the minutes are surely there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have set the standards and we are supposed to maintain them.

MR BAKA: Madam Speaker, I was set to lay the minutes on Table after reading the report which is six pages – 

THE SPEAKER: No, we cannot have different standards for different people. Let us defer it until your minutes come. Let us go to item nine. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REVERSE THE DECLINING TRENDS IN THE IMMUNISATION PROGRAMMES IN UGANDA

5.38
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Women Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity, and I want to especially thank you for making this motion to appear on the Order Paper because from 23 to 28 of this month will be African vaccination week. This is a week which was declared by World Health Organisation. In this week, all Africans, including we in Uganda, are supposed to focus on immunisation and the activities related to it. 

Therefore, I would like –(Interjections)– looking at the importance of the week and what we are supposed to do as a nation, we the Members of the forum for Immunisation thought it wise to bring this motion to the House to awaken Ugandans and tell them that something is going wrong in the area of immunisation. 

Therefore, I am going to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to ask the government to reverse the declining trends in the immunisation programmes in Uganda. As a country, we had taken a step ahead. We had moved and there was success that we could be proud of as a country. But in recent years, two or three years –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am just raising a point of procedure, that I think there is need to give the Members a copy of the motion first. Two, the nature of presenting a motion; we usually read a motion first and then you speak to it. So, I want to appeal to the Member that she should first read the motion then she can speak to it because she is starting with speaking and then I think she will read the motion. I am simply guiding the Member to do it the way we usually do it.

MS OLERU: Thank you very much, colleague, for the guidance, but I was moving towards reading the motion –(Laughter)– because I had reached a point where I said, “I am moving a motion for a resolution of Parliament to reverse the declining trends in the immunisation programmes in Uganda”. 

The second one was that I am moving this motion under rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure. The motion reads:

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda under Objective XIV of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy sets out the state’s duty to ensure that all Ugandans enjoy access to health services, and Objective XX expresses the State’s commitment to take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services to the population;

AND WHEREAS the World Health Organisation in the State of the world’s vaccines and immunisation, 2009 notes that immunisation is a proven tool for controlling and eliminating life threatening infectious diseases, and is estimated to avert over two to three million deaths each year, and it is also key to achieving the Millennium Development Goals;

AWARE THAT immunisation as an important component of primary health care, continues to be one of the areas in the health sector that still faces a number of challenges ranging from poor society attitudes to under-funding from Government, to ignorance of the public on the advantages of immunisation;

FURTHER AWARE THAT the Uganda demographic health survey of 2006 indicates that 46 percent of children aged 12 to 23 months were fully vaccinated at the time of the survey, but this percentage is relatively low since the same survey continues to show that many of the deaths occurring in early childhood can be prevented by immunising children against preventable diseases;

NOTING THAT the Annual WHO Uganda Country Report indicates some improvement in the immunisation coverage in 2009, but glaring challenges still remain that affect performance and this particularly calls for efforts to scale up immunisation coverage, which will contribute towards the relevant millennium development goals; 

FURTHER NOTING THAT the Ministry of Health Annual Health Sector Performance Report for the financial year 2009/2010 indicates that immunisation coverage has reduced in most districts and most targets have not been achieved;

CONSIDERING THAT the National Development Plan (NDP) indicates that over 75 percent of the disease burden in Uganda can be prevented through health promotion and preventive interventions, including immunisation;

REALISING THAT the formation of public policies on immunisation could prevent diseases, promote health and offer access to appropriate and cost-effective primary health care services;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:

1.	The government identifies emerging health issues, conditions and therapeutic interventions that require new legislation and policies, and develop new legislation as appropriate and in a timely manner.

2.	The government ensures universal access to vaccines and immunisation as a cost-effective health intervention and key to achieving the Millennium Development Goals.


3.	The government ensures that there is increased awareness of the immunisation benefits among the constituents by emphasising the value and importance of immunisation.

4.	The government increases the recourses and sustainable immunisation financing in order to ensure a speedy and equitable introduction of life-saving vaccines.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: You can now justify.

MRS OLERU: I thank you. Madam Speaker, I have some few points to support this motion. On a sad note, when we had just concluded the IPU meetings, I managed to attend one of the side meetings where we had the Director for GAVI, who made a presentation to us. It is on that day that I noticed that the other East African countries are now doing far much better in terms of immunisation as compared to Uganda.

In that meeting, I wondered what we were doing as a country. We had started very well with immunisation, but why have we now left it? What are our priorities now? This country is well known for taking advocacy against HIV/AIDS. We are up in the skies, but the trend has currently seized. I was wondering what the problem was and why do we start on something and then from nowhere, we leave it and it dies. What shall we be counting on as achievements for this country?    

What moved me to bring this motion is that I was in my constituency for one week and by the time I came back, my baby was sick. When I took him to hospital, he was diagnosed with measles. Hon. Beatrice Mpairwe has not been in the House for the whole of last week because she has been admitted together with her two children because of measles. 

Madam Speaker, you remember very well the fact that measles was one of the traditional diseases that had already been wiped out of Uganda. In terms of polio, the country had got a certificate that showed we were polio-free, but these things have come back. What should we do as a country? If I, a Member of Parliament, have a son suffering from measles, what about those ones outside? It has been reflected that the outbreak of measles is now in 18 districts in Uganda, including Kampala, Jinja, Busia, Bugiri, Nebbi, Masaka, Mayuge, Iganga, Luuka, Lwengo, Mityana, Koboko, Mitooma and Mbale. So, it means that it is not in one direction, and we need to do something as a country to solve some of these challenges.

We very well know that immunisation is critical for child survival. In the IPU meeting, we were told that Ghana has already gone far ahead by introducing two new vaccines to add on those traditional ones, and it is a developing country like Uganda. I am happy that GAVI has accepted to come back to Uganda and they have accepted to support us in the area of vaccination of Cervical Cancer. But we need to look at these others. 

There has been a survey that found out that from Karamoja up to West Nile or what we now call the Greater North, out of the 10 people examined, eight responded positive to Hepatitis B. So, this means that time will come, maybe in 10 years or so and there will be no people above 30 years in that part of the country. But I think if we can immunise the young ones - because they are already positive and when you are positive, it is like HIV. At least with HIV, we have the ARVs, but for Hepatitis B it is not there. So, the challenges are really big and, therefore, as a country, we need to do something.

I asked myself: “We had gone very far because in area coverage in immunisation - we had already reached 74 percent of the country. What has gone wrong? What has suddenly happened that the trend is coming down and we are declining?” One of the things I found was the collapse of the government systems at the lower levels. We don’t have the LCs working. The LC I chairpersons are very active people, but they are not doing it maybe because they have not been elected. Secondly, we also realised that the parish chiefs think this is not their work because during the routine immunisation, there was that facilitation given to the LC I chairpersons and everyone involved, but because we don’t have the money, they can only talk on the radio. They don’t involve the LCs and these parish chiefs to mobilise the people. So, people don’t attend programmes. 

There is also a problem with the cold chain because in Yumbe, we don’t have electricity. You take your cold chain or a fridge - and charcoal is now very expensive. So, at the end, there will be a problem with the medicine. It may be safe from Kampala, but when it reaches my district, because of maintenance and management, it will have a problem. 

Another problem is the laxity of the leaders in terms of monitoring the immunisation activities. We are relaxed. That is why this is the vaccination week, but nobody from the ministry came to Parliament to give us a statement that this is the vaccination week and this is what we are supposed to do or to say in our constituency. Can you go and encourage your people? We have relaxed. So, Madam Speaker, the reasons are so many, but I picked these ones to talk about. Thank you very much. I beg to move. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Huda for bringing up this motion, but I am looking at the Frontbench of the Government side and I don’t see the line ministers and colleagues –(Interjections)- listen to me. If you want Government to tackle this issue seriously, they should be here to listen. The line minister should be here. Otherwise, we are going to have an academic debate. In my view, the line minister should be the first to respond to all these issues, to give us facts; whether they contradict the motion or they support the motion; whether the ministry is actually aware of the acute situation prevailing in the country. Don’t look at Gen. Moses Ali. He is a minister for Parliament. He does not have the facts. And Madam Speaker, this is not the first time when Members do their research, raise pertinent issues that affect their constituents and our people, and the people responsible to implement and execute Government policies are not here. We are just wasting our time. Hon. Huda, you will be wasting your time if the Minister of Health is not here. We will be just talking to each other. None of these people even holds the portfolio of the Minister of Health. The Minister of Education is there, the other one is Trade, the minister of public order management is here and has his own business. So, I think it is time Government takes some of these issues seriously. 

Before an issue is put on the Order Paper, the Leader of Government Business should be able to summon the minister responsible such that he listens and follows up the issues. It is not about somebody writing notes to him. With some of these things, you need to see the body language of Members. I have never seen hon. Huda like this; so pertinent about this issue. Madam Speaker, I, therefore, seek your guidance on whether it is proper for us to proceed with this very important motion without the minister responsible.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I was also attracted by something that hon. Huda said, that actually, this is the immunisation week. I am just hearing from hon. Huda Oleru, a backbencher. I don’t know what I am supposed to tell my people; I don’t know how I am supposed to guide the director of health services. Even the pygmies and the Bakonjo have not heard. Can we defer it to tomorrow and direct the minister to come and listen to this debate so that they can guide us because I don’t know whether to go to Kamuli or just stay in Kampala. Prime Minister, can we ask the minister to come? 

In the Seventh Parliament, the Minister of Health came here, informed us and we all went. We actually took off time for one week and we all went, but since then, no one has done it again. So, can we ask the minister to come tomorrow so that we are guided on what to do and what to say there?

6.01
LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I have noted the concerns of the honourable member and enforced by you. I agree to the ruling that we will go and look for the ministers to come tomorrow and not only attend the debate, but also explain or give more information to the Members about the week. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank hon. Oleru for bringing the information. So, we defer this motion to tomorrow so that we are guided properly on what to do -(Dr Bitekyerezo rose _)- no, we have deferred it to tomorrow. Let us get the sector minister who can make clarifications because I don’t know how to rule on those clarifications since I am not inclined in that direction. 

Can I invite the Chairperson of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs?

6.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, hon. Semujju Nganda, for raising that important issue about the minutes. I would like to apologise, but this is the first time, in the history of this Parliament, for chairpersons of committees to be required to present minutes of their meetings together with the reports. Nonetheless, in compliance with the rule –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Stephen Tashobya, I think you have not been presenting reports here. The Committee of National Economy, for example, has been presenting their reports together with their minutes. So, this is not the first time.

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Now, may I lay on Table the minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in consideration with the Public Order Management Bill? (Mr Semujju Nganda rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Please, let him lay the minutes because you asked for them. I think you just want to disrupt work.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Speaker, in the same vein, permit me to lay on Table, copies of the submissions from all the stakeholders that met the committee. Thank you so much. (Mr Semujju Nganda rose_)

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Semujju Nganda, please allow the chairperson of the committee to read the report. He has already complied with the Rule 193, which you raised.

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. The last sentence I was reading is about the ruling in the Muwanga Kivumbi Case. In the second last sentence it reads: “The powers given under Section 32(2) of the Police Act are prohibitive and not regulatory. They cannot, therefore, be justifiable in the circumstances of the petition. In the premises, Section 32(2) of the Police Act would be null and void.”

By authorising the Police to prohibit public meetings including public rallies or demonstrations, clause 8(1) of the Bill is in effect proposing to re-enact, in terms of what Section 32(2) of the Police Act did. This would in effect not only be a violation of Article 29 (1)(d) of the Constitution as declared by the Constitutional Court, but would also contravene Article 92 of the Constitution. 

Clause 6 (1)(a) of the Bill defines a public meeting as:

1)	 A gathering, assembly, concourse, procession of demonstration of three or more persons in a public place or premises wholly or partly open to the air:
a)	At which the premises, policy, actions or failure of any Government, political party or political organisation, whether or not that party organisation is registered under any law, are discussed. 

Yet under Clause 6(2)(c) of the Bill, it is provided that a public meeting shall not include:

b)	 A meeting of the organs of a political party or organisation convened in accordance with the Constitution of the party or organisation and held exclusively to discuss the affairs of the party or organisation.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, these two clauses that I have read, when read together, in effect mean that: (i) The organs of any political party or organisation cannot convene a public meeting at which the principles, policy, actions or failure of any Government, political party or political organisation, including the principles, policy, actions or failure of their own political party or political organisation can be discussed without first notifying the Inspector General of Police. 
 
(ii) When considered within the context of clause 8(1) of the Bill, the Inspector General of Police will have the authority to prohibit such meetings.

These clauses do not only restrict the scope of matters that can be freely discussed by the various organs or political parties and organisations, but also empower the Inspector General of Police to prohibit such discussions from being conducted in public places. 

Considering that in the past, such meetings have been held in places like football stadia, which are public places within the meaning of clause 6(1)(a) of the Bill, these will present unreasonable restrictions on the enjoyment of the freedom of association and expression in a way that is beyond what is acceptable and demonstrably justifiable in a free and democratic society.

Clause 12(d) requires organisers of public meetings to ensure that statements made to the media and public do not conflict with any law. This clause raises questions as to whether such a requirement does not constitute an infringement on the individual right of freedom of expression, which includes freedom of the press as guaranteed by Article 29 of the Constitution. This issue was considered by the Supreme Court of Uganda, in the Case of Charles Onyango Obbo v. Attorney-General Constitutional Appeal No.2 of 2002. 

The central issue in this appeal was whether Section 50 of the Penal Code Act, which made the publication of false news a criminal offence, contravened Article 29 of the Constitution. In the ruling, the Supreme Court held thus: “The right to freedom of expression extends to holding, receiving and imparting all forms of opinions, ideas and information. It is not confined to categories such as correct opinions, sound ideas or truthful information. Subject to the limitation under Article 43, a person’s expression or statement is not precluded from the constitutional protection simply because it is thought by another or others to be false, erroneous, controversial or unpleasant. Everyone is free to express his or her views. Indeed, the protection is most relevant and required when a person’s views are opposed or objected to by society or by any part thereof, as false, or wrong. A democratic society respects and promotes the citizens’ individual right to freedom of expression because it drives benefits from the exercise of the freedom by its citizens. In order to maintain that benefit, a democratic society chooses to tolerate the existence of the freedom even in respect of a demonstrably untrue and alarming statement rather than suppress it.”

Although Clause 12(2)(d) of the Bill seeks to protect the public from content of the person’s speech that is likely to conflict with a law, it might not only be almost humanely impossible for an organiser of a public meeting to discern the possibility of that occurrence even before the utterance is made, but it as well runs the danger of smothering alternative views. In any event there are existing laws in the civil liability for defamation and criminal liability for libel that adequately penalise offenders and provide for compensation of any victim of such speech.

Clause 11 of the Bill is inconsistent with section 28 of the Police Act in some material respects regarding the use of firearms. Whereas the Act permits the user of firearms only after an escape has occurred, the Bill on the other hand permits such use to prevent it.

Secondly, whereas the Act permits the use of firearms in respect of persons charged with or convicted of a felony, the Bill permits the use of such force even against suspects against whom no legal proceedings have commenced. 

Inconsistencies in terminology are not only likely to cause difficulties in interpretation, but also the reference to mere “injury” in clauses 11(a) and (b) tends to lower the degree of danger that should be apparent before firearms can be resorted to, compared to that in the Act, which requires the danger of causing “grievous bodily harm”.

It is further noted that whereas the Act contains restrictions on the use of firearms by the Police, none have been included in the Bill.

Whereas in section 28(3) of the Police Act it is specifically stated that the use of firearms must be an option of last resort to be used only on the basis of the existence of reasonable grounds to believe that the specified prescribed conduct cannot otherwise be prevented or otherwise for effecting an arrest; only after the necessary warnings have been given and to use only such force as is reasonable in the circumstances, the Bill has not made similar provisions.  

International standards in respect to the use of force by the Police centre around necessity and proportionality. The guiding principle here is to prohibit the use of force and reserving its application as a last resort, where it is deemed reasonable, appropriate, and restrict such force to the minimum extent necessary. 

Firearms should be used only to prevent grievous bodily harm and death. Lethal force may be used internationally only if the objective is to protect life, and less harmful measures are inadequate as described in the general principles on the use of force in the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials and the UN Basic Principles 9, 12-14.

Under the National Environment Act, what is regulated is “noise” rather than the implements that emit it, whereby noise means “any undesirable sound that is intrinsically objectionable or that can cause adverse effects on human health or the environment”. 

Section 28 of the Act mandates the National Environment Management Authority to set standards for the control of noise and vibration pollution. Those standards were set by the National Environmental (Noise Standards and Control) Regulations Statutory Instrument 30/2003. 

Under regulation 17(1), NEMA has authority to “seize, impound or confiscate any property, tool, machinery or other instrument which is likely to, or has caused emission of noise, if, in his or her opinion the confiscation would cause disturbance of tranquility in the area.” There is an elaborate process specified in those rules for the management of sound emission. 

Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Inspector General of Police or authorised officer to regulate the use of specified sound emitting equipment “in a public place or so as to be a public nuisance”. The conjunction “or” between “a public place” and “so as to be a public nuisance” suggests that either occurrence will suffice to require the permission of the Inspector General of Police or authorised officer.

In the case of use in a public place, such a restriction on the face of it is not justified by any objective criteria. In the case of being a public nuisance, unlike the National Environment (Noise Standards and Control) Regulations, 2003 which have set a criteria for what is likely to cause “disturbance of tranquility in the area” by way of specifying exact sound emission limits by decibels, the Bill does not set up a similar criteria for the determination of what constitutes a “public nuisance” leaving it to the subjective interpretation of the Inspector General of Police or authorised officer. This will result in conflicting interpretation of what is permissible sound.

The current general principles regarding civil and criminal liability, mostly adopted from our common law background, attach and apportion liability on the basis of causation and fault. A person incurs civil or criminal liability for prohibited conduct that is directly attributable to this or her conduct by way of actions and/or omissions. The liability of an individual for the conduct of another person arises only in circumstances where a principal-agent legal relationship exists. For civil liability, it arises in situations of employer-employee relations and for criminal liability in the event of delegation of a statutory duty that imposes strict liability on the individual delegating that duty. 

In both situations, a relationship of trust exists between the principal and the agent, by voluntary action of both parties and the principal has a direct disciplinary control over the agent thereby justifying the vicarious liability. 

This kind of relationship does not exist between an organiser of a public meeting open to all persons such as may be interested in attending it. When an organiser makes a general invitation to the public, he or she does not and is not reasonably expected to have direct disciplinary control over the conduct of all persons who might respond to the invitation. 

Therefore, by requiring such an organiser to “undertake to compensate any party or person that may suffer loss or damage from any fall out of the public meeting”, the Bill is creating a drastically novel principle of vicarious liability whose implementation might have a chilling effect on the enjoyment of freedom of association. 

Secondly, undertaking to compensate any party or person that may suffer loss or damage from “any fall out” of the public meeting is too vague a statement. It subjects the organiser of a public meeting to the risk of having to compensate a victim of “fall out” that could not even have been reasonably foreseen at the time of convening the meeting. 

Article 19 of the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights stipulates: (1) the right of every person to hold opinions without interference. The right permits no restriction and exception; and (2) the right to freedom of expression, including freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds. 

Paragraph three also states that this right carries with it special duties and responsibilities and may only be subject to restrictions that are provided by law and are necessary for respect of the rights and reputation of others, and for the protection of national security, public order or of public health or morals. 

The above provision was interpreted by the UN Human Rights Committee in General Comment No.34 (2011) as follows:

“Paragraph 3 expressly states that the exercise of the right to freedom of expression carries with it special duties and responsibilities. For this reason, two limitative areas of restrictions on the right are permitted, which may relate either to respect of the rights and reputations of others or to the protection of national security or of public order or public health or morals. However, even when a state party imposes restrictions on the exercise of freedom of expression, these may not put in jeopardy the right itself. The committee recalls that the relation between right and restriction and between norm and exception must not be reversed. 

The committee also recalls the provisions of Article 5 paragraph (1) of the covenant according to which, ‘Nothing in the present covenant may be interpreted as implying for any state, group or person, any right to engage in any activity or perform any act aimed at the destruction of any of the rights or the freedoms recognised herein or their limitation to a great extent than is provided for in the present covenant.’” 

The Bill permits broader limitations/restrictions to the right than what is provided for under the ICCTR.

The definition of a political organisation provided for under clause 2 is different from the one on the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005. The definition is too broad and restricts citizens’ rights to political participation, freedom of expression and opinion. The definition in the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 should be adopted.

The definition of a public place in the Bill is different from the definition of the Penal Code Act Cap. 120. This will cause a problem in interpretation and which law should be followed. The definition in the Bill is too broad. The committee proposes that the definition in section 2(z) of the Penal Code Act be adopted.

The powers of the Inspector General of Police should be based on the premise that the State has a positive duty to protect the right to assembly or a demonstration. The powers provided to the Inspector General of Police under clause 4 to direct the conduct of public meetings could be arbitrary. This provision is against the constitutional court ruling in Muwanga Kivumbi vs the Attorney-General Constitutional Court Petition No.9 of 2005, which held that Police have regulative rather than prohibitive powers in relation to the exercise of the freedom of assembly and peaceful demonstration.

The definition of public meeting in the Public Order Management Bill as a gathering of three or more persons in other public places or premises wholly or partly open to the air, is ambiguous as this means that enclosed spaces are excluded. The right to assembly is the aggregate of the individual liberty of the person and individual liberty of speech, and thus, the liberty to express these opinions is the aim of the right to assemble under principle 2 and 10 in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy.

Clause 6(1) which limits public meetings to three or more persons is prohibitive and does not reflect the positive duty to protect the right to peaceful assembly under Article 29(1)(d) of the Constitution. In addition, clause 1(6)(1)(a) and clause 6(1)(b) restrict the right to assembly by restricting the content of what is to be discussed in the meetings. Clause 6(2)(e), which is the exclusion clause, further restricts the activities of political parties to “the exclusive discussion of the affairs of the party or organisation.” 

These clauses are in conflict with the principles of democratic society, which entail criticism of Government principles, policies, actions and the right to petition in the event that there is a divergent view. These clauses are also in conflict with the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy that provide for the State to be governed by democratic principles, which are to encourage the active participation of all levels of governance and the involvement of people in the formulation and implementation of development plans and programmes that affect them.

Though giving notice under clause 7(1) in itself does not infringe the right to a peaceful assembly, the strict application of the seven days period of notification can deter “spontaneous” processions. The content of the notice should not be aimed at defeating the purpose of peaceful assembly. 

Clause 7(2)(c) which requires organisers to estimate the expected number of persons is unrealistic, while clause 7(3) which requires a letter of clearance from the proprietor could further restrict places of public meetings as proprietors could be reluctant to provide letters of clearance due to fear of appearing to support opposing views.

These provisions are inconsistent with the positive duty to facilitate public meetings, which was core to the guidelines of the public demonstrations by the Uganda Human Rights Commission.

Clause 7(5) provides that when the Inspector General of Police tenders the documents in court, it shall be prima facie evidence of terms, date and manner of service of notice. This is an attempt at re-writing the law on admission of evidence since our Evidence Act allows the cross-examination of witnesses. The IGP should appear in court and table the evidence.

Clause 8(1)(b) provides for crowd and traffic crowd as one of the reasons for refusal to hold a public meeting. However, temporary disruption of pedestrian traffic does not constitute sufficient ground for denial of the right to assemble. This blanket provision, in addition, disregards the safeguard of whether holding of a public meeting would be of non-obstructive use of a highway, which would not be a threat to public peace or interfere with the rights of others for passage and re-passage.

Clause 8(1) provides for any other reasonable cause as a ground for refusal to hold the proposed public meeting. This provision does not provide for what would constitute reasonable cause and, therefore, would be arbitrarily applied and impose conditions, which are inconsistent with Article 29(1)(d) of the Constitution.

Clause 8(1) provides for the right to appeal to the Inspector General of Police. However, this appeal lies from the decision of a delegated officer under clause 5, who is acting on behalf of the Inspector General of Police. Clauses 8(4) and (5) provide for appeal from the decision of the authorised officer to the Inspector General of Police within 15 days and the High Court within 30 days.

The time required to appeal and finally dispose such a matter would defeat access to prompt redress, which is crucial for public meetings. The term “acceptable venue” under clause 8(2) should be defined to avoid ambiguity.

Clause 9 gives power to the Inspector General of Police to prevent or stop holding of a public meeting if it is contrary to the Act. This clause would introduce subjectivity since the grounds for the refusal to hold a public meeting under Clause 8(1)(b) and (c) are not explicitly laid out. The grounds for refusal to hold a public meeting should be explicitly laid out.

Madam Speaker, with those recommendations - and I can see hon. Ssemujju smiling - the committee recommends that the Public Order and Management Bill, 2011 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

The report was signed by 17 members out of the 19 members in the committee and I beg to move. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson. Listening to the report and taking into account the preface by the chairperson that this Bill had the highest level of public hearing, and noting that the Bill has been dissected in so many areas, I don’t know whether we would not to sleep over it and start the debate tomorrow. I would imagine that Members need to look at their Bill again before they debate. I do not know what the Leader of Government Business thinks.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, on our side as Cabinet, we request that we be given a chance to go through these amendments. (Laughter) This is a very important Bill and the amendments here have come after our position was made. Therefore, these new amendments would require us to respond to them so that we move together. I beg to request.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good work they have done. I am rising on a point of procedure. Once a Bill has been read for the second time, it means it is Parliament’s business of which members of Cabinet are part. Is it procedurally right for the Third Deputy Prime Minister to attempt to usurp the authority and powers of this House by recalling Parliament’s business back to Cabinet and yet we want to handle it, indeed in the interest of Cabinet, because they are the ones who generated the Bill? 

THE SPEAKER: I have said that, whether it is Cabinet or Members, I want you to read the Bill together with the amendments tonight so that we debate tomorrow. (Applause)

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, the guidance I am seeking is this: This Bill was brought to Parliament by the Executive and if the Leader of Government Business wants to withdraw it, do our procedures allow him to do it and maybe at another time when he is ready, re-table it? 

THE SPEAKER:  I do not think he wanted to withdraw it, but rather that we defer the debate, which I have done. We shall do that tomorrow, and so, all of you should get your Bills and read again the proposals – they are quite many – I want you to internalise them. So, we defer this matter to tomorrow 2 O’clock. (Applause)

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, you have made your ruling, but I would like to appeal to you to - 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I am surprised at the way Government is trying to proceed, more so the State Minister for Internal Affairs. Hon. Baba, you have been in this House and you know the procedures; once a ruling has been made by the Speaker, you do not have to review it. Is the State Minister for Internal Affairs, therefore, in order to attempt to reverse a decision that the Speaker has pronounced herself on?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have made my ruling; go and internalise the Bill and we debate tomorrow. (Applause)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE PROHIBITION AND PREVENTION OF TORTURE BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: We had received the motion for the second reading and the chairperson was about to present when he was caught up with some small difficulty.

6.38
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Baka): Madam Speaker, here are the minutes of the proceedings, duly signed and with the appendices of submissions from stakeholders of the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010. I beg to lay on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson.

MR BAKA: Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010. Copies should have been circulated. If it is so, I beg to continue. 

The Prohibition and Prevention of Torture Bill, 2010 was read for the first time on 8 February 2012, and was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with Rules 112 and 113 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. This Bill was saved by the motion in this Parliament on October 28 2011, to save and retain the Bills which had been introduced in the Eighth Parliament.
Methodology

In the process of analysing the Bill, the committee discussed the Bill and received memoranda from the following stakeholders: 

1. 	The Attorney-General.
2. 	Ministry of Internal Affairs, where we had Uganda Police Force, Uganda Prisons Service.
3. 	Ministry of Security, where we had ISO and ESO.
4. 	Uganda Human Rights Commission.
5. 	Uganda Law Society.
6. 	Uganda Law Reform Commission.
7. 	Foundation for Human Rights Initiative.
8. 	Representative of the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
9. 	Coalition Against Torture, comprising Avocats San Frontiers, Kumi Human Rights Initiative, Refuge Law Project, Uganda Discharged Prisoners Aid Society, African Centre for Treatment and Rehabilitation of Torture Victims, Associations of Human Rights Organisations in the Rwenzori Region, Human Rights Network Uganda and Human Rights Focus.
 
The committee also conducted study tours to the Republic of Burundi and the Republic of Philippines where the law on torture has been enacted and is being implemented.

Underlying policy of the Bill

Uganda is a state party to several regional and international human rights instruments which prohibit torture. These instruments include, among others, the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, 1948; the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights; as well as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. Specifically, Uganda ratified the United Nations Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 1986.

Further to the accession to the United Nations Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Article 24, provides for freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment. This right is made non-derogable under Article 44 of the Constitution.

Object of the Bill

The object of the Bill is to bring into effect the obligation of Uganda as a state party to the various human rights instruments and particularly, the United Nations Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. The Bill seeks to provide a comprehensive definition of torture, make torture a criminal offence, provide sanctions including reparation for the offence of torture, regulate the use of information obtained by means of torture, provide for compensation of victims of torture and provide for individual criminal and civil responsibility for the offence of torture.

General Observations

The committee observed that:

Torture is a prevalent vice in Uganda as evidenced in the reports of the Uganda Human Rights Commission. In its past annual reports, torture has remained a leading reported case of human rights violation. The Commission reported 314 cases in 2009 and 276 in 2010, accounting for 28.3 percent of the complaints received. The Commission also reported that of the top five complaints registered in the last four years, torture has remained the lead violation of human rights. It has accounted for 23.65 percent in 2007, 29.6 percent in 2008, 31.0 percent in 2009 and 28.3 percent in 2010. 

Uganda is a state party to several international and regional human rights instruments among which are the Universal Declaration for Human Rights, 1948; the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966; and the African Charter on Human and Peoples Rights, 1986. All these instruments prohibit torture. Uganda has not yet ratified the Optional Protocol. The Optional Protocol provides for, among others, the training of state parties in the prevention of torture.

Although the Constitution guarantees freedom from torture as a non-derogable right, the obtaining legal framework does not make torture a criminal offence. Persons who would have otherwise been charged and punished for the grave and heinous crime of torture end up being charged, if at all, with common crimes such as assault. These provisions do not address the complex and serious nature of the crime.

Criminalisation of torture will enable the realisation of absolute prohibition of torture under the Constitution and distinguish the offence of torture as a more serious offence. 

These put together will make it clear to the perpetrators that the practice is punishable, thereby providing an important deterrent as well as provide for liberation.

The Penal law in Uganda does not precisely define the nature of the act that would amount to torture. This has led to the perception that domestic violence or corporal punishment, for instance, is torture. Besides, under Article 28(12), the Constitution requires that no one shall be charged or convicted of any offence unless the offence is defined and the penalty prescribed by law. 

The definition of torture provided under the UN Convention against Torture is limited to public officials. It makes torture an offence that can be committed only by agents of the State. This definition has now been overtaken by developments in international criminal law like the Rome Statute and the International Criminal Court Act, 2010 as well as the findings of the Uganda Human Rights Commission in Tumuramye Fred vs. Bwete Gerald, UHRC, No.264/1999 which stated that both the State and non-state actors can commit torture. This is the progressive definition of the offence of torture. In the Republic of the Philippines, for instance, acts of torture committed by private individuals have been criminalised under the International Humanitarian Act. 

Perpetrators of torture often times find solace in the defence that they were executing orders from above, a defence in criminal law referred to as superior orders. This in many cases has led to perpetrators not being held accountable even when the order is unlawful. 

The Bill also makes superiors whose junior officers have committed the offence of torture equally responsible if he or she knew or consciously disregarded information which clearly indicated that the subordinate was committing or about to commit torture. 

Taxpayers are left to shoulder the burden arising from these actions since the officials claim to be on official duty. This is based on the principle of vicarious liability. The Bill seeks to provide an exception to the principle of vicarious liability and makes the defence of superior orders inapplicable in the case of torture.

The Bill seeks to make all actors responsible for the offence of torture, whether it is through direct support, incitement, aiding or abetting, soliciting or procurement. The Bill makes all the parties to the offence of torture equally responsible as long as they knowingly or had reason to know that their support would be applied or used for in connection with the perpetration or commission or instigation of torture. 

Torture is usually committed for the sake of obtaining information from the victim. Although the Evidence Act of Uganda provides that confession obtained by means of coercion is not admissible as against an accused person in courts of law, it is only procedural prohibition without sanction for the act. The Bill provides that the confession is irrelevant if it has been obtained by cause of violence, force, threat, inducement or promise calculated in the opinion of the court to cause an untrue confession to be made.

However, there is no penalty against such a person who uses torture to extract the confession. A penalty should be introduced for a person that uses information well knowing that such information was obtained by way of torture in the prosecution of the persons tortured so as to ensure that the reasons often used to justify heinous acts of torture are curtailed. This will also dissuade people from using information that is obtained through torture, rendering one of the primary aims of torture redundant.

The Bill grants exclusive jurisdiction to try offences committed under the Act to be tried in magistrate’s courts only. 

The Bill provides for the right of any members of the society to complain if anybody has committed torture or intends to commit torture. This is not effective enough to stop torture. The law should make it an offence not to report to the authorities if a member of the community knows that any person has committed or intends to commit torture. 

Some of the people who are involved in the acts of torture hold positions of influence. This enables them to conceal or destroy evidence of torture. The law should make it an offence for any person who conceals or intends to conceal torture or frustrate the investigation of a suspected offence of torture under this Act or who destroys or tries to destroy, alter, mutilate or falsify any evidence related to the offence of torture.

The Bill envisages payment of compensation by the State or by the employer, but does not include payment of reparation by the person who perpetrated the act of torture. The Bill should provide for the payment of compensation out of resources of the person convicted for torture where the victim has suffered loss as a result of his or her commission of the offence. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Prevention and Prohibition of Torture Bill, 2010 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. 

Madam Speaker, the report is duly signed by 10 out of 20 members of the committee. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a Private Member’s Bill. I do not see the Minister of Justice. Is the Shadow Attorney-General here?

6.51
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiiro County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, unfortunately, the Shadow Minister for Justice is a member of this committee and in full support. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Any contributions, Members?

6.51
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for a good report. Just like we have done for the first report, I wish to pray that we defer debate on it and we discuss it tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have inundated you with a lot of information this afternoon. So, we defer the debate on this matter to tomorrow so that you go and read them both. I want to thank you very much for today’s work. The House is adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 6.52 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 April 2012 at 2.00 O’clock.)
