


Wednesday, 14 April, 2021

Parliament met at 3.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Before we commence, I would like to welcome and introduce the following delegations. 

The first is from the Archdiocese of Kampala and includes: Msgr Charles Kasibante, the Vicar General, you are welcome; Fr Remigius Kayiira, PPS to the Archbishop, you are welcome; Mr Freda Lubega Nyamahunge, Diocesan Officer to the Archbishop, you are welcome; Mr John Sekamate, Administrator to the Archbishop, you are welcome; and Mr James Lukyamuzi, the driver to the Archbishop, you are welcome. (Applause)

The second set is from the family of the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. Fr Joseph Wamala, nephew to the late, you are welcome; Ms Olivia Nankya, sister to the late Archbishop, you are welcome; Ms Elizabeth Nansubuga, another sister to the late Archbishop, you are welcome; and Mr Emma Mutebi, a nephew to the late Archbishop, you are very welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. First, I would like to amend the Order Paper to make a provision for the short statement from the Ministry of Energy concerning the oil pipeline. That will come after the motion for the Archbishop.

Then let me also communicate on the following:
 
In the 12th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 5th Session of the 10th Parliament, held on 2 March 2021, I informed this House that following the passing of Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 4 for Financial Year 2020/2021, I received formal complaints against the compensation mentioned in the supplementary. 

The complaints were relating to the following:

The size of the land in question;
The quantum of the compensation; and
The fact that beneficiaries in the first payment did not receive their payment.

I undertook to establish an ad hoc committee to investigate those allegations to get the full details and make recommendations accordingly. An ad hoc committee to investigate the alleged irregularities and inflated figures to the land compensation into that supplementary is hereby established.

It will be a small committee of three composed of Hon. Veronica Bichetero as chairperson of the committee, Hon. Silas Aogon, Member and Hon. Nsamba Oshabe, Member.

These are the terms of reference:

To investigate the claims that Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 4 of Financial Year 2020/2021 contained gross irregularities in respect of the size of the land for compensation and quantum;

To investigate the basis for determination of selected beneficiaries and the amounts for compensation contained in the Supplementary Schedule No. 4 for Financial Year 2020/2021;

To examine whether all the proper and legal procedures under the law of Uganda were followed in the acquisition of the lands in question;

To examine any other matters related to the above and make recommendations for the sound management of compensation, following compulsory acquisition of land;

Do anything incidental to or pursuant to these terms; and

Report back to the House within two weeks.

I have already informed you about the composition of the committee. We ask them to work expeditiously so that we can get the necessary answers.  

There are some matters of national importance.

3.11
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, thank you for allowing me this opportunity. I have a matter of national importance. I recall very well that the Government of Uganda gave the people of Bukooli Islands a very beautiful ferry. 

Last week when I was going to the landing site, I met a group of about 10 people whose land was taken for the construction of accommodation. While interacting with them, they said that they were told by the Minister of Works and Transport and the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to vacate those places and that they would be paid.

Madam Speaker, very few of them have been paid and if they have been paid, they allege that the payments were undervalued. Some are even saying that they are going to pay them Shs 200,000 to leave the land where their buildings are.

It is my humble appeal and prayer that the ministry concerned explains the circumstances under which somebody whose land has been taken plus the buildings or houses could be compensated with Shs 200,000.

Madam Speaker, I would also want the same ministry to come and explain when they are going to pay those who have not been paid.

Lastly, I pray that they present before the House a list of names of those whose land was taken so that we know, who among them has been paid and who has not been paid. That is my prayer, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. Now, because we have guests, we shall transfer these issues to tomorrow but one of them, by Hon. Kasumba, regarding the issue of the Tobacco farmers has already been handled. I believe some more action was taken as a result of our recommendations in this House. Otherwise, let me transfer the others to tomorrow.

3.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol):  Madam Speaker, we have a big problem of the mental -

THE SPEAKER: Can we do it tomorrow? That is what I am saying. We have put them on hold until tomorrow.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO HIS GRACE DR CYPRIAN KIZITO LWANGA, THE ARCHBISHOP OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF KAMPALA, FOR HIS DEDICATED SERVICE TO THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH, THE CHRISTIAN COMMUNITY IN UGANDA AND THE PEOPLE OF UGANDA

3.15
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS: (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to His Grace, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Kampala, for his dedicated service to the Roman Catholic Church, the Christian family in Uganda and the people of Uganda. I am moving this under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received, with grief, the sad news of the untimely demise of His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Kampala, which occurred on Saturday, 3 April 202l, at his residence;

AWARE that His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, was a devout Catholic, who prepared for his service in the Catholic Church by attending the following institutions:

(a) 	St Joseph's Seminary Nyenga in 1964,
(b) 	Katigondo National Seminary between 1912 and 1974,
(c) 	Ggaba National Seminary between 1975 to 1978,
(d) 	The University of Clermont-Ferrand in France in 1979,
(e) 	Pontifical University of the Holy Cross in Rome in 1994;

RECOGNISING that His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was ordained priest on 8 April 1978, consecrated Bishop on 1 March 1997, as the first Bishop of the Diocese of Kasana-Luweero and later as the Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Kampala on 30 September 2006, until the time of his demise; 

NOTING that His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga served the Church in various capacities including:

President of Caritas Africa (2006),
Member of the Executive Committee of the Uganda Joint Christian Council (UJCC) and Chairman of the Finance and Administrative Committee of UJCC (2001 to 2006),
Personal Secretary to Cardinal Wamala, Archbishop of Kampala and President/Founder of the Co-operative for Development,
Professor of Canon Law at Ggaba National Major Seminary and at St Mbaaga Major Seminary (1995 to 1996),
 Vicar General of the Archdiocese of Kampala (1988 to 1990),
Administrator of Ndeeba Parish in the Archdiocese of Kampala (1985 to 1988),
Executive Secretary of the National Committee for the celebrations of the Centenary of the Uganda Martyrs of Uganda (1985),
 Chancellor of the Archdiocese of Kampala (1984 to 1991),
Vice Chancellor and Curate of Nabbingo Parish (I981 to 1984), and
Personal Secretary of the Archbishop of Kampala, Cardinal Emmanuel Nsubuga (1978);

APPRECIATING that His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was a diligent leader who greatly contributed to the growth of the Christian faith in Uganda as well as the development of the Diocese of Kasana-Luweero and the Archdiocese of Kampala; 

COGNISANT that His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was a strong advocate for rule of law, constitutionalism, respect for human rights and freedoms, peace and justice; national cohesion and inter-religious unity as a tool for social economic transformation;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved as follows:

1. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deepest condolences to the bereaved family, the clergy, religious and faithfuls of the Archdiocese of Kampala, the people of Uganda, the Christian family in Uganda, the Roman Catholic Church in Uganda and beyond for the loss of His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga;

2. 	That Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service of His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga as the Archbishop of Kampala and his contribution towards the growth of the wider Christian family, social and economic development in Uganda.”  

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by everyone in the House. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: Justify it.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is the justification for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to His Grace the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Kampala.

On 3 April 2021, the country woke to the sad news of the passing on of His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. The Archbishop succumbed to Ischemic heart disease, following coronary artery thrombosis. In simple terms, a heart attack due to a blood clot in the blood vessels that supply the heart.

His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga served as Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Kampala from 2006 until the time of his demise. He had previously served as the first Bishop of Kasana-Luweero Diocese from 1996 to 2006.

The Archbishop, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was a well-known advocate for work and promoted various notable faith-based projects in the sectors of education, health and also in struggles to improve the livelihoods of our people.

He is remembered for setting up the Ssabasumba Annual Appeals Fund immediately on his arrival as prelate of the archdiocese to renovate the roof of Rubaga Cathedral. He mobilised Christians and within a short period, the cathedral received a face lift.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga worked with the Government to oversee the renovation of Namugongo Martyrs Shrine, which has become an acclaimed faith and tourist site world over. In addition, he led the development of Munyonyo Catholic Martyrs Shrine in 2016, which was later elevated to a Basilica, in commemoration of Pope Francis’s visit in Uganda. 

I must say, Madam Speaker, that, I had the pleasure and fortune of closely working with the late Archbishop in these projects at Namugongo and also at Munyonyo. Indeed, I was greatly impressed by his commitment and the advice he rendered to all those involved in the exercise of preparing for the Pope, and making sure that the sites were appropriate.

As an advocate for work, Archbishop Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was a transformational leader and supported many village entrepreneurship groups. He founded the Wekembe Microfinance Bank to provide financial services to low income members of society so as to improve the quality of their lives. Wekembe presently benefits over 30,000 people. 

Archbishop Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was born on 19 January 1953, at Kyabakadde Naggalama in Mukono District to Mr and Mrs Joseph Wamala. In 1959 to 1963, he attended Kyabakadde Catholic Primary School and then joined Nyenga Minor Seminary for his O’Level in 1964. He proceeded to Katigondo National Major Seminary in 1972 up to 1974, where he studied philosophy. 

He then joined Ggaba National Seminary for his priesthood formation, and was later ordained priest by the late Emmanuel Cardinal Nsubuga at Rubaga Cathedral on 9 April 1978. 

After this ordination, he was appointed Private Secretary to Cardinal Nsubuga. He then served in various church administrative capacities; as Vice Chancellor of the Archdiocese of Kampala and later substantive Chancellor in 1984; Second Vicar General of Kampala Archdiocese in 1988; where he was entrusted with building and renovating the Namugongo Presbytery, the Shrine and the surrounding areas. 

He pursued his Doctorate in Canon Law in Rome in February 1990 and on his return in 1995, Dr Kizito Lwanga was immediately appointed Private Secretary to Emmanuel Cardinal Wamala. 

In 1993, during his doctorate studies, he was chosen as Secretary to the African Synod of Bishops in Rome, becoming the first Ugandan to hold such a responsibility. 

Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was appointed first Bishop of the Diocese of Kasana Luweero on 30 November 1996, and consecrated Bishop on 1 March 1997 at Kasana Luweero by Cardinal Emmanuel Wamala, then, Archbishop of Kampala. On 30 September 2006, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was appointed Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Kampala. 

Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga’s ecumenical approach to issues often fostered closer relationships to promote peace, unity and brotherhood. He was strongly against the social ills in society and held a solid stance for human rights, justice, peace and national reconciliation. 

The Government wishes to extend our profound sympathies to the Catholic Church, the family and the people of Uganda. May the Almighty God grant his soul eternal peace and rest.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Can I invite the Leader of the Opposition to second the motion?

3.31
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I rise to second a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to a spiritual father, a shepherd, a great spiritual director, an iconic cleric, a statesman, Chairman of the Uganda Joint Christian Council and Co-Chairman of the Interreligious Council. 

He has done a lot for the Catholic Church and the country during the years he has been in service by nurturing us spiritually and offering us direction; the late Archbishop, His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, who breathed his last on Saturday, 3 April 2021. 

I would also like to observe that most people who watched television on 2 April 2021 saw him active in the Way of the Cross. So, it was a big shock to the whole country that he was no more on 3 April 2021.

The late Archbishop Cyprian was a talented and brilliant son of Uganda, who always desired nothing but the best for his country and its leadership. He was also an intelligent leader with unmatched capacity for hard work.

The late Archbishop shall always be remembered for true advocacy of human rights, good governance and the fight against corruption in Uganda. His firm character and passion for humanity portrayed him as a martyr; a Godsend and an uncommonly found Bishop just like the late Janan Luwum, Bishop Kivengere and Bishop Desmond Tutu, that protested against dictatorial regimes. 

During and after the general elections of 2021, he raised his voice and spoke against the outrageous kidnappings and torture of Ugandans; a violation of the human rights. He called upon Government to unconditionally release all political prisoners. 

During his reign as the Archbishop of Kampala Diocese, he closely worked with profound desire to meet the needs of vulnerable people and the church.  

He strongly defended the rights of Christians and tirelessly worked for peace and justice. He also worked to economically empower his flock through saving cooperatives and other wealth creation programmes, which lent a hand in development and improvement of the condition of people’s lives.

The late Dr Cyprian Lwanga has left a mark on the Catholic Church in Uganda and on the social and political life of our country. With his bundles of energy, he used to exercise his ministry as a priest and bishop.

He committed himself to promote the Catholic Church’s mission of integral human development. The country has, therefore, lost a mentor and leader who offered wise counsel whenever called upon to do so. His clear voice of advocacy for the poor and the oppressed, his commitment to Christian unity and justice, faith, mutual love and hope for all will be dearly missed.

To all those who loved and respected him, we owe him one meaningful tribute - that is to do all that we can to bring his ideals to reality and to serve this country and the Church as he served. We cannot give up; we owe it to the present and the future generations to rise up and walk the way he did.

As the country mourns, our prayers go to the immediate family of the late Archbishop Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the entire Catholic community and the world over. 

We call for penitence, reflection and peace throughout the nation during this difficult time of national mourning. The late fought a good fight. He finished the race and kept the faith. May the Almighty God receive him and crown him for his great deeds. He will be greatly missed. May he rest in peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition. The third seconder is not visible; so we will just go straight to the contributions. They are very many but we will just need three minutes each. I will try to catch everybody.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for personally turning up at Kololo to join the rest of the mourners in mourning for our beloved, the late Archbishop. 

I remember vividly just a few years ago when His Grace came here to celebrate Ash Wednesday as the chief celebrant, I sent you a message when you were chairing the session. You immediately said you were adjourning the House to give way for the Archbishop, who had arrived and the Catholic family of the House to go and honour the Ash Wednesday. I realised that you pay a lot of attention and give due respect to the religious leaders in this country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, we have three types of Archbishops - the titular, which is an honorary title granted to someone by the Holy Pontiff in recognition of their service to the Church.

The second one is the official Archbishop and this is the given title, by virtue of the office one holds. For example, a papal nuncio is an archbishop by virtue of that office. 

The third one is the metropolitan Archbishop. According to Canon Law 435, a metropolitan archbishop is the archbishop of his diocese and is appointed by the Roman Pontiff, and presides over the province, for example, Kampala Archdiocese. The metropolitan archdiocese has four independent dioceses with their own bishops. Therefore, the late Archbishop Dr Kizito Lwanga belonged to the third category.

Archbishop Dr Kizito Lwanga has fulfilled, to the last day of his life, his ecumenical calling as the archbishop in that category. He has been tireless in organising seminars, monthly and annual retreats for his priests and he was available 24 hours to attend to their needs, even on phone and late in the night.

He has also taken care of that province and he has made for the priests decent support and social assistance according to the norm of the law. He has built decent priest houses and convents in almost all parishes and initiated a priests’ provident fund to support their retirement package.

Madam Speaker, as much as possible, a diocesan bishop is to foster vocations in different ministries. The Archbishop supported seminarians, both minor and major. He has equipped and developed seminaries like Nswanjere, Kisubi, St Mbaga. He has done all that in the short time that he has been with us.

The Archbishop lived like a “candle in the wind”. He was an elegant powerful preacher of the word of God and he could talk to the very minor people in this country with a view of seeking their opinion, as if they knew much more than he did. I think all this was done for him to have a legacy and show people that it is the lower people that matter more than the higher ones.

Madam Speaker, I request that we remember that the martyrs that we have in Uganda were mainly accorded so because of healing the sick. The Archbishop has healed and elevated people from poverty especially the Catholics. I pray that his life and legacy could be researched on with a view of becoming a martyr in Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion to pay tribute to our dear friend, the late Archbishop Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. The cruel hand of death has robbed this country of a great man, a great pastor, a great teacher and a parent to many of us.

The Archbishop of Kampala, the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, preached peace, justice, welfare and human rights. He wanted to see everybody happily enjoying his or her stay in this country. As we are all aware, the Archbishop rose from a very humble background in Kyabakadde, Mukono. Very little was known about that place until the Archbishop was born - a very quiet and remote place in Mukono District. 

People there today say he transformed that rural area and we are very proud of it. Many of us are beneficiaries of the effort of this great man of God. 

The Archbishop has made us, through his wise counsel, guidance and mentorship. He has been a friend to the poor, the sick and the elderly. He preached and his message reached almost everybody who needed support.

He preached the Good Samaritan ways and always urged us, his Christians, to help those who need help and the poor. He always encouraged us to share. He loved his country and church.

Whenever I think about his legacy, two things come to my mind: he was a man who loved his church and was a very firm defender of the Catholic Church doctrine, yet he believed in ecumenism - interreligious harmony and he lived it.

This was a gentleman who respected all religions; he would interact with other faiths with a lot of respect. We thank God who blessed this country with the gift of a very brilliant man of God in the name of Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga.

May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT)(Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion on behalf of the people of Kitgum Municipality. I bring my condolences to the family of the late Archbishop His Grace Dr Lwanga and the Christian community.

I thank you too for enabling us today in the people’s Parliament to talk about this son of the soil, whom we all fondly remember.

The late Archbishop His Grace Dr Cyprian Lwanga was one of the few that God had sent to live as an example for us. It has all been said; he was a shepherd who looked after his sheep holistically, spiritually and physically.

He is remembered for his spiritual inspiration, for trying to make welfare of his sheep and this made us feel proud. He understood those he led in totality. I thank His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda for according such a great son of the soil a befitting send-off.

The fact is that we are here on a journey; we are not permanently here. Every day, we are walking towards the journey God has ordained. We do not know the time. We are here with the family and community who were so close to him so that we can give them hope instead of breaking them further, because we are believers.

As Christians, we do believe that nothing happens outside God’s time. That was his time; let us respect it. It also brings me to remember when we celebrated the Uganda Martyrs’ Day, two years ago. I happened to be one of those who read the reading in Luganda and after that he called and asked me, “How come you know Luganda more than the original Baganda here?” I said I am one of them and I am a Ugandan. That simplicity touched me because he could even go into the details and reach out to everybody. 

I am so fond of that day; it made me feel good and proud. Today, I am happy to speak in this Parliament and say that this was a testimony of a good shepherd of the Christians.

Lastly, when such an event happens, we talk but we forget something; what does it teach you and I? It teaches that we do not know the hour. How ready are we? How many will be fondly remembered, like the late Archbishop. Can we work toward making the world a better place, a memorable place when we leave?

Can we work as believers to leave a positive footstep so that the world remembers us? May his soul rest in eternal peace.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion moved by the Prime Minister in paying tribute to our dear Archbishop Lwanga. On behalf of the people of Ndorwa West, my family and the people of Kabale, I want to send our condolences to the family and the entire catholic community in Uganda on the passing of our dear Archbishop Lwanga.

There are so many ways that we can remember Archbishop Lwanga. One thing that I vividly remember is that the he promoted ecumenical approach to evangelism. He believed in peace, harmony, reconciliation and promoted development activities, education and as the Prime Minister said, the SACCO that he had started, which helped a number of people.

He was one of the towering spiritual figures of our time, whose service and leadership earned him a title of God’s ambassador and touched countless hearts and minds.

I worked with him closely when we were organising the National Day of Prayer - normally held in December - and I have seen how he works, how he leads people and truly I was touched. All of us were saddened by his death at a very early age.

When we moved the Anti-Homosexuality Bill in 2009, we interacted with the Interreligious Council where he was a member and in one of the meetings I attended to explain to religious leaders - you know they have very many versions and ideas. Some people said that we should maybe approach them by caring for them, loving them and educating them rather than removing the law. 

However, in one of those meetings, Archbishop Lwanga vividly asked his colleagues, the religious leaders. He said, “What does the Bible say about that issue?” From that meeting, we were able to ignite unity around this issue. All the religious leaders spoke with one voice against homosexuality and its promotion in this country.

So, we thank him. We thank the Catholic Church that has looked after him. We thank you for standing with his family in these difficult days.

Madam Speaker, we thank you for allowing us this opportunity to pay tribute to God’s servant, who served this country for a long time and who earns this tribute that we are paying him. May God bless his soul. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Wanzala, Hon. Acon, Hon. Byandala, Hon. Kibalya, Hon. Ssengo - Could the Members I have named move nearer to the podium so that we do not take time? 

3.55
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to also second the motion raised by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the former Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese.

Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga will be remembered for his spiritual development, for his missionary work and for his infrastructure development. 

I heard the Prime Minister very clearly mentioning that Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was the pioneer Bishop for Kasana-Luweero Diocese. When you talk about Kasana-Luweero Diocese, you mean the political districts if Luweero, Nakasongola and Nakaseke. So, he was our pioneer Bishop of Kasana-Luweero Diocese.

Madam Speaker, the people of Luweero, Nakasongola and Nakaseke will remember Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga for expanding the Cathedral of Kasana-Luweero Diocese headquarters, which was not enough to accommodate Christians at that time.

Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga will also be remembered for constructing the perimeter wall around the diocese. He will be remembered for constructing the multi-purpose building, which is helping the diocese to raise funds to run it.

Dr Lwanga had unfinished business in Kasana-Luweero Diocese. When I was interacting with the Reverend Fathers and the Bishop of Kasana-Luweero, Bishop Ssemogerere, he had a plan of constructing a flyover near the church to avoid accidents which always occur on the Kampala-Gulu Highway. He had that plan but of course, UNRA did not agree to it. I appeal to Parliament, UNRA and the Ministry of Works and Transport to take his plan ahead and have a flyover constructed.

Madam Speaker, a number of accidents are happening on the Kampala-Gulu Highway around the areas of Wobulenzi, Kasana-Luweero, Migyera, Kakooge and Kyankonwa, a matter I raised sometime back with the Ministry of Works and Transport. That has not been attended – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Use only three minutes. There are very many Members who want to contribute.

3.58
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion to pay tribute to Archbishop Lwanga. We are all aware that the Bible tells us there is no time for death. If we knew, some of us would still request God to hold it back.

I would like to empathise with the family of our late Archbishop and the Catholic Diocese for whatever has happened. I thank the late for the contribution he made to this country; he was among those who rejected homosexuality. 

What I request, Madam Speaker – I have moved around the world. When an extraordinary person dies in this country, we do not have a book to learn the history of that person. I request that for such a person like the Archbishop who has passed away, something must be written so that the younger generation does not forget him. They would love to emulate him. This is one thing, which I would request for.

As Members of Parliament, we are aware that one time, they will pay tribute to us but we want to make sure we do a good job while we are still alive in this world. You must have a good record and a book written about your life, not only to be on the internet. This is one thing which I would like to appeal to our country. I pray that his soul rests in peace. Thank you.

4.01
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Madam Speaker, I stand here to pay tribute to the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. We must all appreciate what this gentleman did for this country.

This man was developmental. For us where he started as a Bishop, there are landmarks in churches, schools, hospitals, etcetera. They are there for everybody to see. This gentleman - Archbishop Lwanga – learnt what priests should do. You do not simply come to preach how Jesus was at Capernaum; no, people also want social services. That is why he was involved in very many things to empower the people. We really thank the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. 

I like him because he was a man who told the people what they were supposed to hear. He is not among those who talked to people about things that those people wanted to hear. He was outspoken, to the point and rightful.

I recall when they were looking for money to refurbish Namugongo, the Church had some land at Entebbe Airport. I was a Minister of Works and Transport then and he approached me. He explained, I saw the sense in his explanation and I agreed that they should be paid and they were paid.

The second thing I did with the Archbishop was the Northern Bypass road going to Munyonyo. The designers had first gone through the Basilica. When he explained to me, I told these technical people to redesign it and immediately relocate and leave that place alone. At least I did something on the request of the Archbishop.

Madam Speaker, the Archbishop was a wonderful man. When he was working – as the Prime Minister said – with the late Cardinal Emmanuel Nsubuga, I met him there because I was doing some work in engineering, with the late Archbishop Nsubuga. He had a relative who was a good architect and I was doing the engineering work.

I pray that those who are in that business of being preachers, nuns and what-not, please emulate what Archbishop Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga has done. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause) 

4.04
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join colleagues in paying tribute to the great Archbishop Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. I thank God that I have lived in a generation where I have seen Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. 

Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was a religious leader but he played the role of changing the lives of Ugandans more than we, the leaders that have that task. Wherever you go and hear of any journey where Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga passed, somebody will be there to testify that their life has changed because of Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. He is a leader who has changed people’s lives.

Our President is somebody who says, Kibalo; yes you are doing this and the other but what about your home and personal income. Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga realised that he was a preacher; he was leading his people but he had to change their lives. We are told that for those who approached him at that time, that he could ask how much you had so that he adds something to that, to make sure your life changes for the better. That was the great man.

Madam Speaker, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga - at one time when they told me his background with Mapeera House, we shared and we wondered whether we could change the name of Mapeera House to Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga House but we were told that it was  hard because of some catholic lines. However, Mapeera House was purely the brain of Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. The Centenary Bank that we see now, the only Ugandan Bank that we are proud of, our bank that we feel is our bank, was the brainchild of Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga.

Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was born after Namugongo existed but he came up with a formula and model that we see in Namugongo now. We were sharing with some parents when Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was being buried. We were told that Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga had around 400 children that he was paying school fees for, as an individual. This is the Archbishop that we are talking of now.

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is here - just one second as I bring tribute from Busoga Kingdom. Since the Prime Minister is here, as we believe and appreciate what we did, we need to do something so that at that in future when talking about Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, our children can see something to know that when you do something unique and different, the country can remember you. But when we see ladies from that association of Wekembe crying, it is because they do not see the future now. We were sharing with those ladies and we wondered the next step because of what Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga did.
 
Therefore, as Government, we need to do something in recognition of his great efforts to help us, as leaders, build this country and do what we had failed to do as leaders, so that the generation to come can also live to testify that a great man once lived at a time when Dr Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda was the Prime Minister of this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me also add some testimony from Busoga. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, one day I had gone to Bukungu Landing Site and they talked to me about the need for water, roads and others, then finally they said, “Madam, the next time you come, we shall be dead.”

I asked, “What do you mean that we shall be dead?” and they said, “We are going to kill each other.” “Why are you going to kill each other”, I asked. They said each of these houses you see at the landing site has got money. Every day we sell things and we have no bank that is why we say that we are going to kill one another.

Therefore, I got concerned and wrote to the minister of finance saying that we need a bank in the extreme north of Busoga because in Buyende, Kamuli and Luuka, there were no banks. I wrote to all these important banks in Uganda asking them to establish a branch in the extreme north and no one was interested.

However, when I talked to Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga and told him my problem, he said, “Leave it to me.” That is how Centenary Bank went to Kamuli. (Applause) and that is why when Hon. Kiyingi says that our relationship - I held him in high regard for solving a problem of our people. Thank you.

4.09
MR KALULE SENGO (NRM, Gomba East County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in paying condolences to our fallen great spiritual father. I came to know the late Archbishop way back in the 1970s when I was still a resident of Najanakumbi. At the time when the late Archbishop was still a young priest, was assigned to start a sub parish and later on the parish of Ndeeba. We started off just a few people in a papyrus thatched church and the late Archbishop was assigned to develop that place. 

Madam Speaker, the Archbishop was a wizard at development. He was very developmental because after a few years, he was able to construct a church for us and presently, Ndeeba is one of the biggest parishes in this Archdiocese.

All Ugandans should borrow a leaf from the late Archbishop. This is a man who welcomed everybody regardless of his religion. This is a man who loved peace and always said the truth. Indeed Uganda has lost a great church leader of the Catholic Church. Every time I met him, he would refer to me as his parishioner of Ndeeba. I always wondered about his very good memory. He would never forget a person; that was our Archbishop.

Madam Speaker, I have a feeling that this country has a number of problems and I also believe that we do not die; even when we die, we remain alive wherever we go. I am sure that the late Archbishop is aware of all the problems we are facing in Uganda and I am convinced that he will pray for this country so that we overcome all these problems.

May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to thank God that he allowed our late Archbishop to be born here in Uganda. If he had decided for him to be born elsewhere, we would not be talking about him now and celebrating his life now. However, because God made him in his own image and placed him here in Uganda, I thank God.

I also would like to thank the Government for the support they accorded for the burial of our late Archbishop. I also want to thank the Speaker and the Parliament for allowing this motion to be moved today.

Madam Speaker, the problem with death is that it has no formula, no home, no subcounty nor county. What we must do is to always thank God when we are still alive. We should not forget that we can die any time. However, before we die, we must do a wonderful job like the late Archbishop has done, like you have heard.

Madam Speaker, since he was the Archbishop, allow me to read two verses from the Bible. By the way, he was a preacher of the word of God and so, this goes to all of us who are mourning.

Revelations 21:4 says, “He will wipe away every tear from their eyes. There will be no more death or mourning or crying or pain, for the old order of things has passed away.” 

We are mourning but all this is going to end. And in 1 Thessalonians 4:14, it is said, “We believe that Jesus died and rose again and so, we believe that God will bring with Jesus those who have fallen asleep in him.” 

I am sure our Archbishop has fallen asleep. When the Christ resurrects, he will resurrect with him. Therefore, I would like to appeal that we work very hard as Christians and be an example, like he was to everybody. He was not selective. He loved everyone.

I am one of those few people who do not understand Luganda properly but each time he preached, I got interested in understanding the language called Luganda. I could ask, “What has he said?” I would like to say that the Archbishop was a great preacher. He was pro-development. He wanted to protect the rights of everybody in this country. He preached love and forgiveness against social ills. He supported the development of this country and that is why in my opinion, just like the minister said earlier on, if he has met all the criteria to be in every matter, I would not oppose it. I would say, “He’s among those who qualify, if he has met all the requirements.”

Secondly, like my brother, Hon. Kibalya said, now that he did a good job and is an example in this country, I would appeal to Cabinet - now that the Prime Minister is here and he is the one who brought this motion - to put up a very powerful hospital in memory of this powerful man who served Uganda with one heart; free from corruption, segregation and religious problems. He knew that we must serve Christ and God and be in Heaven. May God rest his soul in eternal peace! Thank you.

4.17
Ms Margaret baba diri (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Koboko and on my own behalf, I would like to pay my sincere condolences to the family of His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga and the Christians of Uganda, especially the Catholics because we have lost a very great man.

His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was a dedicated servant of God. He devoted his whole life to the people of Uganda to ensure they develop spiritually, mentally and bodily.

Spiritually, His Grace ensured that if you are a Catholic Christian, you must be practical; not only going to pray or having sacraments but also to follow and ensure that you go to Heaven. I had seen that one quality in his preaching.

Mentally, he ensured that children are all educated. He started schools not only in his area but also in other parts of Uganda. He bodily ensured that people are economically and socially healthy and had money. He believed that a Christian must be somebody who is wholly developed.

His Grace was a true leader. Right from his family, he exhibited a sense of leadership during his school life. Even when he became a priest, he served shortly and was appointed a parish priest; from Parish Priest to Bishop to Archbishop. If he had lived longer, he could even become a Cardinal. Unfortunately, he lived shortly.

Let us think about the death of His Grace Lwanga. Sixty six years is a young age; he could still do more work but he died on Good Friday together with Jesus. On Thursday, he collected all priests around him and had supper together just like the Last the Supper that Jesus had with his disciples.

He died on Saturday night. I am sure he died together with Jesus and rose together with Him. He is now there with Him. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.20
Mr Thomas tayebwa (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving this motion and you, Madam Speaker, for getting it space on the Order Paper.

I happened to work with His Grace when we were organising the Symposium of the Episcopal Conferences of Africa and Madagascar (SECAM) that hosted over 400 cardinals, Bishops and Archbishops here in 2019. I was appointed the national secretary for finance. I was also the chief fundraiser.

We moved and started raising funds together to have a very successful SECAM. I remember when we were somehow stuck, we tapped into his friendship with you, Madam Speaker, because we did not have vehicles. We had a budget of over Shs 700 million for hiring vehicles but he said, “Just go to my friend, Rebecca.” 

When we came, you signed for us and we used the brand new vehicles, which were meant for the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) Conference. I am very sure that even wherever he is, he is still thanking you and Parliament. 

At the same moment when we were stuck he said, “My friend, the President, will always be there for the Catholic community.” He managed to link us to the President and the President gave us Shs 4 billion, which we used to host a very successful function.

In all that, he told us two things; that in whatever we do,   whenever we talk about the spiritual welfare of the nation, we should also talk about economic welfare. He preached, lived it and helped many people to get into the money economy and not just the spiritual economy.

Another thing, which we have to look into deeply as leaders in this country – and which His Grace was always talking about - is the issue of pro-life; protecting the lives of the unborn children. We have thousands of abortions on demand sponsored in this country each day. The church has cried out. Now there is what they call abortion on demand. When someone wants to go to a club, they abort, go and look for another child. 

As leaders in this country, we have to look into that issue deeply. If we want the church to be our partners in fighting for the economic liberation of the country, we must work with it to fight for moral liberation. May the soul of His Grace rest in eternal peace! Thank you.

4.23
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the Government, the Prime Minister, and your office for giving us this opportunity of talking about a man, who understood his purpose for creation. The problem that we have in this world is that sometimes we fail to know the purpose of our creation. So, he left us with very important wealth; spiritual and community, which is key and very important in this country. 

It is important to think now, as we praise the doctor for what he has done in this world. He left us with the “Will” on a Good Friday to do justice to Ugandans. What is the Government going to do on the “Will” that he has left behind? He left a very serious “Will” that we have to think about and do in favour of remembering him. 

We should use this opportunity to demand the Government to release the political prisoners, who are in prison now; those who were abducted during this period. We are just a piece of meat walking around with blood flowing on it and I think, we should think about each other. We are born in the same way and that is the kind of preaching that the Bishop left us with. 

Therefore, I would like to request everyone to think about who will cry when they die. We are crying because of the community wealth that he left in the world. He touched the lives of the people. He did not think about touching his own life. He did not build wealth for himself. People will not remember you for the money you left in the bank. They will not remember you for the houses you have built but they will remember you for the life you have touched in the community. That is the most important thing that we should take in the life of the Bishop. 

As a Catholic, I demand and request the Government to fulfil the “Will” of the Archbishop. Thank you very much. May his soul rest in peace. 

4.26
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus, allow me to also add my voice and support the motion.

The late Archbishop was a religious leader who united all of us, regardless of our religious affiliations. He was a human rights defender and indeed, if we are to honour him, we must also ensure that we defend human rights, especially the rights of the oppressed. 

I remember very vividly at the end of last year, the late Archbishop came out to request the Government to suspend the elections because there was a lot of human rights violation. In the interest of protecting Ugandans, probably because of COVID-19, he requested that we suspend elections so that we protect all Ugandans. He was not in politics but he wanted every Ugandan to be safe and free. This is why he requested that we postpone the elections. There are not very many religious leaders who come out boldly to tell the Government what is supposed to be done. 

Madam Speaker, in some of his last sermons, he talked about defending all Ugandans as far as human rights are concerned. He appealed to the Government, especially the security operatives as far as handling and arresting Ugandans is concerned. He wanted them to change for the better. We have lost a unifying factor. May his soul rest in peace. 

4.28 
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join other members to support the motion. Above all, I thank you, for this time to pay respect to the Archbishop. 

I would also like to send my condolences to you, because we were supposed to attend the Easter celebrations with him. Together with the cathedral administrator, they were prepared for you but you did not make it because of his death. 

When you see some of us wearing these Rosaries, you should know that we just want to imitate these archbishops and bishops. This is why I wear my Rosary like they do. Since I failed that side; I try this kind of behaviour. 

I am one of those Members of Parliament that have participated in the public Way of the Cross, together with the Archbishop every Good Friday. I have carried out this activity since 1994, when I came to Kampala. I have always moved with him from Rubaga. I did not communicate with anyone to know whether there was a public Way of the Cross in Namirembe. Otherwise, I would have been with the Archbishop. 

Even then, he has also been our patron at Pope Paul Social Club, where I spend my evenings, as I use some of my income for enjoyment. This made me a very close friend to the Archbishop. We, Catholics, have a word we use in Latin, “Roma locuta causa finita.” You cannot object to what the Pope says but he has never said that the Archbishop should die. Once he brought him to Kampala - not many of us knew him but when he began his work, we worked with him.

At one time, I was the head teacher of one of the Catholic schools, after Shimoni was demolished. The Archbishop gave me a job in Makindye. 

I would like to put this on record. In Buganda and any other culture, there is nowhere you go to attend a funeral for only a tour. It was unfortunate that the Spokesperson of the Government, Mr Ofwono Opondo, on a public television said, “I am not a Christian and I do not worship but I went to Rubaga for a tour”. This was very painful - Of course, since I knew well   the acts and behaviours of this gentleman, I did not wonder - such utterances are not welcome!

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Archbishop foresaw more development for children. In Uganda, we have associations, which build children such as the Uganda Scouts, which is already dead in this regime. The Girl Guides is not functional in this regime but the Archbishop started the Banna Kizito, which has spread to a number of schools. They are building children to grow morally so that they imitate the Saint that was killed young and is a martyr. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this country needs a council of elders. Can you sit down, as the Government, if you feel you are serious, and build a council of elders?

The Archbishop raised a number of complaints about security, to the extent of saying that one time, his priest had a guard. These priests are also human beings and so, do not think they do not make mistakes. They are actually given “seven sins” per day, according to our belief. 

When they come out to utter what they feel is wrong, the Government attacks, threatens them as well as intimidates and spies on them. Once you put up a council of elders in this country, it will help the long serving President, who thinks he cannot leave this Government to solve some of these problems that they are bringing so that this country can move forward. 

Madam Speaker, the Episcopal Council wrote a book on different issues relating to the elections of 2021. I pray that each member is given a copy in their pigeon hole- Each member got a copy. Please, honourable members, go and read and internalise what the bishops wrote about the elections that took place. When you come back, we can act on behalf of the country with a sober mind. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according me this time. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.34
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you Madam Speaker. I stand here to pay tribute to the great Archbishop. As we debate, I know many of the religious leaders are watching and listening to us; this is a very great lesson to them. 

We are saying that he was a great Archbishop because of being open; he feared nothing. You the Pastors watching us, the Bishops, the Reverend Fathers, the Catechists, the Laity, come up and advocate for good governance and rule of law. Expose the dictators, the corrupt, the robbers, land grabbers, abusers of human rights, murders - come up! This is the reason why we are paying tribute. 

Sometimes, I ask myself, if he had not died, what would have been Government’s response to his statements on Friday? When you die, the statements change. People will come and say, “He spoke the truth”. I am sure the spokesperson we have just talked about here would have said, “What is his business in the arrest of Ugandans”? However, because he has died, everybody is saying he was a good man.

Finally, the Prime Minister has justified the motion and I am very happy that the Government has come up with this. However, I expected him to say that because of this good Archbishop, we are going to deal with issues he was raising in respect to the arbitrary killings and the arrests.

However, he still has an opportunity - I am sure before he goes, he will speak to the statement of the Archbishop. Otherwise, it does not make a lot of sense for us to come here and praise the Archbishop yet he left two issues; release those you are not taking to court, where are they? If we cannot speak about that, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are just deceiving the nation. Thank you.

4.36
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join my colleagues to pay a glowing tribute to the fallen Archbishop, Dr Cyprian Lwanga. I watched that day when the Archbishop was being given a deserving send off, and it was akin to the one of previous week; when they were burying the fallen gallant son of the Republic of Tanzania. 

What flooded my mind is that the success of a man or a woman in this world is not in the much wealth you amass around you, not how long you cling to power or even remove those limits that could have actually limited you, but it is in how long you remain in the memories of the people that you served. I saw the mourners mourning; because of how he had touched their hearts and minds by the dedicated service, which he did with passion.

Madam Speaker, the Archbishop Dr Cyprian Lwanga is only second to the late Archbishop Janan Luwum. All the social ills and gross human rights violations that Luwum condemned are happening today, and he is the only cleric that came to speak truth to power.

Madam Speaker, even before he passed away, he had almost fervently asked Government to release the political prisoners. On that note, therefore, now that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister who moved the motion is here, he has set a mark that we ought to emulate. The best tribute that you could pay to the fallen Archbishop, Dr Cyprian Lwanga, is to unconditionally release these political prisoners. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I realised that when the President was eulogising the fallen cleric, he mentioned the enormous contribution that he had made purportedly – 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR NAMBESHE: I am about to conclude - the enormous contribution that he had made, purportedly when they were still in the bush in Luweero. I liked the way he was “lionising” the Archbishop and I wondered why this could not have been done when someone is still alive. I have seen so many medals being given to gallant sons of this country, but that we waiting for them to pass away then we “lionize” them, it does not ogre well with some people who are so God fearing, like myself - (Laughter.) 
With these few remarks, may his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.40
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing time for this motion. I will begin by thanking the Prime Minister, Ndugu Rugunda, for within your motion, you properly described the man, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, as a man who respected the rule of law, a man who desired constitutionalism, a man who had high respect for human rights, freedoms, peace and justice. Thank you, because you really described him well. Those are some of the values Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga stood for.

Madam Speaker, at a time when we experienced threats for crashing NUP supporters during elections, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga’s voice was heard, speaking to the authority. At a time when we experienced kidnaps, murders by the state, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga’s voice was heard on the pulpit. At a time when some ministers asked him to leave politics and concentrate on religious matters, he never relented. He kept on preaching peace and justice.

In fact, many honourable members have reminded us that, on the day he celebrated the Way of the Cross, he spoke for justice. He desired that all people that the Government and state agents arrested during campaigns and January 2021 elections be released. There is no more gift you can give to him or the people of Uganda if you do what he desired.

Madam Speaker, we will miss the Archbishop very much, a freedom fighter, a religious leader who never minced his words whenever he spoke for the people using the position he had.

Many people choose to bury their heads in the sand when injustice is going on in our country. Every one of us deserves a better Uganda and that was what the Archbishop stood for. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.43
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP,	Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people Gulu City, I also join in to support the motion that was moved by the Prime Minister, comrade Ndugu Rugunda. In Latin it is said, “In omnia paratus” (Always be ready for anything).

Archbishop Lwanga, born from the mamba clan and as you are aware, it is the largest in Buganda Kingdom. The Baganda were very wise to create totems because clans protected the environment. If you belonged to the mamba clan, that meant you would not eat that fish called mamba. Otherwise, that clan would have finished the mamba fish in Lake Victoria.

Archbishop Lwanga stood and fulfilled what we call the “apostolic succession” right from being a laity, to priest, bishop, Archbishop, he was going on but he fulfilled them. If you look at the virtues in the canon law, the first section is about theological virtues.

He fulfilled the issues regarding faith as a leader in the church, the he gave hope to the hopeless, he stood for charity about love as the Archbishop.

The second bracket of virtues - that is all about the cardinal virtues, he fulfilled them on the issues of prudence, regarding wisdom as a catholic prelate. 

He looked at fortitude, he was courageous; we have talked about the issues he raised to the Government of Uganda that you may need to fulfil in your reply at the end of this. 

Temperance, that is about self-control. He taught citizens, young children and all of us. When we were being oriented when we came to this 10th Parliament, he met us in Pope Paul Memorial Centre and said, “First thing I need you to do is struggle and use Christian lenses in your legislation in Parliament.”

That is what we do here – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR KOMAKECH: We have learned from him that if you looked at certain virtues and used those as lenses to do legislation, the law will always be respected.

I stand firm to bear witness that he was one of the greatest prolife advocates - that is why I wore this badge about prolife. This is about standing for the lives of the unborn and those to be born. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.47
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me also to add my voice in thanking the Prime Minister for bringing this motion to pay tribute to our father. I thank you for finding space to allow Members of Parliament on behalf of the people that we represent to pay tribute to this great man.

As I was walking here, I heard Hon. Centenary calling me “Nabakristu” but the Archbishop always called me “Sabakristu.”

A lot can be said about the Archbishop; personally, I knew him way back when I was working with the Justice and Peace Commission, Archdiocese of Gulu.

I was the executive secretary and often times we would meet to discuss issues of development because at that time, he was the president of Caritas Uganda and at one time the president of Caritas Africa. I am not surprised with the development that came with that position he held. This raises a big question; how many of us in this Uganda when given an opportunity to hold big offices will use it for the common man and woman? The Archbishop did exactly that. 

How many of us, if given an opportunity, would sacrifice their salary to ensure that we empower women? The Archbishop did just that.

The information I wanted to give to Hon. Morris about Centenary Bank, Mapeera building - The story I heard about it is that it was built on zero loan and purely on savings!

What lesson can we learn as a country; can we survive without some of these big loans? Another thing is that everyone has spoken very well about the late Archbishop.

One thing that also touched my heart is that the Archbishop amidst his busy schedule, would find time every Ester season, Boxing Day to visit and spend time with his family. This is a challenge to all of us, how many of us can do this.

Finally, everything that has been said is summarised in Matthew 25 and it is for all of us here. Start from verse 34 but what I want to conclude with is in verse 40 which states: “Whatsoever you do to the least of my brothers and my sisters, you do unto me.” Let me sing the Hymn in this regard:

“Whatsoever you do to the least of my brothers, that you do unto me; When I was hungry you gave me to eat; When I was thirsty you gave me to drink, now enter into the home of my Father.”
May you rest in peace our Papa; rest in peace Archbishop. 

4.51
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Oyam District and my behalf, I thank you for allowing me to participate in paying tribute to His Grace, the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga.

Madam Speaker, the sudden death of His Grace, Dr Kizito Lwanga triggered a flood of tears and emotions amongst members of his family, the Christian community and the country at large. This was so because he was a man of multitude praises by his peers, very faithful, brilliant, decisive and a pleasant individual who was down to earth.

My first job after university was at the National Seminary Ggaba, where I had the privilege of interacting with the Bishops. Just like any human being, His Grace had his happy moments and whenever he was excited, he would do so. He had a great sense of humour and he was friendly, even to us the staff who worked at the National Seminary Ggaba.

Madam Speaker, as a Bishop, His Grace, the late Archbishop, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga left a mark on the socio-political economic aspect of the lives of the people in this country. His life was characterised by love, peace, unity and economic empowerment; most especially the women and children.

As mentioned by my colleague, the late Archbishop started a project for the children called “Bannakizito”. This shows that he had real lenses to look into the future of this country, as relying on the children. We can best remember him by emulating this very important foresight.

Madam Speaker, we have been told that the late Archbishop worked very hard to improve the lives of the voiceless and poor. I urge the Prime Minister, who is the mover of this motion, that since the Archbishop spoke about human rights abuses and since he spoke and worked so hard on the plight of the poor people, how best are we going to remember him, to make sure that the injustices that we see in this country these days do not increase? How best are we going to remember him, to make sure that we remove our people from poverty?

I pray that as a great shepherd, may his legacy remain longer and forever. May the Almighty God grant the great shepherd eternal rest. Thank you.

4.55
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in mourning the demise of the Archbishop. I appreciate the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the motion to mourn the Archbishop.

I must confess that I was not very close to the Archbishop before 2019. However, after the events in Arua, when Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu and Hon. Francis Zzaake were brutalised, they were admitted in Rubaga Hospital and I was responsible for clearing people who were going to visit them.

I received a call from the wife of Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi that the Archbishop was scheduled to visit Bobi Wine and Hon. Zzaake in Rubaga. I went to Rubaga and welcomed the Archbishop to the hospital and into their rooms. While there, he looked at them and prayed for them. He had carried two very big envelopes. He gave one to Hon. Robert Kyagulanyi and another to Hon. Francis Zzaake. 

After the prayers, I asked the Archbishop whether I could take a photo with him and he accepted. I took a photo with him, that I have made my profile picture on WhatsApp up to now, in memory of the Archbishop.

As he was leaving, Madam Speaker, he made a statement to the effect that whenever there was an opportunity for us to, firstly, forgive those who had tormented us in Arua, we should forgive. Secondly, he said that if we have an opportunity to speak and engage in peaceful activities, we should do so. I knew him as a man of peace, a man who loved to engage and as a man who spoke truth to power.  

As we mourn the demise of the late Archbishop, we should ask a difficult question. Who is going to speak truth to power, the way Archbishop Kizito Lwanga has been doing? May his soul rest in peace.

4.57
MR EDWARD MAKMOT (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Agago County and on my own behalf, I rise to support the motion by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, paying tribute to our fallen hero, the Archbishop of the Catholic Church.

When the news of the passing of the Archbishop came, I was in the constituency in Agago and I stayed there for about a week. I watched the effect from that side of the country. I must say that this was a big shock to the Catholic community in Agago and it was a very unifying thing altogether at the end of the day.

Madam Speaker, I think the character of the Archbishop is a true hallmark of what we have always known as the Catholic principles. He spoke the truth. He was a true friend. He is a person who was very friendly to Government but at the same time, he also was very honest with Government. I think that is what a true friend should be. I think he was able to speak out in times of difficulty. 

He reminds me of one of the greatest prime ministers who is respected for civil rights liberties. That is Prime Minister Trudeau.  He said that the test of a developed nation is not necessarily the skyscrapers but how the country treats its lowest members of society. 

I think the Archbishop was actually a living example of that by what he has done, which many people have talked about. He was very humble and did not shame the Church. He was very highly educated - a doctor. Many times, we think doctors and people who are highly educated over follow the line and all that but he defied the odds. 

We miss him at this time when credibility of leadership in many churches is an issue. When I was growing up, a church leader was of a certain nature – Christ-like in many ways. We will really miss him because he had those attributes that brought a lot of respect to the Church. It restored my faith.

That legacy is great and fare thee well. We pray for his soul to rest in peace. Thank you.

5.01
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in supporting the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to a gallant son of Uganda and shepherd of God’s people. On behalf of the people of Ayivu County and Arua Diocese, we condole with the family and the Catholic fraternity.

Madam Speaker, as colleagues have said, people like the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga should not have died in the manner in which he died. This is a soul from which a lot more was still expected at a time when the country is crying for leadership and unity. We must all agree that as a country, we are at crossroads and in moments like these, we need people like the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga to bring leaders together and preach peace and unity.

The late will be remembered for many more developments initiated within the shortest period in which he offered leadership. Of course some of them have been mentioned; the towering Mapeera House for which many Catholics are proud and also designing the skyline of Kampala capital city.

One of the projects in which we have been participating, which the late initiated with other archbishops was the Catholic television project that is now at testing stage. 

The late spoke the truth and we expect the Government, as one of the practical ways of saying that indeed we respect the late, to heed to some of the issues that he pointed out to the Government before he breathed his last. They included the issue of dialogue, releasing political prisoners and to hold those accountable for the loss of lives in the last general elections.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I believe these are things that can hold Uganda together. The issues that have happened in this country are not beyond us. Therefore, I expect that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister Ndugu Ruhakana to lead in establishing dialogue amidst this situation of uncertainty in our country. I thank you. May your soul rest in eternal peace, Doctor. Thank you very much.

5.05
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover and the seconders of the motion and I stand here to support the motion. In particular, I would like to thank the Prime Minister for summarising the character of servant-hood leadership in His Grace the Archbishop.

He has summarised it for us very well. He said that he was a strong advocate of the rule of law, constitutionalism and respect of human rights, freedom, unity and national cohesion. This is a glorious description of what the man was.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that when I learnt that the Bishop was very condemning of the Obote regime for the panda gaali practices of those days, I was comforted because he was also very condemning of the recent abduction, arrest and abuse of the rights of people. All of us subject our leadership to the authority of Christ when we hold the Bible and we swear when we become Members of Parliament.

I would like to urge the Prime Minister and members of the Government to listen to the last words of His Grace the Archbishop. He talked about respect for rights and justice. It is therefore important that we should take his last words as something we should not ignore.

Secondly, I was moved that this is a man of God but he cared about the plight of the women by setting up SACCOs for them. He cared about children who otherwise would not be going to school. Therefore, I am urging the Prime Minister and the Government that if you could spend Shs 300 million for burial expenses, can you at least release Shs 500 million to send the 400 children who ought to have gone to school but because His Grace has passed on, we do not know what will happen to these children?

I would like to plead with Parliament and with you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, to add, as one of our prayers, that those 400 children he was sending to school can get Shs 500 million to allow them to go back to school. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.09
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to take part in eulogising the life of the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. Personally, I have had an opportunity to interact with him closely and I remember, after the 2016 attack on the King’s palace in Kasese, many of us were traumatised and we are not sure whether we should celebrate the festivities in Kasese.

I briefly went to Kasese and came back to Kampala and on New Year’s Day, 1 January 2017, I had an opportunity to celebrate it at his residence. We even toasted to a glass of wine. I have those fresh memories of him. He counselled me and my wife; he was such a loving spiritual father and I know that he stood and appreciated the value of humanity.

He respected human rights and stood for them, he believed in equity and social justice and if we respect our religious leaders - In my culture, we were taught to respect religious leaders; our spiritual fathers and when they speak, they speak on behalf of God.

I strongly believe that whatever Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga advocated for; releasing of political prisoners, respect for human rights, democracy and good governance - and now that Uganda stands on the value of Christianity, hence our motto, “For God and my Country” if we really stand to that value then we should respect Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga and practice what he preached in his ministry.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in my culture, if you don’t listen to the elders you can get nightmares. Therefore, I am not only sounding a warning but I am pleading with the Government to respect, especially, the last Will that has been talked about of the Archbishop on Good Friday. He is somebody who embraced Ecumenism. That is why at his last Way of the Cross, he had his other colleagues from the different denominations. It was miraculous. I had not seen it before –(Member timed out.)

5.12
The minister of state for energy and mineral development (Minerals) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for the motion and I do support it. I bring condolences from the people of Tororo to the entire Catholic family and his immediate family too.

His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga has left a legacy that needs to be emulated by all the religious leaders. We should get away from telling people about miracles but instead tell them to work. This is one of the things he preached. He taught people how to save and therefore complimented Government efforts in the wealth creation agenda. He was a developmental person and spoke quite often against abuses of human rights.

One of his famous quotes was, “Ugandans should have a duty to promote, not division or bad politics, but unity for this country to develop.” He also said that the future of Ugandans should be a responsibility of all. 

We therefore need to know that this is our country and we must all contribute to the peace that we so need to have development.

The history of Centenary Bank. On 04th December 2020, we lost His Grace Archbishop James Odongo, the Archbishop of Bukedi Archdiocese. At his requiem Mass that was at Rubaga. One of the things I learnt was that His Grace Bishop Odongo was the chairperson of the Episcopal Conference of Uganda. In 1983, he led a delegation to meet His Excellency then President Obote. The mission was to ask him to support their programme of having Centenary Bank. 

His Excellency then, President Obote said:
“I know you Catholics; when you start something you cannot fail. Please go ahead and have your bank” – (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Conclude.

Ms opendi: That was His Grace Archbishop Odongo and Centenary Bank then was started as a Credit Trust. Of course later, it transitioned in 1993 into a fully-fledged bank. His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga contributed towards its growth. Therefore, I wanted to make that clarification and also to say that he has done a lot. 

One of the things I know that he also spoke against was indecent dressing. Sometimes when people go to church, you wonder whether they have gone for prayers or something else. Can we respect God by ensuring that we dress decently when we go in the House of the Lord. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

5.17
Ms agnes taaka (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me join in paying tribute to our father the Rt Rev Bishop Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. Thank you Government for the motion. As Catholics, we are indebted to you.

On 3rd, we woke up to a sad day. Sadly, it is my birth date. I only got the bad news of the demise of our father. Humanly, it was so disheartening but when I reflected on it spiritually, I felt God had taken our father in a very peaceful way. He did not make him go through any kind of suffering or despair to his death. I thank God for that.

I would like to start from the point of Hon. Sarah Opendi. The motto of the Archbishop was, “Work hard and pray.” Many spiritual leaders are taking our people into prayer for days waiting for miracles to happen. Here was a spiritual leader who led people in the Word of God but telling them to work hard and pray. Whatever you do, put it before God for a blessing and then work because nothing will come to you when you are just seated.

I would like to call upon all religious leaders to emulate our father His Grace Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. Let us join in the struggle to transform our country and improve livelihoods. I would like to request Government that in remembrance of Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, we have set out so many projects but have not moved a step. Every time we go out, we still remain one of those poorest countries. 

Let us settle down and come up with a conclusive programme that will take out the multitudes of Ugandans out of poverty so that everyone can have food at their table, afford medical care and have good shelter.

As Catholics we say, “May God grant eternal rest to Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga and let perpetual light shine upon him.” Thank you.

5.20
Ms syda bbumba (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing us time to eulogise the great son of this land. I would like to thank Government for moving this motion.

I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga. On behalf of the people of Nakaseke, I bring condolences.

I am here to give testimony that His Grace the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga was an all-round leader. He was a shepherd to all regardless of creed, religion, and tribe or otherwise.

He was developmental. When he was Bishop of Kasana-Luweero, he brought a lot of development to Nakaseke. He came in at a time when we were just recovering from the effects of the war. 
We had shortage of food and people had no income but through his projects of Twekembe, Caritas, he encouraged people to work. 

I remember one time I attended a function he presided over and some group of people arrived late. In his sense of humour, the late made fun of the people of Nakaseke; that they did not know how to keep time. When it came to my time to speak, I explained to him that those people had travelled over 60 miles to come to attend the function. I told him that we had only three parishes in that large area and I requested him to establish some more parishes to take services to the people. 

By the time he left Kasana-Luweero, he had established three more parishes. All these parishes came with development; schools, community centres, health centres, water and the general discipline that goes with ecumenical services, when brought to the people. 

One time he visited my farm and made fun of me. It was during the period of drought and he had heard that I was propagating cassava for food security. Many of my colleagues know the song of “Syda Akaawa.” He genuinely asked me why my farm, as a leader – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Syda, conclude. 

MS BBUMBA: Madam Speaker, his advice was that we should start small scale irrigation. 

As I conclude, I want to say that His Grace, the late, promoted unity and diversity. That is one lesson all of us should take from him. We should not allow petty things to divide us permanently. Let us all promote unity in diversity. May his soul rest in eternal peace! Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to stop somewhere. 

5.24
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank Ndugu Rugunda for moving this motion to pay tribute to His Grace, Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Kampala, and for his dedicated service to the Roman Catholic Church, the Christian family and the people of Uganda. 

I bring condolences from the people of Buliisa District and the entire Bunyoro Subregion. Many have talked about his life and ministry work, as a priest, but I would like to talk about his last days. 

The late Archbishop was a dedicated servant of God. He was ordained and set apart for God’s purposes because when he accepted to be ordained as a priest in the Catholic Church, it meant he allowed himself to be set apart for the service of God. During that time, he took vows which he kept to the end and he did not relent in doing this. 

On that Good Friday, I watched and listened to him. In one of his last messages, he called upon all religious leaders to strengthen the spiritual and moral fibre of the nation so that everybody lives in obedience to God. We are leaders in different forms but the challenge is how are we going to end? What an end to our dear Archbishop! To me, it is a time to celebrate his life because he ended well in serving his God. I believe that the way the Lord called him was one of the best ways because he died in service. 

We want to thank God for his life. We pray that the Lord rests his soul in eternal peace and that we will all emulate his good ministry and example while on earth. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.27 
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity and thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for moving the motion. 

On my behalf and on behalf of the people of Butebo District and the Christians of Tororo Archdiocese, I stand to pay tribute to the late Archbishop.

The Catholic Church is built on the foundations of social justice, human dignity and solidarity and those were the core values of the Archbishop. 

Many have already spoken basing on those values. On my own behalf, I would like to pay tribute to him for promoting inclusive development; for working with the poor; the Twekembe Women’s Group is something that he has left standing. 

He also started a school in his home village. When managers of such institutions go, those institutions struggle. I, therefore, pray that the Government will come to their aid and take them as partners in promoting human development. 

Let us promote his legacy by promoting politics of peace, respect and human dignity. I thank you, Madam Speaker. May his soul rest in peace!

5.29 
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for moving this motion; I thank the seconders too. 

On behalf of the people of Gomba West, I would like to support the motion and to bring sincere condolences to the Catholic community in Uganda. I would like to thank the late Archbishop for acting as a link through Bishop Zziwa of Mityana to the people of Gomba West because they greatly benefited from the Caritas project, which he chaired. They got water tankers, cows, banana suckers, oranges, pineapples and coffee seedlings, amongst others. 

In fact, most of the bananas being consumed now in Maddu were got through Caritas. I extend sympathy to Father Erinawe Lukwago of Maddu and to the Catholic community in Gomba West. 

I thank the late Archbishop for being developmental in helping women, children and their families to fight poverty and to remain healthy. May his soul rest in eternal peace! 

5.31
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of my colleagues in paying tribute to the late Archbishop, Dr Cyprian Lwanga. I would also like to thank the Government and the Prime Minister for coming up with this motion. 
Madam Speaker, I came to know the late Archbishop, Dr Cyprian Lwanga, when I got my first job at Caritas. At that time, he was the President of Caritas in Uganda and the Bishop of Luweero Diocese. 

I later came to interact with him more, when I came to Parliament in 2011, when he invited us for dinner. I would like to appreciate him for a number of things. At the dinner, he encouraged us to remain united and legislate with the Christian lenses on our eyes.

The late Archbishop Cyprian Lwanga made a significant contribution to grow Centenary Bank to where it is now. He spent over 17 years serving on the board of Centenary Bank.

He established a number of projects in Kampala Archdioceses, Luweero Diocese, where he first worked and a number of projects have been benchmarked by other dioceses, especially Kabale Diocese, where I come from.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Rubanda, that I represent and on behalf of the people of Kabale Diocese, we want to extend our heartfelt condolences for the demise of the late Archbishop Cyprian Lwanga. We will remember him for his contribution. What we can say now is that may God grant him eternal rest. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Hon. Musasizi. Can I invite Dr Moriku?

5.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Archbishop Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and I thank the seconders.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you, in a special way for the time you have allocated to enable members to give contributions and pay tribute to the late Archbishop. He indeed deserves this length of time.

The Bible says, “Let your light shine before men, so that they see the good works that you do and give Glory to your heavenly Father.” Indeed today, we are here to pay tribute, to glorify God for the life that He has given to our beloved late Archbishop.

Just one legacy that I want to remember him with is the one he left in social services, which directly affects the lives of the people. Madam Speaker, Kampala Archdiocese Health Department started in 1972, just as one of those departments of the lay apostolate. However, under his leadership, currently, there are over 25 health facilities with four hospitals including Nsambya, Rubaga, Kisubi and Nkozi. We thank him for this contribution in the health sector.

He took the vows of obedience and he lived to his vows. At the onset of COVID-19 last year, when you recall, the moment the churches closed - the time when the churches were not allowed to open the doors for Christians to worship - that was a difficult moment and decision for the Government. 

I recall, when the President called the leaders of the Church, the Archbishop was one of the very obedient shepherds to say “Yes, I value the lives of the people. We are not going to open the church for the people to come on Sundays”. We thank him for being exemplary and closing the Church, during that time and valuing the lives of the Christians.

The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has put it right here to us that what took the life of our dear beloved Archbishop was ischemic heart disease due to coronary artery thrombosis. This arises due to the narrowing of the coronary arteries. 

These arteries are two in number. They are the ones that supply to the heart muscles and the component of the heart. Once these arteries become narrow, the blood supply to the heart, the nutrients to the heart and oxygen supply to the heart will not be there and eventually, the heart muscles and the entire component of the heart dies off; it becomes necrosis and ischemic. This has taken some time since 2015.

I would like to thank the Catholic Church of Kampala Archdiocese at this point in time, for the care and the love they have offered the Archbishop to ensure that coronary angioplasty and stent placement was done in India to ensure that the health of Archbishop was taken care of by the Church. 

The Church did not stop there. In 2017, the Archbishop made another journey to India and the Catholic Church was there to take care of him and to offer the best quality medical services so that the coronary artery is kept open and the Archbishop remained serving his flock.

Madam Speaker, at this time, many of us will ask ourselves as a health fraternity: what is it that we have not done to save the life of our Archbishop? Once the coronary artery becomes narrow it blocks. There is going to be formation of clots and other substances, which will cloud the blood supply to the heart muscles. Precisely, that is what took the life of our Archbishop. Due to the formation of the clot, which blocked the left coronary artery, eventually, he had that sudden heart attack that led to his death.

At this point, allow me to appreciate the Catholic Archdiocese for the care they offered to the Archbishop. I would like to appreciate Rubaga Hospital, Nakasero Hospital, Medanta Hospital and Apollo International Hospital in India. All these hospitals and the health care workers that offered quality care to our Archbishop to ensure that all this time, he was in position to look after himself.

As I conclude, as we pay tribute to his legacy, we are also learning lessons to take home. In Uganda, 24.3 per cent of people, from studies that have been done have high blood pressure. Out of the 24.3 per cent, 76.1 per cent, do not know that they have high blood pressure. It is on that note that the death of the Archbishop should give us lessons and everyone should rise to speak about non-communicable diseases; our lifestyle diseases, the diet that we eat, the exercises that we do to keep fit, our habit of taking alcohol and smoking cigarettes and the stress of eventful life that we go through.

I would like to appeal to the people of Uganda, as we continue to pay tribute to our beloved Archbishop, that we should learn lessons. See how he looked after his health. We should take this opportunity to take responsibility for our health.

Finally, we appeal to social media that health matters are private issues between my family and I. Therefore, when there is no official communication from a recognised institution, the media should spare these rumours that cause a lot of friction, tension. Otherwise, this is precisely what happened. May his soul continue to rest in peace and his light continue to shine so that men see the good work he has done and give glory to our heavenly Father.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Dr Moriku. Rt Hon. Prime Minister and honourable members, our plan had been to spend one hour in this tribute but it became very clear that you cannot pay a tribute to Dr Kizito Lwanga in one hour.

You heard about the lives he touched, the people he gave jobs, communities he transformed, the water, health, schools and many other areas. Therefore, we have overshot our time. Thirty five Members have paid tribute to the late Archbishop and I will invite the Prime Minister, if he has some closing remarks to make. 

DR RUGUNDA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have just a few remarks. I would like to thank you and colleagues for spending this quality time, paying tribute to our fallen top religious leader and a patriot. This has been very befitting.

Secondly, many colleagues have raised issues, which he himself raised a number of times, about people who are in prison. Government is doing everything possible to ensure that the legal process – (Interjections) - yes, that is the fact. Government is doing everything possible to ensure that courts of law do their work and if there are gaps, Government will endeavour to see that they are filled. Thirdly, the issue of ecumenism has been stressed and I would like to say that this fallen hero was a great preacher. He talked about a number of things on his last day. I watched on television, for the first time, somebody talking of - I may not be a very informed person but he was talking of five wounds that Jesus Christ had and that information was given by him in such strong way, that it had impact on some of us.

He also explained the meaning of the cross in the Catholic community. Therefore, he was somebody who believed in explaining and giving clear messages and ecumenism was his last symbol. Dr Lwanga and Bishop Kazimba, together with their followers moved the way of the cross. He really demonstrated unity and ecumenism. 

I must agree with my colleagues. The fact that the President of Uganda announced and gave an official burial to our fallen Archbishop is very significant recognition that Government attaches to his contribution to the country.

The last comment I would like to make concerns what has been said about the children that he was supporting. This is a matter that will be looked at closely by Ministry of Education and the Government, because we do not want any Ugandan child to stop going to school. This will be followed up.

In conclusion, I thank all those who played different roles in the send-off ceremony; minister Muyingo was in Kyabakadde, His Excellency the Vice President was on the last day of send-off in Rubaga.

The Minister of ICT was also at Rubaga and I must say our sister hon. Nakiwala played special roles, because of the special relationship with the Archbishop. We are grateful for all this devotion, love and patriotic responsibilities that you honourable colleagues played.

He has departed but he has left Uganda more united because of what he was doing and because Ugandans closed their ranks, forgot their political lines and all united to say “bye to him.”

May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in view of your concluding remarks, how do we now move the issue of the children to the Government? Can we ask them to submit a list?

DR RUGUNDA: That is a fair point. The names should be submitted to the Ministry of Education with copies to His Excellency the President and to the Prime Minister. We will work as a coordinated Government and we will rationally consider the appropriate action to be taken, to ensure that these young people do not miss their education.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. There was also another matter Members wanted to add but I have now shifted it to the Prime Minister.

Concerning the political prisoners tomorrow, I have received notice that the Minister of Internal Affairs is coming to sort this tomorrow. Therefore, we shall take it up at that stage but in the meantime, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late Dr Cyprian Kizito Lwanga, the former Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is instructed to make two sets of tribute, together with the Hansards of today. One set to be sent to the Archdiocese of Kampala, the second set to be sent to the family of our deceased friend. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS ON SIGNING OF KEY AGREEMENTS FOR THE OIL AND GAS SECTOR.

THE SPEAKER: I see the ministers moving, what is happening? No. You are walking out because your business is finished? 

5.50
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Kitutu): Madam Speaker, on Sunday 11th April, 2021, Uganda witnessed a historic milestone in its journey to the first oil, which marked the launch of Uganda’s oil and gas projects.

The event, which culminated into the conclusion of the key agreements was graced by the two Heads of State; His Excellency President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and Her Excellency Samia Suluhu Hassan, the President of the United Republic of Tanzania.

One of the key agreements signed was the Uganda Host Government Agreement (HGA) between the Government of Uganda and the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Company. It was an honour for me to sign on behalf of the Government of the Republic of Uganda.  

Mr Martin Tiffen, the General Manager of the East African Crude Oil Pipeline (EACOP) Company signed the Uganda HGA on behalf of the company. The HGA concluded the legal framework and contractual obligations between Uganda (as the host country) and the East African Crude Oil Pipeline Company (as the project company). 

The second agreement was the Shareholders Agreement (SHA). The Shareholders Agreement defines the rights and responsibilities of the shareholders in the EACOP Company. The shareholders are:

The Uganda National Oil Company (UNOC) with 15 per cent;
The Joint Venture Partners - that is Total E&P Uganda Limited with 62 per cent; 
CNOOC Uganda Limited with eight per cent and 
Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC). The TPDC will take shareholding of up to 15 per cent. 

The SHA is significant because it has constituted the EACOP Company and will now guide the funding of shareholding, finance structure and general governance of the company.

The third agreement that was signed is the Tariff and Transportation Agreement (TTA). The TTA defines the rights and responsibilities of the shippers on one hand and the transporter on the other hand. The TTA was signed between the transporter – that is the EACOP Company - and the shippers of the crude oil, who are the Government of Uganda, UNOC, Total E&P Uganda Limited and CNOOC Uganda Limited. 

Madam Speaker, the launch of the projects on Sunday paved way for EACOP Company to award the main engineering, procurement and construction contracts. The award of these contracts is important because it opens up substantial opportunities for Ugandans and Ugandan companies to provide goods and services for the construction of the EACOP Company. 

The conclusion of these key agreements for the EACOP is a major requirement for the announcement of the Final Investment Decision (FID). It is important to appreciate that there is no document that will be signed for or called “FID”. The project launch on Sunday, 11 April 2021 at State House, Entebbe is a demonstration of the commitment the respective Governments and oil companies have for the projects. 

With these agreements in place, the oil companies and Governments can proceed with the approval and award of contracts to the main engineering, procurement and construction contractors. This will enable the construction work for the projects to proceed. 

Governments and the companies estimate that first oil will be within four years, with the actual construction starting this year. However, other processes are already ongoing, including the acquisition of land for the pipeline and the EPC management activities. 

It is important for the people of Uganda to take note of and position themselves to benefit from the extensive activities already going on. The Ministry of Energy developed the Local Content Policy in 2018 to streamline the implementation of the national content regulations within the petroleum laws. 

There are also ongoing opportunities by the Government and the joint venture partners for skills development, specialised training and enterprise development, all aimed at building the capacity of Ugandans and Ugandan companies to competitively work in or supply goods and services to the sector. 

Madam Speaker, it is a requirement for all companies that would like to supply goods and services in Uganda’s oil and gas industry to register on the National Supplier Database, through the Petroleum Authority of Uganda website. Similarly, Ugandans who would like to work in the sector are encouraged to get onto the National Oil and Gas Talent Register for easy access and visibility of the jobs in the sector. 

The signing of the agreements and the launch of the oil and gas projects, more so during the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, are an assurance of commitment from our investment partners towards the sustainable development of Uganda’s petroleum resources. 

Uganda’s oil and gas project is the only major project in Sub-Saharan Africa to be sanctioned since the pandemic started, which attests to the profitability of the projects and the country as a favourable investment destination. 

The significant investment into Uganda’s economy that has now been unlocked includes the implementation of the Tilenga Project in Buliisa and Nwoya districts. This will cost approximately $4 billion. The Kingfisher Project in Hoima and Kikuube districts will cost approximately $1.5 billion. The East African Crude Oil Pipeline will cross the ten districts of Hoima, Kikuube, Kakumiro, Kyankwanzi, Gomba, Mubende, Lwengo, Sembabule, Kyotera and Rakai in Uganda and it will cost approximately $3.6 billion. 

This is in addition to what Government is already investing in the required support infrastructure, including Hoima International Airport, which is costing Government over $500 million and 700 kilometres of oil roads, which are costing around $900 million.

Some of the specific benefits that will accrue to Ugandans and Ugandan companies from the launch of the projects include the following:

De-risking all the other upcoming projects, including the refinery and the new exploration projects. The development of the upstream projects guarantees the supply of feedstock into the refinery, while the pipeline and the refinery provide evacuation options for future oil discoveries in the new exploration areas.

b)	Employment of Ugandans

	This will be through direct employment of about 14,000 people by the companies. Indirect employment will be about 45,000 people by the contractors and induced employment of about 105,000 people as a result of utilisation of other services by the oil and gas sector. Of the direct employment, 57 per cent are expected to be Ugandans, which is expected to result in an estimated income of $48.5 million annually and this will be paid to Ugandan employees.
c)	Participation of Ugandan enterprises in the provision of goods and services 
	
	At least 28 per cent of the $15 billion – that is equivalent to $4.2 billion - investment during the development and construction will go to Ugandan companies through provision of various goods, services and works; 

d)	Currently, contracts worth $167 million, out of the $1.362 billion recommendations to award for the Tilenga and Kingfisher projects that have been presented to the Petroleum Authority of Uganda before FID, are to be awarded directly to Ugandan companies. 

	This only accounts for 19 out of the over 30 work packages to be awarded by the licensees. However, it is important to note that there will be many more sub-contracts given to Ugandan companies through sub-contracting by the Level-1 contractors.


Capacity building and technology transfer through sub-contracting and joint venturing. With the involvement of world-class oil service companies and the expected joint venture and sub-contracting opportunities, Ugandan companies are expected to greatly benefit from the expected partnerships. 

	As witnessed during the exploration phase, we expect Ugandan companies to progressively gain capabilities to provide technical services that have hitherto been a preserve of the more experienced foreign companies.

In addition, the GDP of the country expected to reach $40 billion in 2020/2021 and it will significantly be boosted through sectoral linkages by close to $9 billion, which is an increase of 22 per cent by the end of the construction phase.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the conclusion of the oil agreements is a key milestone for the country. Government of Uganda commits to ensuring that processes leading to first oil bring enhanced value for the country, while maintaining a good return on investment for the investors. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, this was just for information because we were not present at the signing. Therefore, the minister just offered to update us on where we are but we ask our Committee on Natural Resources to follow up the contents and update Parliament further.

6.03
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and the honourable  minister Dr Kitutu, for bringing this to Parliament and the country update. Last week, I laid on the Table the matrix you helped us to generate with the Ministry of Energy itself how to fast-track the first oil in a multi-sectoral inter-ministerial coordinated way.

We are in the budget process and I have been following this matrix, which I laid on the Table. We are looking at the ministerial policy statements of different entities. It seemed at the beginning as if only PAO and UNOOC were being looked at. However, when you see that matrix and the inter-ministerial process, there are very many sectors, which up to now, have not been dated. 

I would request as the Committee on Natural Resources digests details of this statement from the minister; the minister could go ahead – the Ministry of Energy as a lead ministry in oil and gas, working with Ministry of Finance, which is in charge of the wallet should give us a commitment in as far as making the dream of the first oil real.

If 2025 is not believed to be the real year to manage expectation, then we should equally finance other Government agencies.  The PSA model is giving the oil companies leverage and for them, they are not pushing for that Tanga pipeline. However, remember that for us, as a country, Parliament has to give money for counterpart funding to all the agencies. If we do not, the cost of this oil could become higher and therefore, rendering our profits very little.

Most important, while they are reporting on the commitment of funding the sector, we would want the refinery, which is going to be of important benefit to East Africa - and value addition should also get a report. We got reports that the American Company led consortium we are using is about to repeat the fiasco of Katosi road.  That company is a commission agent and so, the earlier we get serious, the better. We need also to be informed that that will be done.

Finally, Madam Speaker, last week I was at Hoima International Airport and I found out that the land we helped very much to acquire is empty and idle. Can the Ministry of Energy, working with Trade and Industry work on that important Hoima Industrial Park?  There is no road, water and electricity and we should not give it to a PPP because it is such a viable project for Uganda where we are going to get value addition and change the opportunities and use that international airport. 

Therefore, on those matters, I would request the minister to bring a comprehensive report so that we can manage some aspects of this country. However, I would like to thank her for the report but Madam Speaker, the communication strategy you processed in the Ninth Parliament had gone quiet because they were not sure. Now that the President has signed, can we see a more robust communication strategy so that citizens do not keep asking questions to Parliament when they do not know what is happening? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I am glad the minister is here. She will respond at an appropriate time. However, since we still have the Energy people, let us go to item no. 9 for two minutes and then return to item  no.5.

RESPONSES BY MINISTERS TO URGENT QUESTIONS ON THE IMPENDING EVICTION OF OVER 30,000 ARTISANAL MINERS FROM KISIITA MINING SITE TO PAVE WAY FOR THE OPERATIONS OF KISIITA MINING COMPANY, ALSO REFERRED TO AS HORIZON MINING COMPANY WITH PRAYERS THAT GOVERNMENT:   

STAYS THE EVICTION OF THE ARTISANAL MINERS PENDING VERIFICATION OF THE CORPORATE ENTITIES INVOLVED; AND 

TO INVESTIGATE THE ROLE OF A ONE MR MUSTAFA WHO IS BELIEVED TO BE THE MAJORITY SHAREHOLDER IN KISIITA MINING COMPANY AND AN ALLEGED TURKISH FUGITIVE.

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Achieng):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This was a question raised by hon. Bukenya regarding the eviction of over 30,000 artisanal miners from Kisiita mining site. This is not the first time that I am responding to this matter. It was raised in March and yet, I had just responded to the same from a Member of Parliament from the same district hon. Patrick Nsamba.

Madam Speaker, allow me to inform this House that in August 2002, Kisiita Mining Company was granted a mining lease for 21 years. In 2015, Horizon Energy acquired 56 per cent interest in Kisiita mining company and thereafter, with management wrangled between the two minority shareholders and the majority shareholder, these two groups resolved their differences and the consent agreement was arrived at on 16 January 2020. 

However, during this time when these companies had their management wrangles, some people went and took over the mining areas. In March 2020, I was working with the anti-corruption team because His Excellency the President had asked them to handle this matter, when the majority shareholder flew into the country from Abu Dhabi. 

We were with Uganda Revenue Authority that initially wanted to auction the property and we all went to Kisiita. We asked the people we found at the site to leave. They requested for only two days so that they could wind up and leave. 

To our surprise, when there was a lockdown, I was then informed that the Police Minerals Protection Unit in connivance with some illegal miners had gone back and they were mining quietly. This was reported to me by the Kassanda LCV Chairperson. We discovered that there was another site where people had died.

From then, more illegal miners - imagine I found one with 100 people and I asked them to leave. That gentleman we found at the site was arrested and even charged in court. However, instead of the police protecting the mining site, they opened up and all kinds of people; over 70 illegal heads - there are heads employing these 30,000 people at the site.

His Excellency the President also picked interest and quietly investigated this matter. On 4 August 2020, he convened a meeting between the IGP, the Deputy IGP and I. His findings had shown that the Police Minerals Protection Unit were not doing the work they were required to do and they were instead encouraging illegal mining. 

Following that, His Excellency the President wrote a strong letter to us, addressed to me and the IGP to have these illegal miners evicted so that they do not continue depleting a resource that was given to Kisiita Mining Company. It is like having Mukwano properly licensed to operate and people take over and Mukwano is out crying while Government looks on.

Therefore, I would like to appeal to this House to support us to ensure that we end this business of people using some security organs to take over the mines of other people. It takes a lot of money for somebody to commence mining because for seven years, you are just doing exploration and a lot of money is sunk in.

This gentleman, the majority shareholder, came to this country and one thing he told me was, “You have a beautiful country. Your President has been inviting us to come and invest but you have crooks.” His manager was arrested for nothing and locked up in the cells. When he was released, he left. Through some friends, he got to know this Mr Mustafa and appointed him as his manager. You can now hear that Mr Mustafa is a fugitive.

If the police knows that he is a fugitive, why haven’t they arrested him? As a sector, we cannot involve ourselves in those matters. I would like to state that Mr Mustafa is not a shareholder. This Turkish man they keep talking about is not a shareholder in Kisiita Mining Company. It is owned by a majority shareholder; Horizon who are from Abu Dhabi and of course, the other shareholder who sold was the Ugandan Mawanda family. They did not have resources to procure the necessary equipment to get into real gold mining and so, they sold their shares and brought these people on board. 

However, ever since then, these people have not been helped. Even when the President has directed, I do not have a force. Rt hon. Prime Minister, I hope that we can resolve this matter. It is only in this country where the President can give a directive and people dilly-dally around it. 

Therefore, I would like to request that this Parliament supports us to get rid of these mafias from the mines. Otherwise, we are going to discourage investments in this sector because once somebody has done exploration and they find gold, others come and jump on board.

I would also like to state that the 35,000 people that we are talking about, for whom we should find a livelihood, are working for mafias. We would like them to work for the owners of the company. This is why we should let them out and the owners of the company recruit them because they were working for them even before. When I met them, they had no problem. They said, “All we need is to work.” Therefore, once we have order, they will definitely be working under the owners of the company.

I would also like to clear the air that where this mining site is, it is land for the National Forestry Authority. It is not a place like others where there were settlers and people are claiming compensation. We are just left with two years for the lease to expire but these people have not benefited from their investments. You can imagine this gentleman put $ 8 million into the mines. He procured equipment but he has failed to do his work.

With those remarks, I would like to conclude. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. There is no more debate on that issue. It was answered and this is the second time.

6.16
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Madam Speaker, I would like to make some clarification on this. First of all, this is a classic case of the problems we have in the mining law where somebody is given a big swathe of land to do mining and they absent themselves. The local people stay, do the mining, get the gold and when the person owning the mining license discovers that things are working out very well, they come in and threaten to evict the people who are mining, calling them illegal miners.

There is a conflict between the people who own the land although the minister says it belongs to the National Forestry Authority. Part of it might be but the large swathe of it is privately owned by the people there but they do not have a mining license – (Interruption)

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, when I got to this ministry, the first complaint that was handed over to me by hon. Lokeris was on this company. I got to the ministry in January 2020.

The consent agreement of the majority and minority shareholders was arrived at on 16 January 2020. The conflict in Kisiita was a management one and it had nothing to do with people. It is now that some people are trying to come up and claim that they have been mining there.

We all know the story about Kisiita. There is nothing like there were people mining. It was just a conflict of management. The police Mineral Protection Unit also became a problem at the site because some of them became beneficiaries of what was going on at this place. It is not true that there are land conflicts regarding this site. There are land conflicts regarding another mining site close by but not this particular one. 

Is it in order, therefore, for the chairperson to tell lies to this House when we do not have any known by the ministry that is supposed to be supervising these people?
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know the Mubende area and Kassanda are mining areas. May be there are several conflicts but let us not go into that today.

DR KIWANUKA: Also, is the honourable minister in order to use an unparliamentarily language that I am telling lies? (Interjections) Anyway, just to clarify. It is not a question of land conflict but a conflict between the artisanal miners and those who have been licensed to do mining there. That is a problem on one hand. 

The other problem is that we have 35,000 people mining there. Of course, the owner has the mining license and those who are mining there are doing so illegally. How do we proceed? 

I have looked at the President’s letter but it does not say that they should be evicted forcefully. It says they should try and find an amicable way of how they can be made to leave.

I think we have to find an amicable way in order to reach a good understanding of – (Interjections) – I wonder why the minister is so agitated about this. You do not have vested interest in it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to item no.4.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020 AS RETURNED BY H.E THE PRESIDENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 91(3)(B) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULE 142 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we received a comprehensive report on the PPDA amendment as returned by His Excellency the President. We invited Members to go and study the report and in particular, the proposals for amendment and we will be concluding it today. Are there any comments?

6.21
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill was returned on 9 July 2020. Therefore, we do not need to delay it. 

I have personally tried to go through this Bill and you find that it is very technical to deal with. Most of the issues raised speak to avoiding lacunas in the law. There are issues of omission, effective operation, specifically on the tribunal, interpretation and application. When you read through, I do not see the need for us to have a prolonged debate over this returned Bill. 

There was an issue raised by the President on the issue of renaming the PPDA. He raised a concern that if you are not providing for the successor entity, how are you going to deal with the issues of liabilities and obligations? I think there was an omission there since we did not provide for that. I do not see anything that needs a lot of debate on that because, indeed, we must provide for succession. 
The President did not go into details but he should have even included the assets. 

As an accountant, the honourable chairperson of the committee knows that whenever we talk about liabilities, we should remember to talk about assets, obligations and pending contracts that have been signed. If you forget to talk about them and do not provide for succession, who will manage them? If you run away and change your name, you are now a new entity. Who is going to manage your debts? What about the existing agreements? I think the President has raised a valid point here, which does not attract further questioning in my opinion. 

There is the issue of omission, to repeal Section 90, which, to him, is similar to Section 89 and may cause contradictions. This one majorly deals with issues of administrative reviews. I do not think we need to debate over that. 

Amendment of part VIIA of the Act basically deals with issues of effective operation of the tribunal. I believe and I would like to think that our committee did proper surgery. They did their job. It would not be good for us to do spontaneous work on the Floor. 

I think what the committee has done is thorough enough. This Bill is technical. If we allow for any spontaneous action here, it can easily get derailed and operation, enforcement and implementation of the Bill will be made hard and yet, you know the whole country is waiting for this amendment. This is what saves us from the quagmire that we have always had. 

Without wasting time, unless there is a colleague who feels that he has a very pertinent issue to raise over these returned amendments, I suggest, if you guide so, that we proceed straight away to committee stage. 

Madam Speaker, we have a lot of backlog, including the tax Bills. Before I sit down, I would like to applaud the Committee of Finance, specifically the chairperson. Whenever you have some privileges for your hard working members, try to consider those who work. There are people who have sacrificed their families and everything; they do not go on holiday. 

Whereas other people are enjoying, they are working day and night like medical staff during lockdown and yet there is nothing forthcoming for them. When there is an opportunity, please, consider them. These people have worked; for example, hon. Bahati, hon. Musasizi and the committee. I salute you. 

If it is agreeable with you, let us proceed to the committee stage. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if there are no other comments, I put the question that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

Clause 3

6.28 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Chairperson, in clause 3, the committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes that the definition of the word "Authority” inserted in the Bi11 should be deleted and should not stand part of the Bill.

The justification is that the committee reviewed its decision to retain the definition of the word “Authority” for the reason that the Bill does not provide for the succession obligations of the Authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, we propose to insert a new clause 5 amending Section 5(l) of principal Act. The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes that the inserted clause 5 in the Bill should be deleted and should not stand part of the Bill.

The justification is that the Bill does not provide for the succession obligations of the Authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the new clause 5 be deleted as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, deleted.

Clause 6

MR MUSASIZI: In Clause 6, we propose to amend section 8 of the principal Act. The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes that the clause be redrafted as follows-

(i) "substitute for paragraph (b), the following-
(b) investigate and act on complaints received on a procurement or disposal process from members of the public that are not subject to administrative review or review by the Tribunal;"
(ii) repeal subsection ( 1)(e)

The justification is to broaden the Authority's mandate in relation to investigation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 6 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 22

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 22, we propose to amend Section 58 of the principal Act. The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes that paragraph (b) should be reinstated as proposed in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honorable members, the question is that Clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes that clause 35 of the Bill be reinstated as proposed in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 35 be reinstated as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, reinstated.

Clause 36

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes as follows:

(a) Sub-clauses (7) and (8) in the Bill be redrafted as follows:
“(7) The accounting officer shall, within ten days of receipt of a complaint, make and communicate a decision, in writing, addressed to the bidder who makes the complaint and which shall indicate the reasons for the decision taken and the corrective measure to be taken, if any; and

(8) Where an accounting officer does not make a decision or communicate a decision within the period specified in subsection (7), or where a bidder is not satisfied with the decision made by the accounting officer under this section, the bidder may make an application to the Tribunal, in accordance with part VIIA of this Act.”

(b)The word “and” at the end of subsection (11) (b), be replaced with the word “or” to make the three situations in (i), (ii) and (iii) independent of each other.

Justification

(i) 	To clarify on what the ten day period in both cases apply to; and
(ii) 	The conjunction “and” is misleading.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes that section 90 of the principal Act be repealed and the original position in the Bill of repealing sections 90 and 91 of the principal Act be adopted.

Justification

Clause 37 of the Bill repealed Sections 90 and 91 of the Act. However, the amendment Bill only repealed Section 91 and not Section 90. The provisions of Section 90 of the Bill are similar to the provisions of Section 33 of the amendment Bill, which amends Section 89 of the principal Act. Therefore, Section 90 as retained in the Act is redundant and may, in some instances, contradict Section 89.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

The inserted clause 35 amending section 91B of principal Act

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes thus:

(i) The word “relevant” appearing in the inserted paragraph (b), be deleted; and
(ii) The inserted new clause (3a), be redrafted to read, “At least two of the members of the tribunal shall be women.”

Justification

Paragraph (b) amends Section 91b(3) to include to the membership of the Tribunal, “any other relevant profession.” However, since the Tribunal hears complaints on all procurement and disposal processes and the appointment is permanent for a period of four years and not on a case by case basis, determining “a relevant profession” may not be possible; and

(ii) To provide clarity on the number of women to constitute the Tribunal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause 35 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Section 37 inserting a new section 91CA in principal Act

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes that section 37, which inserts a new section 91CA in the principal Act be deleted.

Justification
The inserted clause lists the functions of the Tribunal. The functions in (a), (b) and (d) are stated in section 89 as part of the procedure of hearing applications by the Tribunal; and
Part VIIA of the Act provides functions of the Tribunal as the process to be adopted by the Tribunal in hearing applications.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.


Clause 39 amending section 91I of the principal Act

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes thus:

(a) The inserted Section 911 (I) in the Bill be substituted with the following:
“(1) the following may apply to the Tribunal for review of a decision of a procuring and disposing entity -
a) 	A bidder who is aggrieved, as specified in Section 89(7) or (8);
b)	A person whose rights are adversely affected by a decision made by the accounting officer; or
c)	A bidder who believes that the Accounting Officer has a conflict of interest as specified in Section 89(9).

(b) The inserted Section 9(1I) (2) in the Bill be substituted with the following:

“(2) The application shall be made;
(a) 	For section 89(7), within 10 working days, from the date of receipt of the decision of the accounting officer;
(b) 	For Section 89(B), within ten days from the date of expiry of the period specified in the section;
(c) 	For Section 89(9), within ten days from the date when the omission or breach by the procuring and disposing entity is alleged to have taken place; and
(d) 	Delete the inserted sub-sections (3),(4),(5),(6) and (8) from the Bill

Justification

(i) To provide clarity on who can apply to review the decision of an accounting officer; and
(ii) To remove contradictions, which bring ambiguity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President's guidance and proposes that clause 41 be maintained.

Justification 

The requirement for a procurement or disposal process to remain suspended where a bidder appeals to the tribunal against the decision of a procuring a disposing entity is relevant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 41 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President’s guidance and proposes that the cross-reference in sub-section (4) be substituted with “91(L)(4)”

The justification is that this is consequential to the amendment in Clause 41.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 42 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to. 

Insert a new clause amending section 94 of the principal Act.

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President’s guidance and proposes that the inserted clause 45 be deleted.

Justification 

The amendment allows a suspended provider to appeal the decision of the authority to the tribunal. However, a review of Section 95 indicates that a suspension by PPDA is in most cases based on the decision by other bodies. 

For example, paragraphs (b), (c)and (f) of Section 94 of the principal Act and that the authority does not Act independently and in paragraph (d), a provider is suspended if the provider is convicted by a court of law, which court ranks higher than the tribunal. I submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 45 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Amending Section 95 of the Principal Act

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the committee agrees with the President’s guidance and proposes that 
a) 	Paragraph (f) should be recast as follows; 
	“(f)delays contrary to the requirements of Act, the opening of bids, the evaluation of bids or making an award decision.”

b) 	The rephrase “without justifiable cause at the end of paragraph (g) should be replaced with; “contrary to the requirements of the Act”

c) 	Paragraph (h) should be replaced with the following, 
	“(h)cause loss of public funds or public assets as a result of negligence in the implementation of the Act.”

(d) 	Paragraph (i) should be replaced with the following; 
	“(i)fails to comply with the decision of the tribunal.”

The justification is to better the draft and remove ambiguity.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the new clause 46 be amended as proposed. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to. 

Clause 51

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President’s guidance and proposes that paragraph (b) should be substituted with the following;

Substituting for “schedule 1A” where the term appears in the principal Act with “schedule 2.”
Inserting immediately after paragraph six of the schedule the following; “(vii)The institute of procurement professionals of Uganda
(b) Paragraph (f) that was renumbered as (g) should be substituted with the following
 	“(g) Substituting for the word ‘authority’ appearing in the title of part 7(a) section 91 (i)6 and section 91 (l) the term ‘accounting officer’.”

Justification 

This is a miscellaneous amendment to substitute “Authority” with “accounting officer.” The miscellaneous amendment to substitute “Authority” with “accounting officer” was omitted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 51 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

Section 53(3) 

Inserting a transitional provision

MR MUSASIZI: Honourable Chairperson, the committee agrees with the President’s guidance and proposes that section 53(iii) should be redrafted as follows;

“(3) The contract of the Executive Director appointed under section 17 of the principal Act and in office at the commencement of this Act shall be for five years from the date of commencement of the contract and the contract may be renewed for a period specified in section 12 this Act.”

Justification

To revise the tenure of the Executive Director to five years and provide for renewal of the contract but without mention of the other terms of the contract, which were not amended by Section 12 of the amendment Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Section 53 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 53, as amended, agreed to.

Section 55

MR MUSASIZI: The committee agrees with the President’s guidance and proposes that the inserted paragraph 7 introducing the supply chain or institute of procurement professionals of Uganda as one of the organisations to nominate members for the board of directors be deleted.
Justification 
This is a consequential amendment to Clause 51 of the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Section 55 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 55 deleted.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question out and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2020” as returned by His Excellency the President and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, we are considering whether we have passed it with amendments or whether-

THE SPEAKER: There were some amendments.

MR BAHATI: Yes, there were amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

6.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (Amendment) Bill, 2020 be read for a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2021”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) Honourable members, I want to restate the reasons why I try hard not to allow spontaneous amendments. In this Bill and the Coffee Bill, there was a lot of haggling. With the work we are doing, it was disorganised here. So, please, support me when I reject spontaneous amendments.

6.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. It is good you have raised this point. We have always persuaded our colleagues – time and again, – to be cautious when we are processing technical Bills.

What has brought us to this stage was a number of developments, which came at the point when the debate had already started and also from the stakeholders, who thought they would use the opportunity of this House to bring in amendments at the last minute. They eventually ended up almost defeating the intention of this Bill.

Therefore, we pledge our commitment and we will continue guiding our colleagues that the Speaker feels comfortable that when stakeholders, including colleagues in this House have something pertinent to add to the Bill, it is better they bring it to the committee, rather than coming to the House and distort the intention of the Bill.

Madam Speaker, I also take this opportunity to appreciate you for giving us time. I know today was a very involving day for you. Also, the motion we were considering prior was sensitive and needed a lot of time but you tried as much as possible to allow us to present this Bill. I appreciate this very much.

I would like to appreciate hon. Aogon for the comments he made about our committee. For the last five years, I have been the chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

I would like to note that it has not been an easy journey for me and my colleagues, because we are quite a busy committee. However, with your support, the support of our colleagues and the minister, it has enabled us to process most of the work in time.

I pledge that in the coming days, we will be able to – As we process the tax Bills - we have the remaining Bill on local content, which was also returned by the President. I pray that we also find space at some stage next week, to also consider it before our term expires.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.56
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): I thank the chairperson and minister but most especially, my neighbour, hon. Aogon.

I do not know what advice you will give us on this. What causes these spontaneous amendments on the Floor is that when you invite stakeholders to process the Bill in the committee, many of our committees leave out the position of the biggest number of suggestions brought by the people they invite.
The moment they do that, we end up getting different pleas in our pigeon holes from different NGOs that, “Save this, save that”. I pray that during the amendment of our rules, when you get back to that seat, as I expect, we have a rule governing committees.

You cannot have 40 witnesses before the committee; 35 give a position but the committee moves away from that position and takes the one of the five members. At the end of the day, you find us here making spontaneous amendments.

Lastly – this still goes to Members of Parliament – some Members do not attend. Hon. Aogon is always here - I can say that he is better than me. It is shaming that the President refers a Bill back and whatever he is saying is correct. It is us who suffer the pinch because he is beating us technically. Otherwise, there are those Bills, which are controversial. We say, “No, he has refused to assent. Parliament and the committee were in tandem but the President does not accept it”.

We should avoid having the Bills referred, yet amendments are genuine and fair. Members who do not attend the presentation and adoption of the reports and never read the Bills tend to disorganise the whole process. That will not save us and yet, we have seen it several times.

As I conclude, the committees must stick to – Why do you call stakeholders. Is it for mere viewing in the cameras of Parliament or to make their input, which you end up rejecting?

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we had wanted to go to the report of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline but it is not appropriate at this time. We shall handle it tomorrow. As we said, if you have not put in any proposals, there will be no amendments on the Floor.

Honourable members, House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 April 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)






