Thursday, 24 April 2014
  
Parliament met at 2.14 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.) 
  
The House was called to order. 
  
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR 
  
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have a lot of business. Yesterday we started with the committee stage on the HIV/AIDS Bill. I hope the matters that led to the contentions we had yesterday have been resolved so that we can continue and finish that Bill today. If not, please I ask the Members concerned to consult amongst themselves so that we can proceed smoothly. 

2.17
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance which are directly affecting the people in my constituency. My constituency has been attacked by a strange species of warms that are ravaging crops and other vegetation in Mukono Municipality. Several days ago, large swarms of butterflies appeared in Mukono Municipality to the excitement of my people. But within a few days, our beautiful visitors turned hostile and the eggs they laid turned into larva that descended on gardens and all the greenery in the town. 

Mr Speaker, the caterpillars have now invaded people’s homes and public places including hotels. It is clear that these pests are multiplying at a very high speed and the butterflies have since moved to an unknown destination. There is scientific knowledge about these insects. Some two weeks ago, we read in the media that a similar problem does exist in Kayunga District. 

I am therefore raising this matter on behalf of the people of Mukono and on behalf of the people of Uganda. The movement of these butterflies can be traced and intervention made to stop them. 
Secondly, let a public warning be given out so that once they are sighted, people can report to the relevant authorities and the problem be handled with finality. We in Mukono are seeking the intervention of the relevant ministry to curb this problem especially now that the effects are spreading at a very high rate. 

The second issue I want to raise on behalf of Mukono Municipality and on behalf of other local governments is that we have received communication from the Ministry of Finance that Mukono Municipality exhausted her wage bill for financial year 2013/14. The communication comes after civil servants right from the Town Clerk to the lowest cadre in the municipality have not been paid for the last three months. In this communication, it is implied that money was set aside to pay the traditional civil servants in Mukono Municipality and we exhausted our budget. 

Mr Speaker, the figures being sent to Mukono by the Ministry of Finance as monies do not tarry with what we have on the ground. We have received communication showing that millions of money, to the turn of Shs 119,000,000 are being sent to Mukono on a monthly basis. 

However, our total wage bill as Mukono Municipality is Shs 35,000,000. So we do not know where this money ends up. Most likely, this is the reason why our budget has been exhausted and with three months to the end of the financial year - and we are three months already in arrears. In a way, it means that my municipality is being phased out. 

I have learnt from the newspapers that this is not happening only in Mukono Municipal Council, but it has spread in most of the local governments in the country. So we raise this matter and beg that it be handled by the relevant ministry and that workers, especially those of Mukono Municipality get paid and that an investigation be done to find out where monies sent to Mukono Municipality in excess have been taken. This will assist us to trace if at all there are ghosts earning salaries through Mukono Municipality. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. On the first issue, the minister responsible for that is not yet here. But on the second issue, the Minister of Local Government is here. 

2.21
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, the honourable member for Mukono Municipality, for raising this concern. I will relay her concerns to the government and particularly to the minister responsible for Disaster Preparedness to quickly respond to the problem of pests and butterflies and caterpillars which have invaded Mukono and Kayunga. 

On the question of the wage bill for Mukono, I will verify the fact with the Minister of Finance and if there are problems, the ministries of Finance and Public Service will take corrective measures. 

2.22
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance pertaining to some of the most important and most respected institution in life; that is the institution of marriage. The media reported today that the Uganda Registrations Bureau has announced an increase in the fees relating to marriage. The reasons they have given for this is that there is need to sustain the operations of the bureau and to improve service delivery. 

The fees have been increased from Shs 85,000 to Shs 200,000 for Ugandans. Mr Speaker, it is true the fees for marriage have not been revised for a very long time. However, the upward increment itself appears very prohibitive for the ordinary Ugandan. As a country, we have launched a fight against homosexuality; it is therefore important we make marriage between man and woman very attractive and simple. We are on record, as a country, for having criticised bride price. It would be hard, therefore, for us to sustain what we advance as the vices of bride price while at the same time commercialising marriage through levying exorbitant fees.

Mr Speaker, I personally think that it is even more expensive to have unmarried Ugandans than encouraging married couples. I wish the government could come out to clarify on why we should not have free registration of marriages in order to encourage people to formalise this most respected and most important institution of marriage. Thank you.

MR ADOLF MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, the concern of hon. Kasibante is noted; I will communicate it to the Minister of Justice, who is in charge of registration of marriages to give an appropriate response. (Hon. Lukyamuzi rose_) Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have the point of order.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of order – rather reluctantly. Article 31 of the Constitution of Uganda states that marriage is a constitutional right; is it in order for the Minister of Local Government – holding the fort of Leader of Government Business – to side-line a matter of great constitutional importance like that and yet it does not necessitate postponement. Is he in order to do that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, the matter raised by hon. Kasibante is not about stoppage of marriages; it is about the fees levied when people go to conduct marriage. And the minister who made the response said that the person responsible for this sector – who is in charge of Uganda Registration Services Bureau – is the Minister of Justice. He will pass the information to him and this matter will be handled. Since he is the Minister of Local Government, these things are distinguishable. We can leave it at that and allow the responsible minister to make a response. Let us move to the next item.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE IMMUNISATION BILL, 2014

2.32
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuuto County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, I beg to present, for first reading, the Bill entitled, “The Immunisation Bill, 2014”, for consideration by this Parliament. Together with it, I have a certificate of financial implications as a requirement for any bill’s submission. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Immunisation Bill, 2014” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That motion does not require secondment and does not require a decision. It therefore stands committed to the Committee on Health to handle within 45 days and report to the House. Matters to do with immunisation are urgent, so I implore the committee to act on this expeditiously. It is accordingly committed to the Committee on Health. Let us move to the next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION MODALITIES OF THE MARKETS AND AGRICULTURAL TRADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME (MATIP) – RELOCATION OF VENDORS

2.34
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some time last week, concerns were raised on this Floor about the management of the settlement of vendors in various markets which have been constructed by Government. And particular concern was raised on Mbale Central Market, which has just been completed.

This statement has been posted to Members’ email addresses and it is my honour to lay this statement – I do not know if this is – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR MWESIGE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The markets and agricultural trade improvements project was formulated following a feasibility study by the Government of Uganda in 2008 and the Ministry of Local Government is the executing agency. The ministry at that time reviewed, assessed and ranked the infrastructural and operational state of 38 markets across the country. After the review, it was noted that markets in most towns in Uganda were poorly managed, dilapidated and characterised by overwhelmed infrastructure, resulting into poor working conditions.

MATIP is implemented in a phased manner because of limited resources and the need to pick lessons and improve as we move along. The first phase is financed by the Government of Uganda and two development partners, namely the African Development Bank and the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa. It is a five-year programme with a total of $70 million and is expected to end in December 2016. 

The main objective of the programme is to improve marketplace economic and social infrastructure thus inducing incremental production and marketing of agricultural commodities, enhancing the incomes of vendors, increasing employment and increasing revenue generation by local governments.

The project has three components, namely market infrastructure development, market management and project management. 

The general progress of the work so far done is that funds that have been secured under the first phase are only adequate for the reconstruction of nine markets out of the originally designed 26 markets. The nine markets are Wandegeya, Mpanga, Hoima, Lira, Jinja, Mbale, Gulu, Nyendo and Busega in KCCA. The nine markets are at different stages of construction as highlighted below:

    1. Wandegeya and Mpanga markets have been completed and commissioned and these are accommodating a total of 1,785 vendors who have been successfully re-settled and are working.
    2. Mbale Market will be commissioned next week on Tuesday, 29 April 2014 and Hoima Market is due for commissioning in May. The verification and re-settlement of vendors in those markets is on-going.
    3. Lira, Jinja and Gulu are 90 percent substantially complete.
    4. Nyendo and Busega are at design stage. 

The different levels of completion are due to the time the sites were handed over, the size of the market, the design requirements, development partner’s responsiveness to funding and the capacity of the contractors. Since the question was mainly focused on Mbale market, allow me to give facts around the construction and completion of Mbale market. 

Mbale market has a total of 2,590 registered vendors 2,597 facilities have been constructed which include 492 lockups, 1,127 stalls, 893 pitches, eight pharmacies, two clinics, two coffee shops, three bars, three office units, 17 agro-processing stores, one banking hall, two cold rooms, one day care centre, 16 hotels, 33 power rooms and parking for 101 vehicles. 

From the above, the facilities are enough in our view to cover all the legal registered vendors and the balance of the facilities will be allocated by the municipal council provided all the original registered vendors who operated in the market before construction are fully catered for. 

Allocation procedures  

The ministry has generic registration guidelines that guide the vendor registration processes. These were adhered to in the case of Mbale market and others during the registration process up to the allocation of the new market facilities. Any vendor who owned, rented or sub-rented stands, kiosks, stalls, lock-ups or any other facility from the council or his/her partners including those vendors operating in the open space but within the market were registered. The vendors furnished the registration committee comprising of vendors, municipal council staff and project staff with documentary evidence pertaining to ownership or tenancy of the market facility where he or she conducted business. 

This evidence of proof is in form of allocation letter, general receipt, an agreement, a trading licence or any other acceptable document to council or the vendor’s association. This evidence was a requirement during the registration exercise and must have been valid and acquired prior to December 2009 before the registration began. This exercise was executed jointly by three enumerators composed of representatives from vendors, the urban authority and the Ministry of Local Government. 

The final verified vendors register forms the basis for allocation of the new market facilities. This register facilitated in identifying bona fide vendors, signing MOUs with each vendor, allocation of space in the temporary relocation sites and finally allocating new facilities to eligible vendors upon completion of reconstruction. 

The power and responsibility to allocate facilities in the new market upon completion are vested in a purposefully constituted allocation committee for every market. This allocation committee is majorly composed of two members from each of the nine key sections in the market. In other words 18 market vendors sit on the allocation committee elected by the market vendors themselves. Two representatives come from the municipal council and two representatives from the Ministry of Local Government. Councillors and political leaders are not part of the allocation committee. The procedure followed by the allocation committee is as follows: Undertaking final verification of the voter’s register; vendors are then stratified according to their business categories -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of the vendor’s register? You said voter’s register.

MR MWESIGE: Did I say voters? I beg your pardon, Mr Speaker. I am much more involved with voters than vendors - undertaking final verification of the vendor’s register, vendors are then stratified according to their business categories, publishing the final verified register either in one of the leading dailies or public places or displayed in market premises. 

In the case of Mbale, we have displayed the list in four open public spaces for vendors to see and verify whether the vendors who have been allocated facilities are bona fide or not. I am giving you information which I have. You are also entitled to give your own version. Vendors allocate the available new spaces to themselves in sequence to their closeness in the old market. Where facilities are not enough, the sharing option is pursued. People can share lockups and open spaces and we have done it in other markets. 

Where vendors fail to agree, the technical staff conduct the random picking of the ballot paper by the vendors meanwhile the staff also comprise the new vendors’ market register. Display of the new draft vendors’ allocation list in market premises and other public places, handling of complaint and grievances is handled by the town clerk and the market management committee. 

Signing of the final allocation list by all allocation committee members, issuance of allocation letters by the MATIP national program facilitator, the town clerk and the permanent secretary are based on the final allocation list. If there are balances of facilities, not allocated, they are given to the council to allocate adhering to Government procedures of renting Government facilities but must take into account the needs of the urban people and in particular the urban poor and other affirmative actions. 

In the case of Mbale, they are a total of 51 facilities unallocated as of today and these include 15 lock ups, seven agro-processing facilities, one day care centre, eight pharmacies, two clinics, three offices, two coffee shops, one internet cafe, one banking hall, four bars, five wholesale shops, and the 101 parking lots and a number of pitches and stalls. 

The new markets are to be managed on a landlord tenant relationship basis, the landlord being the municipal council and the tenants are the eligible market vendors. The vendors are given a grace period of two months not to pay rent to the council to enable them settle in the market. The new rates take into account the management and operational requirements of the new market and are proposed by the municipal council and submitted to the ministry for approval. The above processes and procedures have been strictly adhered to in all markets so far completed and the same will be followed for the remaining ones. 

The complaints in Mbale are as a result of the verified displayed list which will be handled accordingly. We are still around, the world has not ended. The allocation letters are not yet signed by the town clerk. As I speak, the project manager and the PS have not signed the allocation letters. The cleaning process is still on going because lists have been displayed for people to raise their complaints. 

These markets have had tremendous impact on the communities which they are designed to serve. The market vendors associations have been developed into cooperative societies which will enhance corporate Governance and accountability in the management of markets and hopefully this will minimise market related conflicts. The redevelopment of the markets has created employment opportunities during and after construction processes. These new market facilities also provide for local artisans like welders, plumbers, electricians in addition to mini agro-processing facilities. There has been an improvement in vendor-working conditions in the completed markets and this has led to better health conditions of vendors and also attracted more customers since they are no longer operating in the sun, dirty or muddy working conditions.

The new markets have beautified the physical appearance and planning of the central business districts where these markets are located. The newly reconstructed markets have inbuilt fire prevention mechanisms such as steel which is majorly used as opposed to wood; the entrance of the markets allow access of the fire trucks; fire hydrants were provided in and around the markets; spacing and voids were allowed between blocks; fire extinguishers have been installed; smoke and fire detectors have been provided for; metallic electric conduits are used as opposed to plastics; contractors are required to acquire fire clearance certificates from the Uganda Police before the facilities are occupied by vendors.

As earlier noted, Mr Speaker, 26 markets had been planned for construction under MATIP I  but the available resources can only now cover nine markets; these have left a funding gap of about $120 million to cover the construction of the remaining 11 markets, which have already been designed and are ready for construction. I would like to inform this House that the African Development Bank has in fact agreed to fund the construction of the remaining markets. And these are: Kasese Central Market, Mbarara Central Market, Kabale, Masaka, Entebbe-Kitoro Market, Lugazi, Busia, Tororo, Soroti, Moroto and Arua. The 11 markets are ready for re-development as evidenced by:

    (i) All these municipalities have given us land titles
    (ii) We have habitation re-location sites – where vendors will be re-located.
    (iii) Complete vendors-registration has taken place and;
    (iv) We have conflicts being managed in those markets.

The ministry is working hand-in-hand with the Ministry of Finance to ensure that the construction of these 11 markets is undertaken as soon as possible. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is the statement on the matter that was raised by the Member of Mbale District; it attracts some debate. We will have to work on the time; can we have each member take two minutes? Okay, use the two minutes, please.

2.49
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for his statement that has given us the figures. But I want to inform this House that when the Minister brought a Bill to this House for Parliament to approve a loan from the African Development Bank for the development of markets, we were very happy. I took part in that debate, hoping that our people were going to benefit from the construction of the new markets.

These markets were being developed for the poor people; we wanted the poor urban people to benefit from the new markets. But as I speak now, the situation in Mbale is quite different. The ministry sent its officials to Mbale to work along with the municipal council and market vendors to allocate the stalls. Now the agreement was that the people who were first in the market – who signed the memorandum of understanding with MATIP and Ministry of Local Government – were the ones to be allocated these facilities first.

Mr Speaker, it was not easy for us to convince the market vendors to get out but I assured them that once they left and the new facility completed, they would come back. But this is not the case now; these people have been left out. People who have been given lock-ups and stalls are new people and the list has been displayed. When I got complaints from Mbale, I went to see the permanent secretary at the Ministry of Local Government and the officer in charge of MATIP and we agreed that this exercise was fraud and would be cancelled. I actually communicated that information to the vendors. But hon. Minister, as we speak now, the list displayed is not regarded as the true list because there are very many people – (Member timed out.)

2.51
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. However, I would like to point out that I am not sure how true it is that 51 facilities are un-allocated; and yet the majority of the people in Mbale who occupied that market first are still crying to us that they have not been allocated places. I wish to get clarification as to why these 51 facilities are un-allocated and yet the majority of the people in Mbale have not yet been allocated places.

And Mr Speaker, I am sorry to say this; but according to information on the ground, the people in Mbale are saying that the people who have been allocated places in the market are not residents of Mbale. (Interjections) I do not know how far true it is but among the ministry officials who went to allocate places, many of them are alleged to have allocated places to themselves. We want that issue clarified because the poor people are the ones who have been left out while those who even have shops in town are the ones who have got places. So it is quite unfortunate that the market is not going to serve the purpose for which it was meant. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to be aware that the majority of the poor people have not got places. So let him take keen interest to investigate that issue. (Member timed out.)

2.52
MS SARAH KAYAGI NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to be more specific and kindly request the minister to take keen interest in the issues of Mbale. Mbale market has created a lot of dissatisfaction about the Ministry of Local Government. People feel that the ministry has not helped them. It is stated that 110 stalls in this market have been taken by the ministry officials; the people who came to help us in the allocation process took 110 stalls.

So hon. Minister, as people from this area, we kindly request you to take keen interest in this matter because we do not want the people of Masabaland to rise up and be a danger in this area.

Mr Speaker, yesterday people wanted to go to the streets to demonstrate over the market issue. Most of the people who were vendors in this market were left out and a majority of them do not appear on the list displayed by the ministry. And this puts us, the leaders of this area, in a mess. People feel we have not helped them and yet we trusted the ministry and the team on the ground to help in the allocation process. (Member timed out.)

2.55
MS BETTY BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to observe that it is quite sad that as a country, we still need to borrow money to construct markets. Markets these days are no longer a preserve of the urban poor. When markets are constructed, RDCs, senior policemen and politicians use their offices to own the market stalls and act as landlords for the urban poor. The poor women who sell tomatoes eventually rent the stalls from these greedy rich people. 

And most of the land where we should have constructed markets for the country has been sold off by the districts. I wonder whether my colleague, the line minister, knows about this; districts are busy selling off market land. This happened in my own constituency in Mukono when land where we had a market was sold off to private developers. 

Mr Speaker, this Parliament created nine new municipalities. But I do not know why these new municipalities have not been given priorities over those that are already developed. Those new municipalities include Mukono, Rukungiri and others. I hope by elevating them to a municipal status, we wanted to give these areas better services. 

Lastly, what happened to the Market Act? Under the Market Act, an ordinary person is not supposed to construct a market –(Member timed out.)

2.57
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for local government and I want to know from him - as he just stated, the Lira Market is ready by 90 percent. What we hear is that the President is about to go and launch that market. But we have not seen any list displayed for the beneficiaries. 

May I bring your attention to the fact that the same complaint that arose from Mbale may rise in Lira and it may be worse because there are circumstances where the municipal council authorities, the police and RDCs will want to take more than four shops? At the end of it all, they will rent it out to the poor at very expensive rates. 

We feel that you should give us the list three months before the launch. Let it be displayed; let verification take place so that our people can know where they are going to settle and there will be no dispute. That is what I want clarified. Thank you. 

2.59
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for that statement. But that statement is one he would have used to convince Parliament to get a loan for the market. The reasons he has given are ideal for securing a loan. But where is the gap; the gap is in allocation. 

Mr Speaker, I have to tell the minister and my honourable colleagues here that in Wandegeya, already one of the staff in the office of the President is there; there is a lot of conflicts. There are two things, the people who are supposed to benefit have not benefited. 

At the same time, like any other policy, it is supposed to change the people and the people also change policy. Some of them have opted out and have sold to other people. Therefore, the minister should come up and define what a market is. Hon. Nambooze said the big people are coming in because the definition of a market of the 60s is not the same as the definition of a market today. 

When you talk about Kisekka Market; if my grandfather was to resurrect, I would think about bananas and spare parts. Likewise, these markets attract lawyers, salon dealers and so forth. So you need to redefine and operationalise the word “market” and who should be there. Look at the Namuwongo Project; you know what happened there. You need to go back and cover these gaps. The intended beneficiaries have been cheated and others have opted out. Thank you. 

3.00
MR MICHAEL WERIKHE (NRM, Bungokho County South, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement. On the issue of Mbale Market, as rightly observed by colleagues who spoke before me, people were excited because they have waited for this project for quite a long time. As we talk now, most of the people who were operating in these markets are operating on the streets. And this has contributed to the dirtying of the town; and we have been concerned about this. 

Now, the reallocation process has created even more problems. It has compounded the challenges which we had before. So my appeal to the minister is to halt the allocation process and we sit down together. Please use us, your colleagues in this House, to make a contribution on how you can proceed in the allocation of these lockups. This will ease the pressure that we are experiencing as the representatives of the people. It is actually a regional market because it includes Bukedi, Bugisu and Teso. People from all those places operate from this market. So it is important that we come to the rescue of the people who were in the market first and then those who what to come on board can be considered later. So honourable minister, I request that you take this in good faith. 

3.02
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate Government for putting up markets for the people. They have given us the markets and we have no option but to thank them, then we can talk about the negative things later. 

Now, I have two things to talk about. Go to Mbarara Municipality, I am very glad the Ministry of Local Government thought about Mbarara. We have got a problem as Mbarara; sometimes we are neglected for reasons you know. But I am very glad you finally thought about us and you want to give us a market.

I have seen you omit politicians as far as allocation of these stalls is concerned, which is a mistake. The politicians you are seeing here are the voices of the people and the Latin say: “Vox populi vox dei” that the voice of the people is the voice of God. So I do not know why you do not involve us. 

Right now, as I talk, in Mbarara, the market has become a conflict area because some of the people own stalls and these are rich men. They do not want anybody else to get a stall there. So you will find rich men in Mbarara owning ten stalls when the poor people do not have even one. So why don’t you involve us so that we can help you?

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the government for the wonderful market they constructed in Lira. I wish you could bring the same design to Mbarara because the people of Mbarara are waiting for such a market. And Minister of Local Government, tomorrow, I want to take you to Mbarara and you assure my people that you will give them the market because they need it. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

3.05
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The markets we are talking about are community markets. They are intended to benefit the low income buyer and seller in the community. What we need to distinguish is between a shopping mall and a market. What has been put in Wandegeya is more of a shopping mall for the low income buyer and seller. In Kasubi, which I understand is under multiple I; we did not have a land title for the area. Now land is being identified around Lubigi and somewhere in another community called Lubya. I hear plans are in advanced stages. 

Now, the communities of low income earners in Kasubi and Wandegaya are being ignored. It is therefore not to the benefit of the community but for the rich people. Traders who were elsewhere in Kampala or those from Juba or London can come back now that there is a shopping mall in Kampala. I rest my case.

3.06
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are very happy to hear that Gulu is 90 percent completed and we are getting an experience from Mbale. When these venders were moved away from the market and taken to a temporary place for the people of Gulu, they were registered. I thought the process would have been the same for the people of Mbale. But some greedy people again reallocated those stalls for themselves forgetting the people who were originally in the market. This is very unfortunate. 

Elsewhere, when markets get burnt, the response of the ministry and the government is so fast. But for us in Gulu, our women lost a lot of their properties - sometimes even some of them are kicked out of the market but even when they are going to be out of the market, we should think about them before we bring on board new people. 

Honourable minister, this also brings me to ask again, some of us find it so hard to understand how other markets like those in Kampala get very fast response. In two or three days, they get something and they move on. But the market vendors of Gulu, who struggled through thick and thin, cannot get anything even when we plead on this Floor of Parliament for them. Right now, they have loans. Some of them are running away from the loans they borrowed because fire gutted their property. 

I am happy with the structure; I have not seen the inside. But my prayer is that when our women go back to the new market or the original market, do not over charge them. We are happy about the two months, but do not over charge them because they are very –(Member timed out.)

3.09
MR JOHN SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County, East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Having listened to my colleagues in the House and noting that the submissions are more or less the same – what is affecting the markets in Mbale Municipality is similar to what is in Gulu and other municipalities. 

So I move a motion, if colleagues can second me, under rule –(Interjections)– I move a motion that Parliament forms a committee to expeditiously look at the allocation of these new markets. For example the lock ups and stalls. And also a new committee be set up for the allocation of those markets because the current composition of the committees which are involved in allocations within these markets has issues. I beg to move, if I am seconded, that Parliament sets up a committee to expeditiously look into the issue of allocations of the new markets. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, what would be faster? Setting up a parliamentary committee or asking the minister to correct these issues –(Interjections)– wait. You see, Parliament will take its time although it can still do that. But these issues are urgent; they are going to launch some markets this month and some next month. The way Parliament moves, it will not have accomplished all those things. 

To take a practical approach, wouldn’t it be better to ask the minister to get back to us in a week –(Interjections)– this is just a statement in response to a particular issue that was raised last week. There is no comprehensive study that has been done. Wouldn’t it be more appropriate to now ask the minister specifically on some of those issues that have been addressed and then the minister returns to us this week or the other week and then from there we see how to move? 

3.12
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come from the mountains of the sun. What you are trying to suggest is a very good idea. Incidentally, in Bugisu, which we were talking about – when hon. Werikhe was talking, I thought he was going to give the experience of how a market was burnt and the people were shifted to a lorry park and how we constructed the lorry park and how allocation was done with no complaint under my leadership – (Interjections) – yes, it was under my leadership and I have people to attest to that. 

Having said that, Mr Speaker, I want to tell you that I have been investing in markets since 1986 - before some of you even knew about investing in markets; and that is why I agree with you, Mr Speaker. If someone goes to a lockup in Mbale, the average cost of rent per year is about Shs 7 million.  So as the Speaker said, in one week, get all the list allocation in Mbale and come and table them here in Parliament –(Interjections)– if you have them –(Interruption)

MR TANNA: I would like to thank hon. Nandala for giving way. I would like to inform the honourable minister that the concerns raised by the honourable members are extremely genuine. And as the implementing agency, I would like to agree with the Speaker that the onus lies upon you to make sure that this is correctly done. It is on record that there are people from Kampala who are claiming ownership of those lockups. 

One simple way that we derived in Tororo as we were registering the occupants was to ask people come with their market receipt dues for the past months. You can say six months or one year. And many of these people keep the receipts meticulously. 

Honourable minister, this entirely lies in your docket. Some of your ministry officials have booked lockups – we have been told, we do not know the facts. Some people from Owino and Kampala have booked lockups in Mbale. The genuine people who have been in these markets for 10 or 15 years have been left out. That is recipe for anarchy.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, we are raising this because one of the conditions raised in Mbale was that you must have a lease offer or a title. But in the 80s, somebody would be given an allocation letter by the municipality. It is just a few of us who have land titles and lease offers. 

When it comes to the people from Kampala, you heard of one tough woman, whenever someone raised a receipt, she would say, “Get out of my sight”. Now, these people went away to sharpen pangas. They are saying that anybody who comes from outside will not take a stall in Mbale. 

So, honourable minister, I propose that you first display the names so that everybody can know them. In Mbale, the names are not yet displayed. In fact, what the Member for Lira said, that you displayed them like in an electoral process and say, “The following are the beneficiaries of the new market”. That will prepare the people –(Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, hon. Nandala, for giving way and Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When I got the outcry from Mbale, I went to the ministry and the Permanent Secretary and the officer in charge of MATIP – Mr Speaker, I want the minister to listen; he is being distracted. 

The permanent secretary and the officer in charge of MATIP agreed and said that this exercise is flawed and it is null and void. So we agreed to cancel that exercise and set up a new committee to go and allocate stalls according to the original list of vendors who were in the market, who signed the memorandum of understanding with the ministry. This is a simple thing. We do not want your name to be damaged. I know you are a good person, we worked together; you are a good minister. So you should not give up; accept for a new committee to be set up; we go according to the original list of the people who used to work in the market. Thank you hon. Nandala

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, a market is where people derive their livelihood. And the moment you chase them, you are doing it to make them destitute. If someone becomes destitute, before they become so, they will fight; they become desperate and so forth. 

I know that my brother hon. Adolf will need to go through the Mbale case. People may have brought you reports, but the reports could be wrong. Even the local leadership, like the area MP was not involved; the chairman Bugisu Cooperative Union was not involved –(Laughter)– so all these could be very dangerous. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought Bugisu Cooperative Union was for coffee –(Laughter)– okay, let us have the Opposition Chief Whip. 

3.20
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate your guidance, Mr Speaker. However, judging from the debate coming from the Floor, I feel that the ministry itself needs to be investigated because it is alleged that some of the persons working in that ministry are beneficiaries of these markets. So it would be fair to allow the local government committee to take charge so that we investigate and find out who are these persons who have been unfairly allocated a market and how can we rectify the problem? So that when we come up with the next phase of the market, we will know how to circumvent the problems that we have already encountered. 

Mr Speaker, you know in our country today, corruption has been institutionalised. Nobody is ashamed about corruption anymore. It is like a normal way of life. It is important to know who the MPs and RDCs and whose wives, sons and daughters are having stalls in the markets –(Interjections)– of course when I talk about wives, I mean husbands as well. They are there. But we can only do that if we get Parliament interested in this. We need to get the right things in the right place so that the next phase can be done in the interest of the people –(Interruption) 

MS ONGOM: Thank you, hon. Member. The Member from Tororo said that officials from Kampala own lockups and stalls. I want to give you information that by the time they were ascertaining the list and making the register – people were so desperate to get a new site where they could settle and many of them did not go through the official assessment to get them on the list. So I don’t know how you are going to handle that particular case - but they know one another. 

Secondly, for teachers, they were demanding at least three pass port size photographs. I wish, as you make the display, you include the shop number and the photo of that particular person so that we can know who owns what and at what time. 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now, you can see for yourself that the ministry itself has to clear its name. I believe that even now, if we were to bring the list of those who own those shops, you will be amazed. I come from Lira and - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Not from Dokolo?

MRS OGWAL: Dokolo was birthed from Lira. I belong to the Lango community. Even the Mbale you are talking about, I belong to the Mbale Community. So I am very conversant with what is on the ground for both places. There are a lot of things that are happening which we need to clear. That is why I am seeking for your indulgence, to hear the cry of the Member of Parliament who have not been involved in the exercise. It is important that we get the local government involved so that we come up with what exactly is happening; what should be done properly, so that it guides us in managing the ninth and seventeenth  which are yet to come.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.25
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, I also want to take this opportunity to thank hon. Adol, the Minister for Local Government, for bringing this statement which we were all eagerly waiting for. 

The motion moved by our colleague was so specific; he was suggesting that we should set up a subcommittee or a select committee to look at this. I want to suggest that let the committee that is responsible for that sector do its work but at the same time, given the situation at hand and based on what colleagues are telling us is likely to happen in that area, the best is to let the minister take all the information he has received from colleagues or the allegations made and then he works with the local leaders since they had left out politicians in the process. Let the ministry work with the MPs and the district leaders and the verification is done, then the minister comes to Parliament to give us an update on what would have happened. 

As this goes on, the committee of Parliament in charge of Local Government also continues doing its work and even allegations made by the member for Kawempe about KCCA should also be worked upon by the committee so that the two teams work for the good of this country.

3.27
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am persuaded by the submission of the Government Chief Whip but I want to suggest something slightly different and then I will make one or two points. 

First, as the Government Chief Whip has suggested, we can allow the minister as you had earlier guided, Mr Speaker, that for one week, he goes to work with people who have been involved, and then he brings back a statement to Parliament explaining the remedies that he has been able to suggest. 


The slight change I want to propose is that the committee on Local Government if we are satisfied with what the minister will have done after one week, then you can have the committee taking it up from there. But for both to begin moving at the same time, I am uncomfortable. I am also uncomfortable with Members of Parliament now wanting to be part of the allocation of these lock ups. It is something I would completely oppose, because you can’t accuse councillors and you want to replace them with members of Parliament. 

Members of Parliament should concentrate on their oversight work. If there are problems you report them and propose solutions. You don’t go and become managers of markets; we should task the Minister for Local Government to bring here matters of policy. How do I acquire a lockup? How do I acquire a stall in the market? These sentiments of people from outside Mbale, outside Kampala, there are Ugandans who are operating markets in South Sudan. Do you want them back in Kampala now? We should only be concerned with transparent allocation of lockups and markets and not who gets a lockup and where you come from. If you want to be angry that there are people from Kisoro, from Buganda, from wherever, we have Ugandans who are working in markets in Southern Sudan. So the concern of this Parliament, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you so much, hon. Speaker. I want to thank the honourable member and I also want to appreciate his request for a policy of allocation of markets but this particular one was to help our urban poor and the poor population in our areas. 

In Lira District, for example, if we just used this policy and you left a Kampala based businessman to go and occupy that lockup in Lira, then the rest are going to sell their property on the streets because they don’t have a place to work from and above all these people don’t know the level of our poverty down there. So whatever they are going to charge will be too much for us. Is he, therefore, in order to say that it is irrespective of who owns the market and that the policy will be used regardless of the poverty level of our people down there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This policy was used to prevent the corporate people from creating urban serfdom. That was a key statement I read from the President’s letter that they should not create urban serfdom. So the debate going on looks like the allocation in Mbale seems to be doing exactly that; creating an urban serfdom. That goes against the root of the policy that has led to the construction and rehabilitation of these markets. 

The point being made is, those who had occupied the markets before should be considered first, once those ones are settled then the excess space that has remained can be allocated by some criteria. I think that is the sentiment being discussed here. So if there is space like for 57 stalls from the minister’s statement that have remained unallocated, those ones can be allocated following those procedures that the honourable Semujju is talking about. 

But the people who are there must be settled first. I thought that was the principle. We are now saying, let the minister use whatever means within his disposal and power, to sort out this matter, Mbale being the first case. Of course we have had the case of Wandegeya already, but Mbale being the one where the allocation is still being done, it could provide the template on how you are going to handle the other markets. So will it be fair to ask the minister then to go and engage in these processes, come back next week say, Thursday and tell us what has happened? (Members rose_) 

The Speaker is speaking. I am not yet ruling on this matter, I am just proposing as a way forward so that the minister comes back say next week on Thursday and outline exactly the way he has outlined now and if the matter still generates controversy, then we see what happens next. As the House we can take a decision.

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. In conclusion, therefore, on matters of policy, I also don’t agree that there must be individuals who must own stalls in the market until they are dead and stalls are inherited by their children. If the process of allocating is well known and transparent, then we must know how people lose those stalls? Because you can’t tell me that this Government is only planning for only the urban poor who are currently in the market. Suppose tomorrow one leaves? Because the issue colleagues are talking about here - and that is the last question I want to raise; are you leasing out these lockups? Are these people tenants that they can come and when you fail you go, another person comes and goes through the same processes to acquire a stall? Or you are actually building markets and leasing them out to some individuals? Because these markets must be for the community not for the particular group that is in the market at the moment. 

There must be a transparent process that brings in people as the others are leaving. But when you allocate markets focusing on people who are there now, it means tomorrow when they leave, they will be the ones sub-renting. There will be rich people - you work in a market, get rich and leave but continue sub-renting and that is why I am reluctant and I am demanding a policy from the government. Once we have a policy because finally - I will give you an example from Kireka.

Finally, the policy is that people who are in markets must manage the markets themselves. What has happened is that they have sub-divided themselves into various groups and they have become tenderers so you have one group calling itself Kireka Limited and others calling themselves a different name and they are fighting each other. So the conflict the minister spoke about in his earlier statement will not be resolved if we do not have a policy on acquisition of lockups, how one loses it and how one gets a new one. That is why when he comes back to report, he should also speak about matters of policy.

3.36
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would not have a problem with the Local Governments Committee taking it upon them to verify this exercise and report back to Parliament. My big concern is to do with the Ministry of Local Government. I represent Budadiri East and almost 50 percent of the market vendors in this market are from Sironko. My colleagues from that region can bear me witness.

Quite often, I interact with them on radio talk shows. I am with these honourable councillors, RDCs and politicians but their biggest concern is the collusion. The public accuses the Ministry of Local Government – actually, the officials in the Ministry of Local Government are the ones colluding to bring up these strange and stray names as beneficiaries in these markets. So if you are now saying we are tasking PAC or the ministry to go and come back with an answer -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, not the ministry but the minister.

MR SSASAGA: I believe the minister may end up relying on the same officials who will feed him with the information unless there is an assurance to the contrary. Otherwise, I believe that it may not solve the problem. I would rather move and rely on a committee, which can expeditiously handle this matter instead of the minister and the ministry who may have conflict of interests as well. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this matter is urgent. There is no way a committee of Parliament can come back here on Thursday next week and brief us about the status quo of what is going on in Mbale market. It is simply impossible. This market is going to be launched soon and this House needs a clear statement on how the issues raised by this House have been addressed in the next one week. On Thursday, the minister should come back and say, this is what has happened. If we are dissatisfied with what the minister has done then we should see how to move next to resolve this matter. But as a first step, let the minister take political responsibility of his sector and handle this matter so that he is accountable for what happens. [MEMBER: “Clarification”] Clarification from who? The minister is not speaking. Hon. Minister, can we have your confirmation on this matter and we conclude it?

3.39
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You have summarised the debate very well, namely, that the minister is responsible to this Parliament because I am the one who represents this sector in this House and therefore, it is in order for Parliament to task or assign the minister to go and sort out these issues you have raised and report back to you. If you are not satisfied with the minister’s findings, this Parliament has the liberty to use its own committees to investigate. 

So I concur with your guidance that I be allowed to go - in fact, I am travelling to Mbale on Saturday and I will stay in Mbale the whole of next week because this job is not small. Some of my technical people have been accused of having participated in allocating themselves stalls, so you can see that the task is almost entirely on my head.

I would request for two weeks from today and I will work with my colleagues the MPs. I do not see any harm in Members of Parliament participating in verification because they represent the people but we shall also involve the vendors themselves because I am sure the vendors know themselves better than anybody else. We shall hold the meetings in the market itself and invite the vendors to confirm whether somebody who has been allocated space worked in the market or not. Once we agree, I will come with a report to this House and this House will look at it and make its judgement. So I beg for two weeks. 
In the meantime, I am going to suspend the allocation process until I have done the assignments, which this House has given me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And the launching also?

MR MWESIGE: No, the launching of the market can go on as we proceed with verification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, so you need two weeks to do this?

MR MWESIGE: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, we should give the minister two weeks because next Thursday is actually Labour Day; I have just been reminded. Let us give the minister two weeks. The other Thursday after next week he will come back to this House and brief us on what has happened. Can we resolve this matter that way? Thank you.

Hon. minister, you have two weeks to get back to the House and address the issues and concerns of the Members. Thank you very much. 

Hon. Minister, for Disaster Preparedness, there was a pending issue that you needed to address - (Members rose_) - hon. Member, I have always said that there is no such a thing in the rules so I will not be allowing guidance points.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, before I came in, my attention was drawn to the issues that were raised by the hon. Members regarding caterpillars that are ravaging most parts of the country. I wanted to respond as follows: 

When my ministry’s attention was drawn to the disaster that has been caused in many districts in the country by the caterpillars –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. I did not want to interrupt the minister but I know he is the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and issues of caterpillars are issues of agriculture. They are ravaging gardens and this requires a scientific response from Agriculture. Is it therefore procedurally right that we listen to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness or should we listen to the Minister of Agriculture who can give us a comprehensive solution on that matter?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, as of now, it is a disaster. Crops have been destroyed and people do not have anything to eat so it is a disaster. As to how it will be comprehensively handled in the long term, that is another matter but for now, it is a problem. Hon. minister -

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of procedure on something very technical. The point highlighted by hon. Okumu is not a small one -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have ruled on that matter. Please resume your seat. Honourable minister -

MR ECWERU: Hon. Speaker, two things happened. When my attention was drawn to this challenge, I did draw the attention of the Ministry of Agriculture in writing and I will read my communication to the ministry and table this communication here. The second thing I did was to deploy my technical people to assess the emergency nature of the challenge.

Regarding my communication to the Ministry of Agriculture, the letter is as follows: 

“Caterpillars destroying crops across the country. This is to draw your attention to the above mentioned subject. Destructive caterpillars are wreaking havoc in the districts of Mukono, Kayunga, Wakiso, Kasese and many others. 

Given the disaster nature of the challenge, many district leaders are appealing to my office for intervention. However, I had expected your office by now to have done the following:

    1. Calm down the peasants by issuing a public/professional statement on this challenge.
    2. Explain to the country how you intend to manage the challenge and how the peasants can handle this problem.


Honourable minister, this note is to request you to urgently do the above while my ministry will handle the relief face of the intervention after a technical assessment that my technical people are conducting across the country as of now.”

It is signed by me and this letter is copied to the Prime Minister, the permanent secretary responsible for crop production, my permanent secretary and commissioner. I want to report to you, Mr Speaker, that the Minister of Agriculture received this communication yesterday.

My technical people are busy assessing because the information that we have got is that many people are likely to lose what to eat. Therefore, my ministry will package an arrangement so that we can make an appropriate response.

In the same vein, I want to let this House know that not only have we noted the challenges that have been caused by the caterpillars but there are also challenges associated with hailstorms and winds de-roofing houses and institutions of Government. My ministry has communicated to the Prime Minister who is our senior supervisor to inform the following ministries: 

    1. The Ministry of Agriculture because crops are being destroyed.
    2. The ministries of Education and Health because health centres and schools are being de-roofed.
    3. The Ministry of Works to prepare for the bridges that are likely to be washed off.

I have also drawn the attention of the Prime Minister to the fact that as we talk now, the Ministry of Works must keep an eye on Nyamwamba River in Kasese, which is threatening to burst its banks again.

Mr Speaker, all these communications have gone to these relevant offices and I beg to table them to this Parliament. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, let the records capture those. Hon. Members, that is the response from the Minister responsible for Disaster Preparedness.  Hon. Member, when you address the House from there, you are outside the Chamber of the House so you need to come in front.

3.48
PROF. GILBERT BUKENYA (NRM, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of caterpillars is a very serious one. First of all, I was expecting the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to tell us what the longevity of the caterpillar is. When do they pupate and at what time should we advise the farmers to attack? This is because in my area of Wakiso, there are black caterpillars. Their longevity is two and a half weeks and then they pupate. Now the size of a caterpillar is very important for its consumption of green grass; the larger they are, the more their consumption. Therefore, I do not think the caterpillars are the same species in Wakiso as they are in Mukono or elsewhere. This information would be very important for us to communicate back to our farmers.

Someone was speculating using sprays but if you are going to do this, you have to attack when a caterpillar is about five days in its longevity. So I am of the view that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness should work very closely with the entomologists so that this issue does not perpetuate because we have been crying of caterpillars now and then and we can control it.

I would be very interested that the next time you come back, you tell us the state of caterpillars, their longevity, when they pupate and when they become butterflies. (Interruption)

DR MUTENDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Member for giving way. I agree to a very great extent with the professor but one thing which I would like all of us to know is that caterpillars are very specific. If it is the same caterpillar in Wakiso as in Mityana or wherever, it will be the same caterpillar. Caterpillars do not eat more than one type of green or grass and that is the basis for using them for economic reasons. That is how the history of the silk worm is. It only eats mulberry. So whereas it may be true that the sizes may differ because of specific environmental differences or maybe because of micro climatic changes or differences, if it is the same species of caterpillar that we are seeing in Mityana and Wakiso, then the same remedy will be applied. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you for that information. The question I was asking the hon. minister is, is it the same species or are they different species? And their consumption depends on the species. Some are thin and smaller, others are big and their consumption is not the same. That is why I was saying I would need the ministry to be in consultation with the entomologists to tell us what to tell our farmers. Some will not spray the caterpillars; others want to ask the government to spray with planes. Others want to attack them in a conservative way because if they pupate, it is easier to kill them. So that is what I was asking the hon. Minister for Disaster Preparedness.

3.54
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have since grown shorter. Last year, about the same period, the people of Mukono and Kayunga raised this same issue on the Floor of this House. The Minister of Agriculture then reported to the House that because of environmental degradation and the pressures exerted on the forest cover of the country, there are several species of caterpillars that would ordinarily live in the forests that have now invaded gardens. They promised then that they would work in the medium term and long term management strategy of this problem. A year down the road, we are back to exactly the same spot; caterpillars in the districts of Mukono and Kayunga where I reside. 

What the minister is reporting is that he has written to his supervisor, the Prime Minister, to start a process that should have started one year ago –(Interruption) 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give the honourable member holding the Floor is that this time the caterpillars which invaded Mukono came as butterflies. The town was so excited to see a swarm; they invaded like locusts and came into the town. In addition to invading gardens, they have invaded hotels, shops and people’s houses. People are starting to question where there is no possibility for health issues – (Interruption) 

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Butterflies can never become caterpillars. The member is misinforming the House that the butterflies came as caterpillars. Is it in order for the member to misinform instead of informing it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member was only beginning to make her point. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, Mukono received very beautiful visitors in form of butterflies. After a week, these butterflies had laid eggs that hatched into very dangerous larva that are now moving around the town as caterpillars. I think if the honourable member had been here when I first raised this matter, he would have known my context. 

What I was trying to emphasise is that away from the gardens, the caterpillars have invaded homes and there is fear that there may arise health issues to human beings and livestock. It is so urgent yet when the minister was laying letters he has written to ministries, I did not hear what he is going to do as the minister in charge of disaster. That is the information I wanted to give my colleague. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR ODOI: I appreciate the information from hon. Nambooze. Mr Speaker, the point I was trying to make is this. As a country, we should know which pest to expect when and where. And we should have a control strategy; what do we do in the short term, in the medium term and in the long term for an economy that is predominantly dependent on farming. Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to come up with that kind of strategy and present it to this House. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS (Mr Musa Ecweru): Mr Speaker, I did indicate to this House that the Ministry of Agriculture is the lead ministry sector in the technical management of this challenge, and I have communicated to them. I have also had a telephone conversation with the technical officers. 

The details of how they are going to proceed, I am sure, will be coming to this House as the ministry responsible for the management to indicate to the House how they are proceeding. 

Mr Speaker, for me and my ministry, we are looking at the humanitarian challenge that this problem is going to present. The technical people are on the ground as we talk now in all those districts. Fortunately, from the preliminary report, they have indicated to us that the destruction may not present an immediate problem that might need relief. But the destruction will present a problem that will occur probably in the next one month or so because the food that is being destroyed now is what the population expected to use for consumption in two or three months from now. Therefore, my ministry will have the burden of mobilising food intervention and other intervention but not immediately. But the technical people are going to work around the clock. 

What I can promise this honourable House is that when I am sharing with the department of agriculture – you see, Cabinet resolved that in the event that the Ministry of Agriculture suffers a challenge that causes destruction of say, food crops, the Minister of Disaster Preparedness can only handle the relief phase. The onus again is on Ministry of Agriculture to provide seeds and implements –(Interruption) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, this is a very important matter pursuant to what Prof. Bukenya articulated biologically. The clarification I am seeking is that you are standing in technically. How do you know whether your intervention is conclusive in the absence of the appropriate Ministry of Agriculture? How do you know the relief you are giving is worth the challenge because this is a mere stage of growth for that given insect? I hope you know what you are talking about. (Laughter)

MR ECWERU: Mr Speaker, sometimes my colleague from Rubaga makes appearances that are quite useful, but given the limited time that is available to us, I will pray that he gives us a bit of time. 

We are going to continue sharing with the Ministry of Agriculture as I promised this House. Professor has correctly observed that there is need for agriculture to come here and particularly the department of entomology who are responsible for the management of this kind of challenges. They should come and brief this House. 

My brother Fox Odoi indicated that last year, the same thing occurred in Mukono and Kayunga and other parts of the country. The truth is that we are doing hazard mapping in the country and hazard mapping has been undertaken to indicate which areas in Uganda are likely to be faced by what type of hazard. So soon we will present to this House a map up that we will develop for the country so that we can prepare adequately from time to time. 

But the climate change challenges that are presented to us will also cause us shock at some times because there will always be some new challenges that will emerge that we may not have anticipated given climate change that has befallen the globe today. 

Mr Speaker, we will always rise on top of the situation given whatever happens to us. But we will continue to mobilise and use our technical people to help us in that direction. 

PROF. BUKENYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable minister. As we are talking now, out there people are crying. I came in a vehicle this morning and some newsmen were asking people in the villages about these caterpillars. I see slowness in the way we put a statement for those people to start action. Is there “Caterpillarcide” that can kill a caterpillar and you can recommend it to those people? Do they just sit and wait and wait and wait because the hon. Minister for Disaster is going to give them posho? What do we do? This is what is disturbing me. What do we do now that out there the people are waiting for the wisdom of this Parliament to act? Should we just wait for the food or do you have anything that I can buy for my people and they start spraying it to kill some caterpillars so that they do not go into people’s houses? I am worried about the degree of emergency and the way we are responding to it.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, you know that I am a bit at pain to see hon. Ecweru being crucified for a ministry. Surely, he is doing his work because the Minister for Disaster Preparedness is preparing food for those ones who have been hit by the caterpillar disaster. Every district has an entomologist who is a scientist employed by the district specifically to look at such pests that are causing disaster.

The clarification that I am seeking is since we have got a Prime Minister here – we have the Rt. Hon. Deputy Prime Minister here –(Laughter)- and he is now the Leader of Government Business. Is there a possibility for you to guide the Prime Minister to summon the Minister for Agriculture to do his part so that we leave hon. Ecweru to look for the food for those ones who are hungry? We are now putting hon. Ecweru into Ministry of Agriculture and also in the Ministry of Disaster? Or should we give him two ministries at the same time?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the hon. Minister has responded to the efforts he has done to engage with the Ministry of Agriculture responsible for this particular kind of disaster. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, do you have something to say about what would happen in the Ministry of Agriculture on this subject?

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Minister for Disaster in his opening remarks did mention that he has written to all the concerned ministries and he did mention also that the Ministry of Agriculture is sending out experts to ascertain what kind of insects are out there – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of order. Having got a very good submission from hon. Minister Ecweru and hon. Bitekyerezo having raised some issues that need clarification from the Prime Minister and the House was very expectant about the response of the Deputy Prime Minister, is the State Minister for Industry in order to usurp the powers of the Prime Minister whom we are very expectant to hear from? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I keep saying, I am in charge of this House and I actually saw the Deputy Prime Minister beckoning the other minister to come forward. (Laughter)

DR MUTENDE: Thank you for that ruling, Mr Speaker. Before I was rudely interrupted, I was just informing my senior brother, Prof. Bukenya, that what he was calling “Caterpillarcide” is actually called insecticide and before you go into any mode of control using any insecticide under any situation, you need to make a thorough analysis because with whichever insecticide that you apply or any chemical intervention, you should be able to know that you will affect some other flora and fauna or plant and animal life. 

So, it is not completely abnormal for the agricultural team to first go and scientifically assess the particular insects that they want to fight against. It is just proper for the Ministry of Agriculture to send out a team to go and establish not only the insects that are being targeted but what other insects are available because you affect so much what we call the food chain –

MS NAMBOOZE: Order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, Ugandans believe that the NRM Government is in control and even in charge. But by the explanation now being given by the State Minister for Industry, the insinuation that he is trying to bring out is that in fact the NRM Government is not in charge. 

Is he, therefore, in order to continue insinuating that the Government in which he serves as a Minister of State for Industry is not in charge? That very many weeks after the districts were invaded by the butterflies and consequently the caterpillars, the Government is only about to send officers to know what type of caterpillars invaded Mukono? Is he in order to insinuate that the NRM Government is not in charge? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that was a scientific intervention that you need to assess the nature of the problem before you act on it because if you act in haste, you may start causing unintended consequences. That is what the minister was explaining.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: How long does it take?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please conclude.

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Maybe let me also inform the member that invasion of caterpillars or any other pests are not unique to Uganda. This is a global phenomenon and these insects are migratory. They could be in Mukono tomorrow and another time, they are in Hoima or Congo and you need to know which ones are there at the time.

So, I was just informing the member that certainly, the NRM Government is fully in charge and at the right time, with the right intervention, like it has happened before, these caterpillars will be under control. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: People are living with them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please let us leave this now. We cannot go on with this debate like this now. Let us leave it here and we will proceed with this. We will proceed with this when the Minister for Agriculture – what I am going to direct is that we should get the Minister for Agriculture coming with a specific statement on the subject so that we know the level of intervention from the Government, especially as far as the caterpillars are concerned and not the destroyed foods now because you said the impact of the destroyed foods will come two months later – that is when you will be required to intervene but as of now, the destruction is on-going. So, we need some explanation from the Ministry of Agriculture.

MR ECWERU: Most obliged. What we are going to do – I want to promise this House that I will go and communicate to my colleagues in the Ministry of Agriculture again and make sure that even the next sitting of this House, they ought to give communication to the entire country using any other media that they can avail themselves to about what is being done, what the population should expect and how we can work around the clock to make sure that the level of destruction that these caterpillars are causing to the country can be minimised. I want to promise the House that this is going to be done by the Ministry of Agriculture.

I also want to promise the House that we will request our other sectors to come and inform the House about what they are doing in intervening in the disasters like hail storms that are de-roofing houses and bridges that are being washed away by heavy rains in the different parts of the country. We have communicated to the Prime Minister but I will remind my colleagues to come and inform the House on what is being done. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have laying of papers; can the House be guided on item 5 whether the contentious issues have been resolved that we can see the possibility of moving with it? Item number 5 from the Bill.

4.16
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I want to make a brief statement of serious concern not of national concern but concerning the procedure. Some time ago, the Speaker instructed the various chairmen of the committees and this House not to set up side activities when Parliament is sitting so that we ensure that we have quorum for the plenary sessions. You may not be aware, but yesterday I raised this matter with the Clerk that there are some committees who actually have gone on upcountry tours knowing very well that yesterday the House suffered lack of quorum and we could not move with the Bill on HIV and from what I am seeing, maybe you are not informed about what is going on. There could be something going on in the country which we are not aware of; I don’t know whether the NRM is boycotting the House? –(Interjections)– I am making a statement and the Speaker has not told me to stop yet. 

With my meagre number, I try my best always to gather them and bring them in the House but the huge majority on the other side is depended on when it comes to quorum and yet we don’t see the effort coming from that side. This to me is a very serious statement which the Movement is making to this country but I rather that statement should be made audibly so that we can understand. Because right now as I can see, we cannot move with item 5 because we don’t have the quorum and it is the same problem we had yesterday and it is because the NRM has decided to deny us the quorum. Can we get an explanation why there is no quorum and why the NRM has continued to boycott meetings of Parliament?

MS JANEPHER NANTUME: Mr Speaker, I have stood on the point of order. Even if hon. Cecilia Ogwal has finished speaking, I still want to find out; even if the point of quorum arises now but can you put the whole blame on NRM MPs? Can we find out whether all Opposition MPs that you head as chief whip are all around? Can we find out whether all the Independent MPs are around? So I just wanted to know whether she is in order to insinuate that only NRM MPs are not in Parliament and others are present. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we could not proceed with this same item because a matter of quorum was raised and at that time, we had 71 Members. As I talk now, I have 45 Members in the House. It is a serious problem if we cannot proceed with business simply because we don’t have sufficient numbers. That is a big problem and I call upon the whips to work hard to ensure that we are able to transact business. There is a big problem. Can you call item 4?

LAYING OF PAPERS

DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR GENERAL

4.21
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (MEMBER, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Yumbe District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.

I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Kotido District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.

I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Buhweju District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Pallisa District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.

I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Rubirizi district local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.

I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Bududa District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.

I beg to lay the financial statement for Nebbi District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. 
I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Pader District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. 

I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Kayunga District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.

I beg to lay the financial statement for Butambala District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011. 

I beg to lay the financial statement for Kibaale District local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.

I beg to lay on Table the financial statement for Kiryandongo District local government accounts for the year ended 30th June 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture those 12 district local government financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. It stands committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling. 

SUB-COUNTIES’ FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the following reports for the sub-counties’ financial statements for the year ended 30th June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General

Kayonza Sub-County, Kayunga district; Kangulumila Sub-County, Kayunga district; Butansi Sub-County, Kamuli District; Lodonga Sub-County, Yumbe District; Kigumba Sub-County, Kiryandongo District; Kasodo Sub-County, Pallisa District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Excuse me, there is, I think a mis-numbering. Mutunda – after Kigumba, there should be –

MS OSEGGE: It is just Kigumba Sub-County, Kiryandongo District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: After Kigumba?

MS OSEGGE: There is Mutunda Sub-County, Kiryandongo District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is the next one.

MS OSEGGE: Kabwangasi Sub-County, Pallisa District; Petete Sub-County, Pallisa District; Pachara Sub-County, Adjumani District; Dzaipi Sub-County, Adjumani District; Kalisizo Sub-County, Rakai District; Bugongi Sub-County, Sheema District.

I beg to lay Kyangyenyi Sub-County, Sheema District; Shuuku Sub-County, Sheema District; Kitagata Sub-County, Sheema District; Bwikara Sub-County, Kibaale District; Nyamarunda Sub-County, Kibaale District; Nyamarwa Sub-County, Kibaale District. I beg to lay Kasambya Sub-County, Kibaale District; Mpasaana Sub-County, Kibaale District; Birembo Sub-County, Kibaale District and finally Mpeefu Sub-County, Kibaale District.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture those 23 sub-counties’ financial statements for the years ended 30 June, 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General. It stands committed to the appropriate committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling. Can we differ item five and go to the next one?

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON A FIELD VISIT TO MURCHISON FALLS NATIONAL PARK

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I propose that we allow the chair to present both reports on (6) and (7). They all relate to Murchison Falls National Park. If it is acceptable to the Members, the two reports could be presented sequentially and then we debate both of them together. Is that okay? Chairperson, prepare to present on items six and seven.

4.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you very much. I stand here to move a motion for the House to adopt a report of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on a field visit to Murchison Falls National Park that happened between 11 May and 13 May 2013.

The objectives of the field visit were to:
    i) Acquire detailed information about Uganda Wildlife Authority’s conservation activities, achievements and challenges and;
    ii) To find out the infrastructure provided under the Protected Areas Management for Sustainable Tourism Project;
    iii) To find out the extent to which the oil exploration companies protect the environment while conducting their activities. 

In the methodology, we used meetings and guided tours. Allow me to lay the minutes of the meetings we held with the different categories of people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS KABAHENDA: For matters of time, I would like to request the Members to turn with me to page 6 so that we go through the observations and recommendations of this report.

    i) Proposed establishment of golf courses on 50 hectares at Murchison Falls National Park without proper justification. A prominent local investor’s intent to construct two golf courses in the park, one near Paara Safari Lodge and the other one near Chobe Safari Lodge is likely to upset the national park’s eco-system and subsequently lead to loss of huge amounts of revenue.

    ii) Failure to sell out all the gorilla permits is partly caused by tour operators who charge exorbitant prices for the permits, which has discouraged some tourists from buying them. A permit is supposed to cost $500 but tour operators sometimes double or triple the dues.

    iii) Unauthorised encroachment on Murchison Falls National Park land by Civil Aviation Authority. The Civil Aviation Authority has encroached on 12 acres of park land at Pakuba Airfield by extending a fence from the original boundary mark. A written request was sent by Uganda Wildlife Authority to Civil Aviation Authority to iron out this problem but Civil Aviation Authority is yet to respond. 

    iv) Poor road network in all national parks; the money allocated for roads is not enough and the poor road network on the tourism destinations is an observation that the members made.

    v) The loss of lives of wildlife staff while carrying out their conservation duties. This happens when armed poachers shoot at the staff or set traps and snares for the staff.   

    vi) Loss of huge amounts of money by the Uganda Wildlife Authority staff in the course of transporting it to the banks and at the national park gates by thieves who have intelligence information that the money is stored there. The money is usually being taken to banks in Kasese, Masindi and Moroto. Inadequate staff to watch over the boundaries allows for informal tourists who evade payment.

    vii) Limited and unaffordable accommodation facilities in the national parks for the ordinary Ugandan, which hampers promotion of domestic tourism. For example, Chobe Safari Lodge and Paara Lodge are the only two places providing accommodation at Murchison Falls National Park. The two top-notch facilities are very expensive and cannot be afforded by ordinary Ugandans like students and other back packers. 

    viii) Poaching is still a big problem in the national parks and poachers target animals like elephants for ivory, chimpanzees and some reptiles. This substantially reduces the number of animals in the park yet it is expensive to restock. 

    ix) Oil exploration activities pose a present and future danger to the national parks. The animals leave their natural habitat and go out to the communities where they become soft targets for the poachers and of course also, they destroy property and hurt people and environment is distorted. 

    x) Increasing population in the communities; the number of people surrounding the national parks is ever increasing. This puts pressure on the land while the demand for food goes up, a situation which is likely to lead to poaching since most of the people surrounding the park are poor. Also, the increasing populations are likely to encroach on the park land and compete with the wildlife population.

    xi) Problem animals; some animals leave the national parks and go to the communities and destroy gardens thus causing untold suffering to the local people. This has created hostility among the local people. An example was when we read a petition from Nwoya on animals that had destroyed people’s crops and houses and even killed some people.

Mr Speaker, I would like to go to the recommendations because 6.1 is looking at the Protected Areas Management of Sustainable Tourism project and the details of what we discovered are there but the committee observed that the oil companies involved in exploration are doing their best to protect and restore the environment. For example at Jobi site, the environment was restored to its original setting and it is hard to tell whether any activity ever took place there. One of the challenges identified was noise from the exploration sites, which scares away the animals.

Recommendations 

    i. Domestic tourism should be highly promoted in order to boost tourism in the country.
    ii. The amount of money allocated for roads in national parks should be increased to facilitate movement of people to and from the national parks.
    iii. Construction of golf courses should be done outside the national park.
    iv. Communities around the national parks should be encouraged and involved to appreciate the importance of conservation of wildlife. 

In conclusion, Uganda has massive tourism potential which needs to be fully harnessed in order to earn more foreign exchange from the sector. The Uganda Wildlife Authority is trying their best to harness this potential but they need the cooperation of all stakeholders if they are to fulfil this uphill task. I beg to report and I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, allow me again to move a motion for the House to adopt a report of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on assessing the effects of oil exploration on tourism in the Murchison Falls National Park and ascertaining the tourism facilities under the Protected Areas Management Sustainable Tourism Project. This happened between 30 May and 2 June 2013. I request Members to allow me to read a summary of the observations as picked from the bigger report to save time.

Observations

1. 	The committee observed that the first house to be constructed experienced cracks in the walls and in the foundation during the defective period and a consultant was hired to find out why that was happening. This observation falls under the PAMSTU construction and the consultant identified the following causes:
    a) The cracks were caused by the runoff water, the soil texture was so porous that it has little capacity to hold water and the fishing communities destroyed the floating buoyant that were anchored as boundary marks on the water. 

	Mr Speaker, these problems were minimized by constructing pavements to channel away the water from the buildings and reinforcing the structures with high density metal and planting grass on the bare surfaces of the ground. 

    b) On the oil areas in the national parks, the committee observed that the oil companies involved in the oil exploration were doing their best to restore the environment as was after installing the oil ridges in the exploration areas. For example in Jobi, the environment was restored and one cannot tell that any activity ever took place there.

    c)  If the oil companies continued with the same trend, then tourism and oil exploration would coexist without any difficulties. The only challenge faced is during the exploration process when the noise pollution from the site scares away the animals. However, this is normalizing in the affected areas but more effort will be required to promote integrated and co-existent activities.

    d)  The same practice of restoring the environment is not being implemented in the exploration areas outside the park and there is degradation of the land of the communities in such areas. 

    e) Although the exploration companies have a disposal collection centre at Tangi in Nwoya District, there is no policy established on waste management disposal by the National Environment Management Authority. 

    f) All the waste from the northern block is collected at Tangi disposal site which is being used as a holding site while waiting for the next move from the National Environment Management Authority and these are dragging the process.

    g)  The community of the Bagungu that live in Buvule I area complained of non-employment of the youth in these oil fields, not even as usual casual labourers yet they are energetic and can provide the labour. 

    h)  The communities do not benefit even from any business like supply of food stuff to the camps and yet they think that is the only way they would be able to get some income from the oil companies.

    i)  NEMA is taking too long to come up with a policy on waste disposal especially from the oil and mineral exploration. 

Recommendations

    1. Nema expeditiously develops a law and regulations on the disposal of waste from the oil exploration. 
    2. The oil companies should employ the locals as well especially the youth in the oil exploration areas as casual labourers.
    3. The oil exploration companies should extend the same practice of restoring the environment that they are using in the national parks to the communities where they are doing oil exploration to what it was at the time of starting the exploration. 

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, while the oil companies involved in the oil exploration are trying to restore the environment in the exploration which will see tourism and oil co-existing without difficulty, there is a challenge of noise pollution that scares away the animals and waste disposal which are being handled. The noise should be contained so that we don’t lose out on our tourism product. We need resources - minerals and wildlife. The committee hopes that the implementation of its recommendations in these reports will lead to the harmonious existence of tourism and oil exploration in this region. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and I thank the committee for being very proactive in this sector and I can tell you that the Office of the Speaker is very happy with this progress coming from that committee. 

Hon. Members, there are two motions for adoption and I propose the question that we debate them both to take your contributions on both of them. The first motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on a field visit to Murchison Falls National Park. The second motion is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on assessing the effect of oil exploration on tourism in Murchison Falls National Park and ascertaining the tourism facilities under the Protected Areas Management Sustainable Tourism. Those are the two reports that I now propose for your debate. Debate starts now. Three minutes each.

4.29
MS JESCA ABABIKU: (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and I want to also thank the committee for the report. UWA is not only faced by the mentioned problems but also the issue of border conflicts. Therefore, I want to know from the Government how far it has gone with the implementation of the demarcation of the border between Adjumani and Amuru because it is affecting the operation on East Madi Wildlife Reserve; where UWA is operating. 

I want to know whether my district cannot be given seeds. A lot of destruction has been done; these issues are not only in Nwoya, Murchison Falls and so forth but in many other parts of this country. As a means of recovery, the rains have started. So I am requesting for seeds. Can I be given seeds so that I can give the affected people to plant since the rains have started?

There was another issue of the road which was mentioned; all the roads are bad. But again, there is indication that funds were released. Can we be informed the extent the released money has been used? You stated that all the roads are bad and yet we released the money. How much did you receive and what have we received from that?

There was also the issue of the noise generated. The effect is so adverse that the animals are moving away. The animals are the key commodities that we have. Now that they are moving away, what specific strategies are we going to derive to ensure that the noise is contained? What methods are you going to use?

There was the issue of the Civil Aviation; there is no response yet. Mr Speaker, tourism is now seen as a viable area that can boost the economy of this country and the encroachment is very high. I want to know what the ministry is going to do about it because we want to see immediate response –(Member timed out_)

4.48
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank the committee for the report that they have given to us. However, I have these few observations. 

In that report, they said that the exploration is doing well and that they are doing their best to restore the environment. But whatever they have realised is that the exploration that is taking place outside the national park is not taking care of environmental restoration. We thought that NEMA was working hand in hand with the people who are doing the exploration. Is it in their interest that restoration of this environment be done only in the park and ignore the parts outside the park?

Mr Speaker, last week, we had these people in the committee of Human Rights before us. We were interested in the rights of the people especially those who are affected by the animals. We told them that there is a lot of noise in the exploration area and that is the reason why the animals are leaving those areas. The animals are even leaving Uganda and going into other countries where there is less noise. That means that as a country, we are losing animals and I do not know when they will come back and how we can own them. 

To a greater extent, those animals are going to invade the people around, destroy crops and even kill some people. When we asked them, they said they have technology where sound is detected and so animals can move around without any problem. Today, we have got a report that the animals are running way. Why are they giving contradicting information? The committee of tourism went to the ground and found a lot of noise. The committee on human rights was told there is no problem. This is a contradiction and we are both committees of Parliament. So can we have a responsible office, especially the minister concerned to tell us what is happening? Is there any technology that will help stop our animals from leaving for the neighbouring countries and also ensure that our people are not affected by these animals – (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of tourism is of paramount importance in as far as our resources are concerned. But I want to pose a question to the minister. I know that you have put a lot of emphasis on the oil sector at the expense of other sectors including tourism. 

In our committee on National Economy, as we were interacting with Uganda Tourism Board, they raised a serious concern that we cannot compete favourably with our counterparts in the East African Region because of the meagre resource we inject in tourism.  We were informed that Kenya invests over $5 million per year in tourism. Rwanda invests over $2 million, Tanzania, over $3 million and Uganda invests less than $500,000. If you compare that with what our counterparts invest, there is a big difference. 

I request for our intervention. Of course the minister will tell us that there are budgetary constraints. But we must come in as Parliament particularly during the next budget process to invest more in tourism. If we invest heavily in tourism, we could earn even better than in the oil in which we have placed much hope. 

Furthermore, they talked about domestic tourism. We are greatly lacking in domestic tourism. If you asked us MPs, who of us has ever carried out voluntary domestic tourism on our own, not during parliamentary committee work; how many of us have toured the various – (Member timed out.)

4.55
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report and I would like to join my colleagues to express my views about the report. One, Government got a loan to improve the infrastructure in the tourism sector that was mismanaged. A commission of inquiry was set up, I think headed by a judge; we would like to know the outcome of the report and how far the ministry has gone in attending to the recommendations that were made by that committee. Mr Speaker, we are the generation that is paying for this loan and we would like to know what exactly this loan did. 

Secondly, the committee observed that there are intentions of setting up golf courses in the national parks. They have recommended that golf courses be built outside national parks but it appears there was a presidential directive that space or land be provided to the investors to set up a golf course in the national park. Can we be advised on the status of this matter? 

Thirdly, the committee has also indicated that there is a conflict between Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) and Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA). In fact, that CAA encroached on the land of the Uganda Wildlife Authority. Can the ministry be able to tell us how far they have gone in resolving that conflict? 

In the Vision 2040, it is indicated that the road network in national parks be given priority. We would like to know how far the ministry has gone in implementing this Vision 2040. 

Recently, we passed the oil laws and in those laws, we had provisions that the National Environment Management Authority prepares regulations to be brought before this Parliament for our approval. Up to now, NEMA has not brought the regulations and these regulations have serious effects in the implementation of activities in the oil sector. We would like also to know how far NEMA has gone in preparing these resolutions because the effect, if these activities go on unchecked, will be disastrous – (Member timed out.)

4.58
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank hon. Flavia Kabahenda with her team but I also want to thank the management of UWA for the good work done so far. Mr Speaker, I can assure you that a very big number of our parliamentarians do not visit parks and yet they have the money; because I have on several occasions interacted with the ED of UWA – Dr Sseguya and he actually interested me in going to Lake Mburo National Park and I took my kids there. The charges were lower than the charges for the foreigners. So, what MPs fear to do - the money is less. Stop talking about money being too much because what we consume in bars is higher than what we should be consuming when we go to national parks and scientifically, when you spend a day very happy, you will die later. This is scientifically true but people here are very fake; they can’t even go to have a look at an elephant.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, in 2004, I had chance to travel by road from Maputo to Mbabane. I was struggling to get a good job and I saw a very wonderful park after Lomas before you reach Manzini in Swaziland. This park has elephants and it is surrounded by an electric fence. There is no problem between animals and human beings. The problem with Ugandans is that you travel but when you see, you close your eyes. What is wrong with this thing being imported – and I am happy I am debating when the Minister for Tourism is seated here and the Executive Director is seated here. Please, why don’t you fence off those parks? Whenever I travel to Mbarara, I see a dead zebra. In Lake Mburo National Park, the cars are finishing the animals and even people are complaining that the animals are actually competing with them for food. Why don’t we put simple electric fences and we fence them off?

I am very disturbed by poachers killing people who are looking after animals in the parks. Now, who has the right to kill another? A national park official is looking after animals and somebody comes to kill an elephant and they kill the person who is actually doing the work. I don’t know whether this Parliament has got the powers to give UWA something to do about these poachers. 

Mr Speaker, lastly I want to talk about the killing of elephants in this country – (Member timed out.) 

5.01
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for giving us this elaborate report. The committee came up with a recommendation that domestic tourism must be promoted and I wonder how or what the ministry is doing to promote this domestic tourism. In 2012, I tried to move with my children to this national park in Uganda but I saw nothing like promotion of domestic tourism. I am a local tourist and one thing that I found out is that there is no accommodation; the available accommodation in Murchison Falls National Park is very expensive and always booked by the foreigners so much that the hotels are fully booked and with our Ugandan money, you cannot compete with the dollars even if you are an MP. I am an MP but all the same I could not compete favourably. 

Mr Speaker, in Zambia, what they do to promote domestic tourism is making the locals pay 10 times less than what the foreigners do pay. Also, I would like to urge the ministries that we really need accommodation targeting the local tourist. That is my opinion to the ministry.

Concerning the roads, during my visit to one of the most exciting sites in Murchison Falls, the road became too bad. We were warned that if it rained we might skid off. Fortunately, I am an MP and I have a four-wheel drive; so, I dared to move but some people who had small cars could not move because of the bad roads. So, since the committee has recommended that domestic tourism or local tourism be promoted, I would like to know what the ministry is doing to that effect.

Finally, about the oil, we are sending a lot of revenue to that sector and one of the reports that the committee has just given is that our youth are not getting employment there. So, who are these people who are taking the work that our youth are supposed to be doing and in any case, when a project like this comes, the local community or the surrounding community are supposed to benefit and if I were – (Member timed out.) 

5.04
MS ROSE LILLY AKELLO (Independent, Woman Representative, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this elaborate report. I want clarification from the honourable Minister for Tourism. I come from a district where one of the parks of Uganda - Kidepo National Game Park - belongs and that is Kaabong District. We have a road whose opening His Excellency, the President himself directed, from Kapedo Sub-County to South Sudan but up to now, UWA has decided not to open even after the central government has given funds for this road to be opened so that it can connect South Sudan to Kaabong District or to Uganda. 

Secondly, there is the issue of UWA encroaching into the people’s land. You know very well that the NRM government brought peace to Karamoja by removing the gun. And our people used to live in the mountains, but now people are coming down settling there. But there is this issue we call the corridor for the animals which means that there is a lot of land which they are removing from the people instead of allowing our communities to cultivate and we produce food. We want to avoid these issues of relief every year going to Karamoja and in particular Kaabong. 

I want the honourable minister to clarify to the people because this is an issue which is biting us in the district. Even as politicians, we are having a problem especially in Dodoth West constituency where Kidepo National Game Park lies. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.07
MS JUDITH FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank honourable Kabahenda with her team for the very great job done. For the last two years, my people of Agago District that border Kidepo National Game Park in the sub-counties of Paimol and Lapono have not had peace with the animals. They have not had a chance to cultivate because whenever they try to get to their land to cultivate, the animals especially elephants destroy the crops and they also hurt human beings. We have been reporting this to the ministry, I wonder why the ministry especially UWA itself went and told my people when I was not there - I was told, that there is no government policy that allows for compensation of people whose crops have been destroyed. So I wonder whether the ministry can include this in their planning to come up with such a policy such that people can claim because for the last two years or more, my people have not been able to reap whatever they cultivate from their land.

I want to find out whether there is an animal corridor in Agago District because I grew up not knowing that there is an animal corridor and people are being told, “This part is the animal corridor.” If there is anything of that kind, honourable minister, kindly let the people know because at least as far as I know, there is no animal corridor in Agago District and you are allowing elephants to come and destroy our crops every year in and out. This year I am going to tell my people to kill - I will actually help them to kill elephants. That is what I will do because for the last two years people have not been able to eat. So that is the first issue. 

The second issue is what actually the committee emphasises. It is about how to help the communities around the animal corridor and around parks. It has come to my notice that most of the communities that live around the parks do not get any social kind of help from the government to enable them co-exist with the animals because it is a fact that these animals come up to their compound; for instance, we have a very nice edible rat we call Anyeri. It is edible. Now UWA is stopping us from eating Anyeri and yet they come up to the doors. What are you going to give us to motivate us from eating Anyeri?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Just free legal advice from a lawyer; the law prohibits and gives authority for arrest of anybody who is found committing or has committed or is about to commit. So what you have declared is an intension to commit an offense but within the House you have immunities and privileges but if you go and repeat those statements in your constituency, I am not sure whether this House will be able to extend the same immunities there.

5.11
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Just in case my three minutes run out before I complete, I would like to invite the entire House to come for domestic tourism in the beautiful district of Tororo where we have the indomitable Tororo rock as a tourist attraction and the rock paintings of Mawundo in Nagongera Sub-County in West Budama North. 

That said, I listened very carefully to the committee report and I was seriously disturbed that a serious person known as an investor can harbour an intention to construct a golf course in a national park. My understanding of a national park and tourism carried out in a national park is that people go to a protected area to do game tracking, bird watching, to look at reptiles and protected species. 

Now golf is a completely different game. It is an elite sport, you go teeing and these two activities are mutually exclusive. There is no way you can tee while looking at elephants or tracking elephants. This activity should be totally discouraged and I request this House to stand together as one and condemn this and advise Government to drop this idea completely. 

Domestic tourism; a lot has been said on this subject but I only want to add one point. If we want to promote patriotism, we should not teach it in schools. We should encourage Ugandans to travel look at their country and explore and they will naturally love this great country. If you travel to Mbarara, where I proudly got a woman and you visit Lake Mburo National Park, you will love the place. If you go to Karamoja, there is a beautiful Kidepo National Park. The problem is that the minister must now plan to provide camping sites for Ugandans who cannot afford to pay for hotel accommodation. You should also plan to provide tented accommodation for the low end tourism so that you are able to attract both high end premium tourists who are foreigners and we the locals who can carry our tents and we camp. 

Lastly, oil exploration; there is an attraction of big money but we have got to weigh this against the long term effect of exploration and the need to conserve and to protect for future generation this wonderful resource, our national park.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we now reduce the time to two minutes? Two minutes, please.

DR TWA-TWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report they have presented. However, I am really dismayed because a human being is the most selfish animal I have ever seen. There is something we call human rights but there is also animal rights. Really, we have driven animals a very long distance to a very small space. If I give Uganda as an example, where most of us stay as of now, there used to be animals but now, we have confined them to national parks. Even that little space we have left them, we are still interfering with them. We would like to construct golf courts, to construct aviation fields, etcetera. This is wrong. Animals are affected by noise and vibrations; all these things affect their wellbeing, including breathing.

So, I would like to urge Government to plan effectively to protect the animals and at the same time, we should plan and utilise this very useful resource by attracting tourists from abroad and also from within because it is very easy, instead of going down to drill oil, we should cultivate this wild life so that we get the money very easily.

5.17
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the chairperson for the report. I will give my few submissions towards the report especially regarding NEMA. Much as they have talked about delayed implementation, NEMA should come in full-blast because I do not know how the ministries can license all companies when we know there are side-effects in the exploration of oil. One time, we went to Nwoya and a man had been left in a village alone because he sold part of his land because it had deposits. Every crop is yellow. We gave a report to Parliament and I do not know how far they have moved to finding a solution. It was a complaint raised by the area MP and we went there to assess the situation. 

So, the minister concerned, please, make sure that before the exploration takes effect, link up with NEMA to ensure that our people do not suffer.

In the same vein, when we visited that place, I wondered why Ugandans want local jobs; they say they want to do simple jobs on the site but we got information that some Ugandans are being trained for jobs in the oil sector. They also briefed us that in the oil sector, jobs like slashing are very few. So, we should not only look at casual employment but also train Ugandans to take on those senior positions.

Lastly, my submission is on marketing tourism. When you reach Nairobi, the first thing, which attracts you are the sites for tourism but when you come to –(Member timed out.)

5.19
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. Straight away, I want to comment on the availability of jobs and supply of food in the area. I remember when we were debating the Oil and Gas Bills, one of the issues we emphasised was the local content. However, when the committee talks about the Bagungu not participating actively in the local jobs, – when we were interacting with the communities, we were told that companies got the impression that people in the area were used to fishing and they may not easily be integrated in other jobs. So, I think it is the responsibility of the government to sensitize people that they should not restrict themselves to what they are used to and to be open to the new available opportunities in the area.

On the issue of food, recently, I watched the President encouraging the area residents to produce food. Therefore, I think for these companies to import food from outside the region, they have not yet established a clear strategy of involving themselves in agriculture. Leaders in that area should encourage people to come up with a strategy to engage in agriculture such that they have enough supply of food to the companies that are working there.

On the issue of NEMA, yesterday, we were interacting with the Ministry of Water and Environment. They informed us that much as NEMA is a skeleton sector, they have come up with offices in the Albertine area and I do not know why the Ministry of Tourism cannot collaborate with NEMA to ensure that they effectively implement all those policies that are required in order to protect the environment.

Mr Speaker, we already have a law in place; I do not think we need another law. (Member timed out.)

5.22
MR MARTIN BAHINDUKA (Independent, Ntoroko County, Ntoroko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for according me this opportunity. I thank the chairperson for the good report. However, there is something I obviously expected in this report and I did not hear about - the issue of how the people down there are directly benefitting from these very game reserves and game parks. To me, that is the most important issue. You cannot continue telling people to protect animals unless they know how beneficial they are to them.

This is because these illiterate people do not know that the revenues collected are injected into the economy. That is something they do not understand at all. So, I would like to know as well - what has UWA done to make sure that the local people do understand and get to know why you are doing so much protection? For example, in my constituency, people think about the game reserves as something abstract and I think this is the biggest question that they will ask, “Why would we protect something we cannot benefit from?”

I do not blame them for poaching; you cannot protect something you are not going to benefit from. So, if we are to stop them, for example, we could – I am just suggesting, maybe the Ministry of Tourism would call the local leaders and give them a free tour through the game reserves or national park or any other, so that people can get to appreciate. If you do not do that, the only way that my people will know in Ntoroko that the game reserve is important is if they can go and kill an elephant, a kob or an antelope to benefit from its meat.

So, this is the most important thing that we should look at. I expected the committee to give us examples of how the people are benefitting directly from these game reserves. Thank you very much.

5.24
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. I also want to say that I am proud to be a member of the Busoga Tourism Initiative. Hon. Members, early next month, all roads are leading to Busoga to a place called Buyende; there is a hill called Kagulu, the chief guest is the President of Uganda, His Excellence Yoweri Kaguta Museveni and the theme of the day will be “Kagulu Climbing Challenge”. Chameleon will be live. (Laughter)

Besides that, I have only been surprised that in Uganda, when somebody talks about tourism, their mind goes to game parks and game reserves. But there is only one ingredient that I would urge the Ministry of Tourism to include on their menu, they should be very innovative.

Early this year, I went to Zanzibar to participate in their Mapenduzi event, which was taking place in January but after the football match, we were taken around for a tour. As we were moving around, I saw many things different from those we see in Uganda. Surprisingly, when we reached the place they were taking us to, we were only shown a number of trees like jackfruit, coffee and some few monkeys. (Member timed out.) (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mbale Municipality is next. Hon. Members, I have all of you on my list. I will read the list after the Member for Mbale Municipality has made his submission.

5.27
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report. However, right from the onset, I want to tell this House and the whole country that this country has not invested in tourism at all. For us to be able to milk the cow, we must feed it. So, there is nothing. I would like to tell you that when you look at our neighbours, I will take the latest and the youngest one – Rwanda - who has just come on board recently. Rwanda injects $10 million in tourism, Kenya $30 million and Uganda only $300,000. We are not even able to carry out an exhibition on tourism. 

When you talk about domestic tourism, it is wishful thinking. People are poor and there is no infrastructure, there is no public transport. How will people travel to national parks? So, this is wishful thinking because you have got to improve local roads and hotels. People cannot afford to go and stay in hotels because they do not have the money.

For us to be able to benefit from tourism, we must put in money. People are looking at oil; this oil is going to come to an end and animals will stay. There was a time when there were three T’s - Tourism, Tea and Tobacco and all these are long gone but our neighbours have put in money and that is how they have attracted tourism. 

One time, I was telling people that when you land at Nairobi Airport, you get six big planes coming in with tourists because the Kenyans have developed their tourism; the roads in the national parks, the hotel industry and everything else is developed.

But in this country, tourism has been ignored and I even keep wondering, why should we have ministers of tourism? It is a waste of money; three ministers in that ministry, what are they doing when they cannot even sustain that department? Therefore, I am talking about tourism and I want to tell you about the untapped beauty in this country –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, I will have Nakapiripirit, Kassanda North, Ngora, Kabula, Budadiri East, and then finally, hon. Dick Kasolo.

5.29
MS ROSE IRIAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report well-done. I talk as a cattle keeper and a pastoralist who loves land. What happens with the cattle keeper? We all need land, we need to protect and to preserve land but what happens with those who need land and grass to feed the cattle? 

I am not against protecting land in my district - there was one time we interfaced with UWA; my people went to graze their animals and they were chased away as if they are not Ugandans. They need to preserve that land to feed their animals and not for anything.

I know that we all need food, we need meat, we need milk, we need animals and many other basics in life, but why are you against the cattle keeper? A cattle keeper needs to also be protected. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Kassanda North, I am informed you are a member of the committee. So, you cannot debate. Ngora.

5.31
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the Committee on Tourism for a good report presented to this House. I have the following to mention; one is tourism marketing as a potential for Uganda’s development. I want to give an example of many different countries; immediately you arrive in most of the countries, or at any airport, you are already given options on which tourism you would require, either watching people’s culture or traditions. In Uganda, we are rich with traditions; that is a potential that the outside world needs to know. It attracts money even to the poor people that hon. Wamai talked about - he said they cannot enjoy tourism. No, the people themselves can be potential for tourism if they are well organised. Therefore, I think there is need for innovation in order to have Uganda as a tourism destination.

When we were celebrating 50 years of Independence, we talked very well about Uganda, how it is a pearl of Africa but as a visitor, immediately I reach Entebbe Airport, there is nothing that shows me that Uganda is actually a tourism destination. There is totally nothing. It is important that we market our traditions; for example, the Ateso have a wonderful culture and the Bagisu too. When we were in Makerere, we used to have cultural –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Tourism is very important to this country and I request the Minister of Tourism to be very assertive. I remember in the previous parliaments, we recommended that the Minister of Tourism should come out with a strategy, for instance, start with one national park, with a full infrastructure. I remember in one of the reports, we recommended that at least, one national park should be connected to electricity. How much do you need so that that could be used as a pilot to others?

As hon. Bitekyerezo said, when you move from Mbarara, Lyantonde through Lake Mburo National Park, the whole mix of animals, dairy industry and wild life, we are not benefitting anything because the animals go to the farms where there is the dairy industry and transmit diseases because the ticks, East Coast Fever is just rampant in those areas. Therefore, you kill the dairy industry, even the animals because the national park is not fenced; they are killed by wild animals.

Why don’t you be assertive? You have a good will of Parliament and you could say, “This year, we want a budget to fence off one national park”, and put up the entire necessary infrastructure. For instance, when you land at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport, you can see a well fenced national park; it is an electric fence. When you leave the airport in Namibia towards the capital city, you see that their parks are well fenced and organised. But here we are disorganised; what is the problem? The Minister of Tourism should be more assertive and tell us what you want to achieve. 

I would like to agree with Members that MPs should also be very cautious when budgeting – (Member timed out­­.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can see the amount of time the Speaker has allocated for this debate. That means that the Speaker takes this matter of tourism very serious. The matter of tourism is very close to my heart. So let me hear from the Member for Budadiri East. 

5.36
MR JOHNY SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do commend the committee for the good work, but I expected them to tackle the issue of corruption in these game parks. 

I come from Mount Elgon and my constituency is the custodian of Wagagai peak. So I know what I am talking about. How do the poachers enter the national parks? They always have prior arrangements with the game rangers, and when they fail to share the spoils of poaching, they start shooting and killing one another. Under what circumstances are the communities allowed to go and plant in the game parks. And when the crops are matured, then they are cut down and the communities are sent away; they claim ignorance. It is after they realise that there is an inspection team coming in from the top that the game rangers claim they did not know about the activities of the communities. The communities are sent away after selling their items and investing in crop farming in the game parks. 

The second issue to the minister is about collaborative management. Uganda Wildlife Authority has done well sweet-talking the communities and accepting to undertake collaborative management. They are given some land in metres on the forest reserves or game parks where they can plant friendly crops; UWA has done that. But the challenge is that the minister is not providing resources as stated in the agreements. 

Lastly, on the marking of the boundaries, if you go to Mount Elgon, I was with the director in charge of the eastern region and we shared all these issues –(Member timed out.)

5.39
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE: (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, many issues have been talked about. But there is the issue of tour operators who have monopolised the tourism sector. They are inflating gorilla permits and they are not allowing online booking – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, is my colleague right to miss lead this House and the whole country that the tour operators who are doing a great job in promoting tourism in this country are inflating the charges when actually the charges are determined by Ministry of Tourism and UWA; are you in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, the observation is captured from the report, but those issues are not determined by the operators; they are determined somewhere else. 

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. But I have information that the tourism operators intimidate even the minister –(Interjections)– yes; if the minister was here, she would confess. We need to market tourism online, but these people are against online marketing –(Interruption)

MS LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, when the Member says that the tour operators intimidated even the minster that means the minister is not in charge of that sector and that the minister should leave that office. 

Is the Member in order to make such insinuations when he is not in position to substantiate on such a big claim?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kasolo, would you like to substantiate this issue of intimidation of the tour operators to the minister?

MR KYEYUNE: Mr Speaker, as Parliament, we had proposed that gorilla permits be put online so that tourists can book online. But because tour operators were losing business – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I asked you to substantiate before I can rule on the issue of the tour operators intimidating the minister.  What facts do you have?

MR KYEYUNE: Mr Speaker, I withdraw the statement because the minister is my friend – (Laughter) – and the Government Chief Whip put it right that if she was intimidated then she deserves to leave her office; so I choose to withdraw the statement. 

But this is a very serious statement; gorilla permits are booked online in Rwanda, but in Uganda, it is not the case –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I want to give information to my colleague hon. Kasolo that if you want to go to Queen Elizabeth National Park to watch gorillas, you just go online. Last Christmas, I was in Queen Elizabeth National Park and I booked online. So the information you are giving is quite misleading to the country. 

MR KYEYUNE: I was giving this information based on the information given to us by Dr Seguya when we went to the field and Dr Seguya is there. So if I am giving wrong information, then it is Dr Seguya to blame. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you inviting a stranger to defend himself?

MR KYEYUNE: No, Mr Speaker. Given the fact that my information is outdated, I rest my case. 

5.45
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As part of the country hosting the biggest portion of Murchison Falls and the host of this new resource, I have been able to go through – as an environmentalist and as a natural resource manager, I believe in sustainable development and co-existence.

My disappointment however, is that even when we know that oil is finite and that the Albertine Graben, which is the second globally, in terms of ecological biodiversity, is a long lasting infinite tourist destination, we have not put in place an integrated inter-ministerial development plan for the tourists using this oil resource, which could have been a catalyst to develop what we want in this very interesting area. What I have noticed is the fact that we have given the oil and gas sector too much hype yet we should be investing in what we want to have after getting the oil. That is where I would want Parliament to put more effort.

In other words, we should invest in tourism; we should invest in environmental management; and we should invest in making that place a tourist attraction point. That is because some conservative tourists fear oil industries. So, we have a challenge of wiping that fear out of them. But we can only do that by use of roads and the general infrastructure. 

In South Africa, for example, when the mining sector was affecting the wildlife, they turned it into an opportunity by doing game ranching. That is why most of the parks in South Africa are actually doing game ranching. When the animals ran away, the owners of that land to which they had run, fenced them off, built big hotels around them and they make a lot of money. If you go, for example, to the Mbulo Lodges and so on – these are not natural game parks, they are just game ranches and are doing well as tourist centres.

Yesterday, we talked about why Kenyans are now managing our tourists, it is because of the Utali – and the Jinja Crested Crane concept is in line with that.
So, I would want to see how that concept relates to the hotels in places like Kidepo, Mweya and Kabalega to create more jobs because not everybody will get money from the oil proceeds. We would rather get some eco-tourism and some community conservation from which our people can benefit. What is important is to make sure that as we do this new development, which we wouldn’t want –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MR JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for a job well done. This House has on several occasions demanded for a comprehensive marketing strategy from the Ministry of Tourism, but we have never got it. I thought that would help us in at least directing commensurate resources to that sector for us to get the necessary benefits. 

Instead we have had embassies in prime areas in the various cities not being utilized. Actually if anything, they just project a negative image of Uganda because of their being in a state of disrepair. So, that is why we need that marketing strategy.

In order to get maximum benefits from the oil sector, there must be coexistence. Oil exploration should not be at the expense of the other eco-tourism systems. So, I suppose what we need is the detailed plan on how the ecosystems can co-exist. Like my colleague has said, we should not put so much emphasis on the oil at the expense of the other resources, because indeed, they are longer lasting resources; we need to look after them.

Recently, when the Committee on Human Rights was interacting with the Minister for Energy, he assured us that there are new technologies that can detect the oil in the ground without making noise to disturb the peace of the animals in that area; they can go about their business and can even mate without interruptions. So, I would like actually the minister –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now have the member for Bubulo. It is her maiden speech and so no interruptions.

5.51
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for the good work done. I would like to make my contribution based on marketing. I feel that the Ministry of Tourism has not been aggressive enough. They have to develop a sense of initiative. For example, if you went to Cairo in Egypt, you realise that tourism is on the lips of every Egyptian. When you go to a shop to buy something, you will not leave that shop without the attendant asking you whether you have visited the Pyramids, the hanging Church and so on. Everywhere you go, even on the boats along the River Nile, all the Egyptians have this tourism information at their fingertips. How can we develop a mechanism through the Ministry of Tourism to sensitize all Ugandans to have that sense of belonging in order for them to pass on such messages to whoever comes to Uganda? 
We can start with the domestic market before we go to the external one. This will enable them to pass on this information about the tourism sites in Uganda. Every Ugandan can be able to provide such marketing information to whoever comes to Uganda. How can we improve on that so that we use a deliberate mechanism that can involve all Ugandans? 

I want to think that it is the Ministry of Tourism that has to get aggressive enough. They can make use of the mass media to deliver messages that can encourage Ugandans to sell Uganda to the foreigners who come here and also sell tourism to them too. Without that mechanism, we will not manage. We need to copy the example of Egypt. We can even send some MPs to Egypt; I am sure they will prove what I am talking about. Egyptians are doing this because they know they get a living from tourism. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable member. That is hitting the ground, as they say. Okay, let me now have the Leader of Opposition for half a minute – okay, two minutes.

5.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Ogutu): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I was about to complain that half a minute is very short a time. Anyway, thank you for the addition. 

I would like to thank the committee for doing this great work. I am really concerned about how the NRM Government looks at tourism, which has great potential for our economy. I notice that we have not invested much in tourism. We are like the very unthoughtful cattleman who milks the cow so much yet they don’t feed it.
Worldwide, about one billion people go visiting other countries as tourists. Of these, Uganda receives about one million. The latest report shows that Uganda with the little investment is number seven as a tourist destination in Africa but she earns only $1 billion. Neighbouring Kenya earns over $2 billion and so does Tanzania; but they invest a little bit more so definitely they reap where they have sowed. The worldwide earnings from tourism are over $1 trillion. Of that, we earn $1 billion. The growth of tourism in the world is 4 percent per year meaning it is an avenue we should be investing in instead of investing in some of the things we invest in but mostly on consumption –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I am sorry I never wanted to interrupt my good friend the Leader of Opposition. The point of clarification I would like to seek is whether the Leader of Opposition is agreeing with Government because our point has been that let us invest money in infrastructure development not on consumption but what has been coming from his side has been totally different. For example, this budget year, the tax measures are going to collect Shs 90 billion but 50 percent of that is going to go on consumption. So is there any change of heart that this House can move together and invest money in infrastructure development which gives a magnificent propensity on the economy? 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much. Hon. Kakooza, there is no change of heart; even from this side, we have maintained one development and we work for development and we criticise that side if we think they are wasting our money and disinvesting it. So there is no change of heart. We just think that Government should spend more money in tourism because it has potential to give us more money. 

I also have seen that right now, over one million Ugandans directly depend on tourism as a livelihood. So it is an avenue where we must invest. The issue of fencing off parks - surely Government should plan to fence off parks. Take 10 or 100 years but start somewhere. The parks have problems when animals move around. Hon. Bitekyerezo talked about how animals are killed every day in Lake Mburo, but we can plan, budget and fence off these parks. MPs also should have initiatives to collect funds in those places neighbouring parks to fundraise to fence off parks. The corporate organisations in this country can be involved in collecting money to fence off parks. That is what I think we should be doing. Thank you so much Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I will now come to the minister who I hope has grouped her issues because you cannot certainly handle one by one. There are very many issues that have been raised and I am giving you seven minutes to sum up.

5.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (TOURISM) (Ms Agnes Akiror): Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence because I think seven minutes is not enough time to give responses to over 100 questions that have been raised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have already spent that one minute. Proceed Madam.

MS AGNES AKIROR: I thank the committee for the report and I rise to respond to the issues that the committee and my honourable colleagues have raised. I am reliably informed that my colleague, the minister, directed that the online system be opened only to Ugandan tour operators and not to the outside world. Gorilla permit fees are displayed online and we have not received any complaint of overcharge by the tourists in the ministry. 

I want to correct this; Civil Aviation Authority is not encroaching on park land. We in the ministry together with UWA are in agreement that the air field should be upgraded to international standards. 

Honourable members, roads within the parks are routinely maintained by UWA, roads to key tourist attractions and sites are being worked on by ministry of transport as you are all aware. Strategic roads are being tarmacked. Nakapiripirit to Moroto road is being worked on, Kitgum to Kidepo was upgraded to first class murrum; I used it recently in February, it is true there are unfortunate incidences of cross fires and lives have been lost but we shall come to this House with penalties that we are including in the Bill that are stringent because at times our patriotic sons and daughters, the rangers, have been shot while on duty. We provide compassionate contribution for people who are injured or when animals raid crops. Cabinet has agreed on this and this will be covered in the Wildlife Amendment Bill that Cabinet approved and it is now with the First Parliamentary Counsel.

I want to re-assure honourable colleagues that no money has ever been lost in transit to banks; the money that was lost was when thieves attacked the collection gate at Queen Elizabeth National Park and killed an accounts clerk. We are developing a cashless system to avoid any future losses at our collection points and this is being piloted in Bwindi. 

The issue of limited accommodation and unaffordable accommodation in parks; we are negotiating with Malasa Limited for reduction from the 25 mile radius exclusion zone to 5 Kilometres. These negotiations are in final stages. At Queen Elizabeth National Park, we have renovated all staff houses at mweya to cater for middle and budget accommodation, so I welcome – (Interjections) – hon. Jack Wamai, I heard you in silence so kindly let us listen to each other.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: She says they renovated them for people’s low cost accommodation not for staff. That is what she said. 

MS AGNES AKIROR: In Kidepo, we have advertised for an investor and investment offers have been awarded to three investors; Bomax Ltd, Protea Hotel, and Amproc and so they are going to construct accommodation. We are also trying to source for investors in budget accommodation. 

I want to take this opportunity to interest Members that they can actually be investors. You can come and discuss with us and invest because there are investment opportunities for low and middle budget accommodation that I know we can ably take on and this can cater for our retirement. So I want to interest you to come and be investors in the parks.

Mr Speaker, poaching has reduced. In 2012, we lost only 12 elephants. From 2013 to 2014, we have so far lost only six elephants. However, there is need to curb the vice further. What I can say is that we are revising all the regulations in the upcoming Wildlife Act (Amendment) Bill, which was recently approved by Cabinet and is now before the First Parliamentary Counsel. I seek Members’ support on this although I am very convinced they will do so.

My ministry is working with other line ministries together with all other stakeholders including the oil companies to mitigate the negative impact so as to strike a delicate balance between oil exploration and conservation. Our staff routinely oversee the activities of the oil companies in the parks. Also UWA is undertaking studies to establish the impact of oil exploration in the parks. And as soon as the study is finalised, any recommended interventions will be undertaken.

Even before exploration, animals have occasionally moved out of the park. Elephants, for example, have a very good memory and can recall the migratory route they used up to 100 years back. So, at times, they like going to neighbouring countries and return back. This is not because of the noise in the park as was raised by one colleague; it is because they have good memory. They will always go and come back.

Hon. Members, the elephants at the gate know the swamp at Tangei; this is where they prefer to stay. There are incidences where animals have run out of the parks and raided people’s crops and also destroyed property. We regret that. But I want to inform the House that we have dug trenches, for example, in a place called Kochgoma in Nwoya –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, two more minutes.
MS AGNES AKIROR: We have facilitated communities to plant red-chilli and also do bee-keeping. These are not only deterrent measures but also as income generating activities for those communities. The MP for Ntoroko said that there is no need for the community members to appreciate conservation. But we have 20 percent revenue shared with communities through their districts. We have tried to sensitise them on that.

Recently, when we were celebrating Kidepo Day, we handed a dummy cheque to the people of Kidepo who were very impressed. So, people of Kaboong District – 

Mr Speaker, we are also trying to promote domestic tourism. We have earmarked some funds to have a tourism exposé, which will be a national one this year. I invite all of you to attend it. The exposé will run from November 22 to 26. We expect that there will be exhibitions and a carnival run together with a food festival –(Interjections)– about the invitations, I urge all of you to come and join us.

But we are also trying to promote Uganda Martyrs Day, which is cerebrated on 3 June of every year. We have actually urged our partner states, Kenya and Rwanda, to join us. We hope that they will actively participate. It is all about promoting domestic tourism. We have subsidized tourism packages for students and the process to develop corporate tourism packages is ongoing.

Mr Speaker, I notice that Members raised many issues. What I am wondering about is whether I still have enough time to respond to all of them; I have answers to all of them.

Hon. Jack Wamai, I would like to inform you that we are only two ministers in this sector and not three. So, it is not good to misinform the House and the general public.

Next year, Shs 6.5 billion has been earmarked for tourism promotion and marketing –(Interjections)– I said Shs 6.5 billion. We think that will be a big push –(Interjections)– electric fencing is still under feasibility study. And once that is done, a report will be tabled in Cabinet for the necessary action.

The Commission of Inquiry Report is already before Cabinet and once Cabinet comes up with a white paper, we shall implement its recommendations.

The MP for Oyam asked what we are doing to promote domestic tourism. I would like to say that we have been trying to give them some packages where nationals pay less; I urge all of you to take advantage of this and come to visit these parks.

On the issue of problematic animals, we are doing what we can to handle it. In addition, killing of animals is not allowed under the law. So, honourable colleagues, don’t incite your constituents to kill these animals because the law will catch up with them. And as you know, you might lose on votes.

There was a question on how much nationals pay as park fees. I would like to say that adults pay Shs 15,000 only and children Shs 2500. So, please take advantage of this by taking your children there to appreciate what Uganda has to offer to them.

Then a member asked how much we gave to the communities in Kidepo. It was Shs 300 million for Kidepo and for Murchison and Queen Elizabeth parks, Shs 4.2 billion.

There are animal corridors in Karenga, Aswa and Lolim. Cabinet chaired by the President had guided that roads through the national parks should be avoided –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Chairperson of the committee, would you like to make the last prayers?

6.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TRADE, TOURISM AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank all the Members for supporting the recommendations in the report and for adding other vital ones. I also would like to thank the sector minister for addressing some of the issues raised although she has not addressed others.

I stand to speak on behalf of my committee and request that the Ministry of Tourism and the Cabinet Minister prepare a comprehensive report about the matters that have been raised in this House –(Applause)– because I feel this response was inadequate for us. So, the minister must come to give a comprehensive report.

I would like to comment on two particular issues. One is about the noise scaring away the animals. This is happening. It is minuted – we got it from the workers in the parks and the Executive Director together with all the people we interacted with during our tour. But also it is common knowledge that noise will scare the animals away. You cannot tell this House that noise cannot scare animals away. If it can scare a snake away in the House, how much would it scare away animals in their homesteads?

Mr Speaker, about the gorilla permits online - marketing anything online is very good. I want to appreciate the initiative by Uganda Wildlife Authority for introducing marketing our gorilla permits online. However, while UWA wanted to market our gorillas permits online by even declaring the prices, the tour operators were up in arms. They did not want our prices declared because they wanted to buy those permits and at times inflate the prices. Mr Speaker, this has happened; the minutes will give you the testimonies but I know that the cabinet minister is holding dialogue between UWA and the tour operators to harmonise on this issue and come up with the right procedure on how we shall market out gorilla permits online.

Mr Speaker, we, as a committee, emphasise that the tourism roads take their rightful priority as of Vision 2040. The reason why the tourism visa card was introduced – part of the reason – was to sort out the issues of waylaying our workers in the national parks when they are transporting the money to the distant banks. It happened in 2011 when we lost a member of staff who was transporting money from Murchison National Park to a bank in Moroto.

I want to end by thanking everybody and emphasising the fact that the Ministry of Tourism still owes us a comprehensive response on the matter. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. Ministry of Tourism, you owe this House a comprehensive statement on all the issues that have been raised and more that you know and are planning to boost the tourism sector, a great earner. And they have said many times that do not continue milking a cow which you are not feeding. Make the case to Parliament that more money needs to be appropriated; if it comes from you, what else will Parliament do apart from supporting you?

Hon. Members, can we have this statement within one month? (Interjections) We want something comprehensive, hon. Members.

MS AKIROR: Mr Speaker, whether it is two weeks or one month or even one week – we are comfortable with that time. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you want one week?

MS AKIROR: Yes, sure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, in one week, you come back with a comprehensive statement. It is your request; we want a comprehensive statement within one week in this House. Thank you.

Hon. Members, I will put the question to the first motion – that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the field visit to Murchison Falls National Park be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the second motion that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on assessing the effect of oil exploration on tourism in Murchison Falls National Park and ascertaining the tourism facilities under the Protected Areas Management System Sustainable Tourism be adopted. I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Chair and your committee for this work.

Hon. Members this is to inform you that the Uganda Aids Commission has organised a dialogue with the key stakeholders on the HIV Prevention and Control Bill at Hotel Africana on Tuesday 29 April 2014, starting at 8.00 a.m. until 1.00 p.m. That means you need to be back in time for 2 O’clock when Parliament re-opens.

Hon. Members, thank you for sitting this long. This House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.19 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 29 April 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)




 



 






