			

Wednesday, 22 April 2020

Parliament met at 2.38 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga,  in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to begin by welcoming hon. Anifa Kawooya, member of the Pan African Parliament. She has come with a certificate clearing her of any possibility of the coronavirus. Therefore, we welcome her. The certificate is here in my hands. (Applause)

Secondly, honourable members, the Clerk to Parliament has brought to my attention an order from court, in a matter filed by one of us – hon. Gerald Karuhanga – to challenge the powers of the function of this House. 

The matter is Miscellaneous Application No. 180 of 2020, arising out of Miscellaneous Application No. 179 of 2020, also arising out of Miscellaneous Cause No. 78 of 2020. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga vs Parliamentary Commission and the Attorney-General.

The order reads as follows: 

“This application, coming on this 21st day of April 2020 for hearing before the Honourable Lady Justice Esta Nambayo, in the presence of David K. Mpanga, Counsel for the applicant and Sitna Cherotich, Counsel of the first respondent…”

You will note, honourable members, that the second respondent was again not in court.

“It is hereby ordered as follows:

    1. Miscellaneous Application No. 179 of 2020 for a a temporary injunction be and is hereby set down for hearing on the 29th day of April 2020 at 11.00 a.m.

    2. That until the hearing and determination of Miscellaneous Application No. 179 of 2020, the status quo, pursuant to paragraph 16, 17, 18 and 19 of the affidavit of Genrald Karuhanga, sworn in support of this application, be maintained i.e the monies in the sum of Shs 10,000,000,000 (Uganda Shillings ten billion), appropriated to the first respondent under the impugned amendment to the report of the Budget Committee in Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2 Addendum 1 and 2 for Financial Year 2019/2020 remain undistributed, until the determination of Miscellaneous Application No. 179 of 2020 or if already paid, members of Parliament are ordered to dissipate or spend the same, until the hearing and final determination of Miscellaneous Application No. 179 of 2020 or until further orders of this court.”

Honourable members, by the time we received this order, I am informed that the money – the subject matter of  this suit – had been received by the Parliamentary Commission and already been disbursed, in accordance with the Supplementary Appropriation, which was passed by this House and in accordance with the laid down procedures of this House.

In the circumstances, I instruct the Attorney-General, who is a party to this matter, to come to this House and offer guidance as to how this order can be implemented. It is confusing. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, because of the curfew, we no longer have the one and a half hours a day that we used to have. So, for the Members who wanted to raise matters of national importance, please, ask questions. We shall try to expedite them with the relevant Government officials. We should go straight to the business of the House. Hon. Yeri Ofwono, hon. Tom Aza and hon. Bitangaro, please, write down questions and we shall assist in expediting them before this House.

LAYING OF PAPERS IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 31 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

PROPOSAL TO BORROW SDR 71.6 MILLION ($99.8 MILLION EQUIVALENT) ADDITIONAL FINANCING FROM IDA TO FINANCE THE COMPETITIVENESS AND ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (CEDP)

PROPOSAL TO BORROW UP TO $219.40 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) AND UA 40.060 MILLION ($55.60 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND TO FINANCE THE KAMPALA CITY ROADS REHABILITATION PROJECT (KCRRP) 

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a Government proposal to borrow SDR 99.8 million for additional financing from IDA to finance the Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project (CEDP).  

The second item is to borrow up to $219.40 million from the African Development Bank and $55.60 million from the African Development Fund to finance the Kampala City Roads Rehabilitation Project (KCRRP).

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposals are sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON
 BUDGET ON THE ANNUAL BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Budget -

2.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Budget on the annual budget estimates for Financial Year 2020/2021.

Introduction

Madam Speaker, in accordance with Article 155(4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Section 13(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended and Rules 147(2) and 173 of the Rules of Procedure; the Committee on Budget is mandated, among others, to:

    1. Examine, discuss and review the budget estimates and make appropriate recommendations to Parliament;

    2. Consider sectoral committee reports on the budget estimates referred to the committee by Parliament for reconciliation and harmonisation.

Madam Speaker, on 31 March 2020, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid before Parliament the proposed annual budget estimates for Financial Year 2020/2021 and this was referred to the Committee on Budget.

In addition, Parliament referred the sectoral committee reports on the Ministerial Policy Statements for Financial Year 2020/2021 for reconciliation and harmonisation to the Budget Committee. The committee has consulted, discussed and reviewed the proposed annual budget estimates and wishes to report to the House as follows:

In 1.2, we present the methodology, which includes the institutions and the various instruments that we consulted.

On page 4, Part 1, we are presenting under item no. 2 a compliancy audit of the annual budget estimates according to the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

The committee observes that Section 13(3) of this Act requires the minister, on behalf of the President, to present the proposed annual Budget to Parliament by 1 April each year. In addition, the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires that the annual estimates should contain various sets of information as well as key documents that must accompany his submission as stipulated in section 13.

The committee established that 14 of the 17 legal requirements have been complied with while two were partially complied with and one was not complied with. Partial compliance here means that only part of the information required under the law was provided, rendering the submission incomplete. The details are in table no.1 on the assessment.

The committee has considered this assessment and recommends that in future, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides all the required information as per the requirements of the law. We took that exception given the circumstances under which we are now operating; COVID-19 to be more specific. 

Therefore, table no.1 indicates the 14 items that are just mentioned and the level of compliance. I believe you can read that during your spare time. 

On page 6, we present item 2.1 on the consistency of the budget with the National Development Plan III. Madam Speaker, Section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 requires that the annual Budget is consistent with the National Development Plan. 

In line with this requirement, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development presented for approval to Parliament the National Development Plan III on 22 January 2020. Parliament subsequently approved the plan to guard both planning and resource allocation for the next five years beginning with the Financial Year 2020/2021.

Some of the salient issues of the NPDIII are as follows: 

So, in the subsequent text there, we present the NDPIII strategic direction, the key objectives of the plan – I am not going to go into the details. 

Key development strategies of the plan and the NDPIII’s overall outcomes. You can call it the expected results: 

We are also presenting an outline of the NDPIII programmes, which the National Budget Framework Paper is expected to follow strictly. 

On page 9, this financial year being the first year of implementing the NDPIII, it is important that sectoral priorities are well aligned to NDPIII to avoid a false start. 

However, while scrutinising the annual Budget estimates and the various ministerial policy statements, it was established that most of the sectors had not aligned their sector investment plans to the NDPIII.

The committee noted that the time between approval of the NDPIII and presentation of the annual Budget - that is in February to March 2020 - was not enough for sectors to develop sector investment plans for the next five financial years as required. 

The committee recommends that all sectors should develop sector investment plans that are aligned to the NDPIII and consequently, the National Budget Framework Papers must always align with the sector investment plans. 

In paragraph 2.2, we present the assessment of consistency with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. The charter requires that Government fiscal balance including grants is reduced to a deficit of no greater than 3 per cent of the GDP by Financial Year 2020/2021. 

According to the fiscal outlook, the fiscal deficit would increase from a projection of 6.8 per cent in 2019/2020 to 9.2 per cent in Financial Year 2020/2021. This implies that the objective of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility has been violated.

The charter further prescribes the total gross public debt in Net Present Value to be maintained below 50 per cent of the GDP. Uganda’s public debt stock amounts to Shs 46.4 trillion of which Shs 30.85 trillion is external debt and Shs 14.51 trillion is domestic debt. 

According to the National Budget Framework Paper, the present value – I do not know if you are still hearing me, Madam Speaker; am I still being heard? According to the National Budget Framework Paper, the present value of the public debt to the GDP was 31.7 per cent as at end of June 2019. It is projected to increase to 33 per cent in the Financial Year 2020/2021, which is still below the threshold of 50 per cent stipulated in the charter. 

THE SPEAKER: Can you move closer to the microphone? The microphone is far from you. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: I am sorry, I cannot hear you.

THE SPEAKER: The microphone is far from you.

MR LUGOLOOBI: The committee notes that Section 7 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 provides for a deviation from the objectives of the charter. 

The committee recommends that subject to Section 7(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the minister must present to Parliament for approval a statement on the deviation from objective 1 of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.
In addition, the minister, as per Section 7(2) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 should publish a report in the gazette within 30 days after deviation. So, the minister is required to comply with those requirements. 

In 2.3, we present an assessment of the consistency with the National Budget Framework Paper. Madam Speaker, according to Section 13(6) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the annual Budget shall be consistent with the National Development Plan, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the National Budget Framework Paper. 

However, the committee noted that during the consideration and approval of the National Budget Framework Paper in February 2020, Parliament was informed that the resource envelope would be revised due to the ongoing negotiation with our development partners for external financing and additional resources would be mobilised to accommodate other priority interventions. 

In this regard, the resource envelope has increased by Shs 5,852.93 billion in comparison to the resource envelope presented in the National Budget Framework Paper of Financial Year 2020/2021. This increment has largely been attributed to a budget increment of Shs 5,046.44 billion in official development assistance or call it external financing. Tables 2 and 4 present the details. 

The committee further observes that the sector budget allocations for works and transport, security sector, interest payments and health sector, have continued to receive the lion's share of the Budget, which was largely consistent with the share of allocations in the National Budget Framework Paper 2020. 

The committee notes that the sectors with the largest proposed budget increments compared to the National Budget Framework Paper estimates are security (with an increment of Shs 1.64 tri11ion) and health sector (with an increment of Shs 1.28 tri11ion). The details are in table 2.

With regard to the budget strategic direction as per the National Budget Framework Paper, the committee observes that the overall focus of the annual Budget for the next financial year is consistent with the interventions as per the National Budget Framework Paper. The interventions for Financial Year 2020/2021 will fall under the following strategic clusters, which have been listed. I am not going to read them. 

Table 2 on page 11 gives us a comparison between National Budget Framework Paper estimates and the annual Budget estimates for the Financial Year 2020/2021. It is clear from that schedule that the changes - the additions or the subtractions - that we have seen since the National Budget Framework Paper was presented. 

On interest payments, we have increased that by Shs 486 billion. On health, as I already mentioned, the increment is Shs 1.22 trillion. On security, the increment is Shs 1.641 trillion. Those are the biggest recipients of the increment. 

Gender and Equity Responsiveness

The certificate confirming that the annual Budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021 is gender and equity responsive was laid with the annual Budget estimates on Table. 

Madam Speaker, without going into the details, the recommendations are there below and read as follows: 

    1. The ministers responsible for overseeing the four institutions that failed the gender and equity assessment be directed to provide a statement to Parliament on what measures they resolve to undertake to ensure that gender and equity concerns are addressed in their respective budgets. 

    2. The measures for equalisation opportunities should be clear, specific, measurable and time-bound. 

Semi-Annual Performance of the Budget Financial Year 2019/2020

3.1 Revenue Performance

Tax revenues at the end of December 2019 stood at Shs 8.4 billion against a half-year target of Shs 9.1 billion. We registered a shortfall of Shs 644.2 billion. Therefore, this was a 93 per cent performance against the target. 

In terms of non-tax revenue, that one stood at Shs 518.6 billion against a half-year target of Shs 761.1 billion. This one registered a shortfall of Shs 242.5 billion. In terms of performance, it was a 68.1 per cent performance. 

Government anticipated to receive Shs 197 billion in form of capital gains tax from oil companies but only received Shs 23.6 billion as at end of December 2019, which was paid into the Petroleum Fund.

3.2 Expenditure Performance

A total of Shs 10.99 trillion of the Government of Uganda budget was released against a target of Shs 10.041 trillion. In that regard, the performance was quite acceptable. Table 3 on page 14 presents the details of the releases and expenditure for 2019/2020 half year. The details are outlined there. 

In terms of the grant performance, we are performing at 101.04 per cent. In terms of releases spent overall, we are performing at 80.2 per cent. 

In 3.3 on page 14, Madam Speaker, I do not think I am safe. This place is flooding. 

We are on item 3.3 on page 14, which is on the underperformance of externally financed development projects. 

Absorption of external finances was at 49 per cent. In other words, 51 per cent of the external resources did not perform as at end of December 2019. This poor budget execution was mainly as a result of challenges in project executions that resulted into delays in disbursement of funds from development partners.

The committee recommends that in order to reduce the delays in disbursements, the efficiency of project execution be improved with the following measures:

    1. Improve project selection, design, appraisal and analysis before the projects are approved and sanctioned for funding;

    2.  Continue to ring-fence counterpart funding for projects to enable Ministries, Departments and Agencies undertake preparatory activities like land acquisition, among others. 

    3. Strengthen the Chief Government Valuer's Office to address the inefficiencies attributed to compensation matters;

    4. Ensure that accounting officers monitor projects and officers who have experienced unsatisfactory project/programme implementation should not be reappointed in accordance to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Madam Speaker, I now turn to the Annual Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2020/2021 under item 4. We will begin by analysing the budget strategy. 

The committee was informed during the interaction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that various sectors will be affected by the COVID-l9 pandemic, more so, tourism and industry, which are the major sources of foreign exchange earnings.

The committee was also informed that the budget strategy for the next financial year is anchored on the NDP III and the theme remains “Industrialisation for Job Creation and Shared Prosperity”.
	
The NDPIII underpins Uganda's growth and development agenda for Financial Year 2020/2021 to Financial Year 2024/2025. The goal of the plan is to increase household incomes and improve the quality of life of Ugandans.

The committee was informed that economic growth strategy during the NDP III period will focus on:

    a) Accelerating the face of industralisation, scientific research and innovation in the critical sectors. 

    b)  Investment in infrastructure for production, trade and social services delivery including prioritisation of the maintenance of existing public infrastructure and

c) 	Continued investment in human capital development. 

According to the strategic priorities of the budget for the Financial Year 2020/2021, which are in line with the NDP III -those strategies have all been outlined from (i) to (v):

The committee appreciates the key strategic riorities espoused in the budget strategy for Financial Year 2020/21. They are well intentioned to deliver the desired development outcomes and support Uganda's efforts in building an integrated and sustainable economy.

However, the committee observed that some of the budget strategy priorities for financial year 2020/2021 –

THE SPEAKER: Hold on for a minute, honourable Chairperson. Yes, what is your problem?  

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. We have the National Budget being presented and everything was going on very well. However, with noise from the rainfall, we are finding it very difficult to hear what is being presented yet, this is something very important.

I know we should have come with our iPads but nfortunately, many of us had not planned that. So, I do not know whether we are proceeding well when we canot hear the presentation on the budget report, this being is a very important function of Parliament. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I think you should use your iPads. However, let me ask the Chairperson to move nearer to the microphone so that Members can hear.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I have tried to be very close to the microphone.  Maybe, they should raise the amplifier. I was at page 16 and I had just read the observation in bold but I will repeat. 

The committee observed that some of the budget strategy priorities for Financial Year 20202/2021, need more emphasis and others may require some readjustment in resources in order to mitigate the negative effects of the COVID-l9. In that regard, the committee recommends, going forward, as follows:

    1) Government should come up with an integrated multi-sectorial and multi-stakeholder economic response plan to support businesses, groups of vulnerable people and the overall economy;

    2) The strategic budget priorities for next year should address the short-term, medium-term and long-term stimulus packages to key priority sectors that are critical in ensuring that the well-being of all Ugandans is at the forefront in resource allocations. Some of the budget interventions earlier planned can be postponed as the economy stabilises; 

    3) More investment in agriculture and agro-processing so as to produce enough food for the population and surplus food for sale to earn foreign exchange;

    4) Agriculture being private-sector driven, Government should consider increasing access to affordable credit, provision of subsidies to large, medium and small-scale farmers, to facilitate increased production and productivity; 

    5) Government should establish silos at county level for food storage and minimise post-harvest losses. This will address food security, which in turn will reduce morbidity rates and ensure a health population and hence increased output; 

    6) To militate against climate uncertainty, a result of global warming, Government should scale up funding for water for production. The water for production strategy can be strengthened through increasing allocation for solar powered irrigation water supply projects to be undertaken across regions, especially in water-stressed areas; 

    7) Like most governments have learnt from the pandemic, there is urgent need to strengthen local production capacity. The local manufacturers need affirmative action to maintain production and also maintain their employees. Fundamental among these, is the need to avail cheap credit through the Uganda Development Bank; 

    8) Government should consider expediting pension reforms and adequate recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank, which in turn should introduce financial products to support investors in agriculture, mining, industry, tourism and ICT, among others, in order to boost the country’s economic growth; 

    9) The budget for next financial year provides a window of opportunity for Parliament and the Executive to build consensus of a minimum set of economic stimulus packages that will make the economy maintain the economic growth trajectory that had been projected at 6.3 per cent in the financial year 2019/2020 and in the medium term;
 
    10) Government should consider implementing targeted fiscal support for households and firms to stimulate demand. These include income subsidies for affected workers, tax deferrals, restructuring of loan repayment programmes and state loans or credit guarantees for companies. This will stimulate demand and encourage production for most affected industries;
 
    11) Tourism is one of Uganda’s major foreign exchange earners but has been hard hit by the global COVID-19 pandemic whose contagion nature has left the sector in dire need for resuscitation. An elaborate stimulus package for this sector is key, as it has the potential to generate faster returns and the required foreign exchange to revamp the economy;
 
    12) More resources should also flow to social services sector especially the health sector. Globally, all countries woke up to the realities of inadequacies in health infrastructure and systems, to rapidly respond to a major pandemic like COVID-19 has proved. Even advanced economies like USA, UK, Italy and Spain have had their health services overstretched to the limit and sought for external support. The support could not be forthcoming because everywhere was the same crisis. So, the lessons learnt should be translated into real action by fixing our health systems and infrastructure to rescue our population in case of a health crisis –

    a) Government should, therefore, prioritise health spending by establishing a hospital in every district with an operational ICU unit, provide resources for ambulances across the country, recruit, facilitate and maintain qualified medical staff and consider a comprehensive infrastructure plan for housing medical personnel at their work stations;

    b) Health training institutions should be resourced adequately by targeted payment of tuitions for students undertaking courses critical to the country’s health system. Some of the health staff can also be exported to the region to bring in more foreign exchange. We should harness our comparative advantage in providing high quality education to leverage our regional neighbours and reap benefits of economic integration; and 

13)	Government should also increase investment in science, technology and innovation for us to build local capacity to produce goods and services that we have been importing and enhance industrialisation for employment creation and economic growth. This is normally known as the substitution effect.

Madam Speaker, I would like to present the resource envelope for financial year 2020/2021, under 4.2.

The committee notes that the projected resource envelope for the  Financial Year 2020/2021 is now estimated at Shs 45,493.727 billion. In other words, it is about Shs 45.5 trillion, which is an increase of 12.36 per cent compared to the approved resource envelope for Financial Year 2019/2020. Table 4 gives us the details.
	
On the 15th and 21st April 2020, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted corrigenda to the draft Budget estimates for Financial Year 2020/2021 with some revisions to appropriation in aid, among other changes.

The committee notes that total domestic resources out of this Budget will constitute 72.5 per cent while external financing will constitute 27.5 per cent. We need to note that domestic resources include the amounts borrowed domestically. The schedule in table 5 is a summary of the resource envelope for Financial Year 2020/2021. 

Total domestic resources, as I have already mentioned, is Shs 32,972.39 billion. Domestic revenue is Shs 21.7 trillion. The Petroleum Fund is contributing nothing. Domestic borrowing is Shs 3.555 trillion. Domestic refinancing is Shs 7.486 trillion. Local Government revenue is only Shs 215.59 billion. Total external financing will be Shs 12.521 trillion. 

Budget support has increased tremendously from what was approved in 2019/2020 from Shs 675.2 billion to Shs 2.906 trillion, of which the grants, loans, project support grants and loans have all been reflected there. 

Table 5 gives us the sectoral allocations for the Financial Year 2020/2021. Looking at the details, that table presents the 2019/2020 Budget as approved and is also presenting the Budget estimates for 2020/2021, just to give a clear picture of the changes that have been made. 

We note that works and transport is now Shs 5.8 trillion. This is a minor reduction. Security is increasing from Shs 3.6 trillion to Shs 4.5 trillion. Interest payments are increasing from Shs 3.1 trillion to Shs 4.1 trillion. Education is increasing from Shs 3.3 trillion to Shs 3.6 trillion. Health is increasing from Shs 2.5 trillion to Shs 2.7 trillion. Energy and mineral development is reducing from Shs 3 trillion to Shs 2.6 trillion. The accountability sector is increasing from Shs 1.6 trillion to Shs 2.1 trillion. 

Justice, law and order is increasing from Shs 1.7 trillion to Shs 2 trillion. Local Government sector is increasing from Shs 1.3 trillion to Shs 1.8 trillion. Water and environment is increasing from Shs 1.1 trillion to Shs 1.7 trillion. Agriculture is increasing from Shs 1 trillion to Shs 1.3 trillion. Public administration is increasing from Shs 0.97 trillion to Shs 1.3 trillion. The legislature is reducing from Shs 687 billion to Shs 667.8 billion. Public sector management is also reducing. Science, technology and innovation is increasing from Shs 186 billion to Shs 264 billion. Lands is reducing from Shs 227 billion to Shs 200 billion. 

Tourism is increasing from Shs 193 billion to Shs 198 billion. Social development is reducing from Shs 219 billion to Shs 172 billion. Trade and industry is reducing from Shs 202.8 billion to Shs 171.8 billion. Remember, the theme of this Budget is “Industrialisation for Job Creation and Shared Prosperity.” ICT and National Guidance is increasing from Shs 146.2 billion to Shs 162.9 billion. 

The rest are normal items on our debt repayment, domestic refinancing, domestic arrears and appropriation-in-aid. 

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that total revenue, as a ratio to GDP, is projected to increase marginally from 13.4 per cent in 2019/2020 to 13.9 per cent in the Financial Year 2020/2021. This revenue to GDP ratio is still below the sub-Saharan average of 20 per cent as stated by the International Monetary Fund in 2012 and OECD countries average at 34.3 per cent as at 2015. 

In addition, the committee noted that total domestic revenue, including local Government revenue in the Financial Year 2020/2021 is just 48.2 per cent of the total resource envelope. The balance of 51.8 per cent are resources from borrowings and development assistance funds. This situation is very worrying and could indicate that our fiscal operations may not be sustainable in the medium term. 

The committee recommends that there is need for Government to strengthen the mobilisation and collection of revenues, which have stagnated at below 16 per cent of the GDP for the past so many years. 

The committee is aware that Government has developed a domestic revenue mobilisation strategy that would ensure that revenue mobilisation efforts are strengthened. The committee recommends that Government fully implements this strategy. 

The committee also recommends that Government reviews and revises the Budget after the full effect of COVID-19 on the economy has been ascertained. 

Proposed adjustments to the annual Budget estimates for Financial Year 2020/2021 

Madam Speaker, tables 6 and 7 below present resources identified by the committee for reallocation and Budget suppression. These resources are reallocated towards other priority areas. Some votes are receiving the reallocated funds.

Table 6 is on the resources identified for reallocation. We have suppressed Vote 130 on court awards and programme 51, which is about bank charges. The reason we suppressed it is because it is moving from Shs 790 million to Shs 100 billion, an increase in bank charges that was found to be on a high side. We have reduced that by Shs 37 billion. 

There is also a suppression for the local Government agricultural commercial services by Shs 40 billion but that money is reallocated within the agricultural sector. 

In the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, programme 8 has also been suppressed and that money is again reallocated within the ministry. 
In the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, the relevant committee moved some of those resources to other areas within the same sector. Largely, these are coming from Uganda Wildlife Authority.

Under Vote 154 – Uganda Bureau of Standards – some of those resources were moved to support other areas within the industrial sector.

Under the Ministry of Water and Environment, there is also reallocation to what we considered to be priority areas within the water and environment sector.

In the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Shs 30 billion that was to be spent on thermal power has been moved, leaving a balance of Shs 10 billion on that account. In the same ministry, Shs 8 billion has been moved and so on and so forth – I do not think I could go through everything, Madam Speaker. Since all members have copies of this report, I beg that they go through the details. These suppressions go on up to page 32 and a total of Shs 402.5 billion has been suppressed from those Votes. 

From page 33, you can see how these resources have been reallocated. Resources have been reallocated to: Uganda Bureau of Statistics; Uganda Investments Authority; Financial Intelligence Authority; Office of the Auditor-General; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (particularly targeting Enterprise Uganda, National Population Council and Micro Finance Support Centre); Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Ministry of Works and Transport; UCDA; NARO; and Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities – various sectors within the tourism ministry have benefitted. 

Other beneficiaries of the reallocations are: Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Kiruddu National Referral Hospital (to support the dialysis unit); Ministry of Health; Uganda Bureau of Standards; Uganda Export Promotion Board; Kayunga District; and Ministry of Water and Environment – we provided for sustainable access to water supply in rural areas as well as the development facility in the east to support some projects there. Other programmes that have benefitted under the Ministry of Water and Environment are the inner Murchison Bay and climate change.

Other beneficiaries are: National Forestry Authority (boundary opening and marking as well as seeds and seedlings); Petroleum Authority of Uganda; Uganda Mission in Denmark; Uganda National Examinations Board; Ministry of Education and Sports; some districts such as Kyankwanzi and Rubirizi; Parliamentary Commission; Ministry of Water and Environment again; and NAGRC&DB.

Others are: Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; Office of the President (in various directorates, including the ones for RDCs, manifesto and political coordination); Office of the Prime Minister; KCCA; Directorate of Public Prosecutions; Law Development Centre; Uganda Law Reform Commission; Judiciary; Uganda Registration Services Bureau; Ministry of Internal Affairs; Lira University; and Office of the Prime Minister again.

Others are: External Security Agency; Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs; Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory; Ministry of Education and Sports; Busitema University (covering Namasagali Campus); Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries – targeting improving access and use of agricultural equipment and mechanisation. The other beneficiary is the Ministry of Education and Sports to support the Competence-Based Education and Training (CBET) programme.

Madam Speaker, we have, therefore, reallocated the money that was suppressed – as I indicated earlier – amounting to Shs 402.5 billion.

Let me now move to page 53 on the figures recommended for appropriation. Madam Speaker, arising from the above adjustments, in tables six and seven, the following figures in Table 8 – on column five – are recommended for appropriation as expenditure for Financial Year 2020/2021. Table 8 is a consolidation of Schedule A, Schedule B and Schedule C. 

From page 54, we have Schedule A, presenting the recurrent budget estimates for appropriation for Financial Year 2020/2021. Schedule A covers pages 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62 and 63 and has a total of Shs 11,922,033,120,000.

Pages 64 onwards present Schedule B – on development budget estimates for appropriation for Financial Year 2020/202. The schedule covers pages 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72 and 73, with a total of Shs 18,076,920,072,000.

On page 74, we present Schedule C – on the statutory charges on the Consolidated Fund for Financial Year 2020/2021.

Under Vote 001 – Office of the President, there are two items: the President and Vice-President – and this relates to their wages.

Justice court awards: Shs 9,350,000,000.
Vote 130 – Treasury services: Shs 13,316,591,196,000

The Judiciary, Electoral Commission, Inspectorate of Government, Parliamentary Commission, Uganda Law Reform  Commission, Uganda Human Rights Commission, Uganda Aids Commission, National Planning Authority, Auditor-General, Directorate of Public Prosecutions, Inspector and Deputy Inspector General of the Police, Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner-General of Prisons, are presented and their figures are outlined above.

The subtotal - Statutory Votes and specified officers has an amount of Shs 14,798,897,154,000.

We also present the Pension and Gratuity for Non-Statutory Votes amounting to Shs 695,876,996,000. The grand total statutory charges is Shs 15,494,774,150,000.

I am taking you back to the summary schedule on page 53. Under that summary schedule, item (a) presents a breakdown of Recurrent Expenditure and the following figures have been proposed for supply:

    1. Central Government - Shs 8,552,941,121,000
    2. Referral Hospitals - Shs 152,022,906,000
    3. Foreign Missions   - Shs 173, 209,311,000
    4. Local Government - Shs 3,043,859,781,000
    5. Total Recurrent Expenditure – Shs 11,922,033,120,000

Part (b) is Development Expenditure. The figure proposed for the Development Expenditure in the following categories –

    1. Central Government - Shs 17,055,403,253,000
    2. Referral Hospitals - Shs 26,567,562,000
    3. Foreign Missions    - Shs 17,873,850,000
    4. Local Governments - Shs 977,075,407,000
    5. Total Development Expenditure – Shs 18,076,920,072,000
    6. Total proposed for Appropriation for both Recurrent and Development expenditure is Shs 29,998,953,191,000.
    7. Total Statutory Expenditure proposed for supply is Shs 15,494,774,150,000.
    8. Grand Total, which is the overall budget is Shs 45,493,727,341,000.

Madam Speaker, that is the end of my presentation. I beg to move. I have a minority report on the budget estimates, as I have read, for the Financial Year 2020/2021. It is signed by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table minutes of the budget committee meetings on the various dates that considered this budget. I also beg to lay on the Table a copy of this report in its original form, signed by various members of the Budget Committee. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Budget Committee. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, if you allow me, I would like to thank my colleagues, members of the Budget Committee, the chairpersons of various sectoral committees and our technical staff who have worked so hard to enable me present this report this evening. I think they deserve a round of applause. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I concur with the chairperson in the proposal to applaud the Committee on Budget. As you may recall, when we had Easter despite it being unusual, the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Planning remained here to work on these activities. We really want to thank them for the work done in very difficult conditions. Thank you very much. Can I now invite hon. Muwanga Kivumbi to present his minority report?

3.44
MR MUHAMMED MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank members of the Budget Committee for their tireless effort and working extremely hard during this COVID-19 scenario. Members of the Budget Committee and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development never went away a single day. I would like to express my regards.

In the same vain, I would like to express our regards to you, Madam Speaker, for making it possible for us to continue to do our work. 

Madam Speaker, this minority report is signed by myself because of the guidelines you read out. Otherwise, there are quite a number of members of the Budget Committee who concur with my opinion. Since you guided that a single person signs, it is the reason I signed it alone -(Interjections)- I was only selected to sign on behalf of the Opposition. This is why I signed the minority report alone. Otherwise, there are many members that agree with the minority report. They include hon. Cecilia Ogwal, hon. Winfred Kiiza and others.

We do not have a very elaborate disagreement on this budget because this budget is drawn on a presumption that the conditions for which it’s premised are pre-COVID-19 in this country; so the budget we are going to consider envisages the world in which we will never live again.

That is why we have a very limited opinion on this budget - because we were waiting for the Government to come up with an elaborate post-COVID-19 budget action plan for which we shall have a strong opinion - our opinion differs.

I would like to thank the majority report - at first they completely disregarded our idea; they said that the items we were proposing for cuts were impossible to be considered under the circumstances. But as time went on, the chairperson and members of the Budget Committee came back to our idea.

They made small cuts that amounted to Shs 190 billion; I thought the chairman would be cautious to acknowledge that that was our idea where they realised Shs 190 billion.

Our disagreement is at the extent of the cuts, priorities and reallocations that were focused on. We looked at the entire budget - I will go straight to table no.1 and look at the following items for which we strongly think in a COVID-19 environment and after, the country is not going to engage in these kinds of activities and this is our opinion.

There is a lot of money put on advertisement, public relations, workshops and seminars, hire of venue, books, periodicals and newspapers. Welfare, entertainment, special meals, drinks, classified expenditure, travel inland and abroad, fuel, lubricants and oils, transport, equipment, classified assets and office equipment.

Like it or not, there are not going to be travels abroad in a foreseeable future; workshops during and after COVID-19, they will be highly limited. Travel inland for Government officials will be highly curtailed during and after COVID-19.

Therefore, we think that we can make a cut that can save money that can be invested where we think is most critical. When you look at those items in our budget, they constitute - in the last year’s budget those items were a whooping Shs 4.1 trillion. In this year’s budget, they are Shs 5.1 trillion; if only we can maintain these expenditure levels to what was in last year, we save a whole Shs 949 billion. If we say, let money spent on it be as it were in this ongoing budget, we will save Shs 900 billion and it can be reallocated.

I had made a modest proposal for us to cut 20 per cent; we will save Shs 1 trillion for which we can invest. If we made a proposal and said that, “Let us cut 50 per cent,” we will save Shs 2.5 trillion. 

However, this table envisages and includes classified equipment and classified expenditure. Sometimes it is very difficult because of our national security concern to touch them but we want to challenge them in a post-COVID-19 environment.

What is it that we are going to buy guns for other than spending money on health and welfare of our people?

We are even challenging that this classified budget is uncalled for because we do not need the so many weapons that we intend to buy.

We also have another consideration on table no.2 that if we removed classified expenditure because of the nature of what it is and classified equipment, and maintained the same budget, we would save Shs 322 billion.

Just 20 per cent cut on those items, we will save Shs 374 billion on entertainment for ministers and on those other things for the powerful officials in Government. If they lived frugal and simply, our poor people would simply live. If we made a 50 per cent cut on all those items, we will save another Shs 940 billion.

Therefore, our considered opinion is that the budget committee felt shy and was not surgical enough in its cutting; we want to find this money using our formula and invest it where Parliament made resolutions.

I would like to draw members of Parliament to what the main report talks about on page 17. They observed that Government should prioritise health spending by establishing hospitals in every district with operational ICU units.

That was the resolution which Parliament made earlier but when you go to the table of allocations, they have reallocated only Shs 6 billion - out of the entire Shs 400 billion - to health.

Our considered opinion is that if you adopt our formula and save this money; (i) with Shs 900 billion, we have 39 districts without a district hospital. The health committee presented a report and said that for every hospital, you require Shs 30 billion.

Therefore, with Shs 900 billion, you will build 30 hospitals in one year and the president will be there to open them as we go towards campaigns. And the winner will not be us but that other side.

That is why we are saying that if we cut entertainment, travel abroad - the World Health Organization issued guidelines saying that COVID-19 is going to be with us for the next two years, even if we find a vaccine.

There are likely going to be no travels; people will not be going to hotels - so therefore, ours is a considered opinion that it is high time powerful people in Government became frugal so that our people can simply live; that is the gist of our minority report.

We want to generate money and this money should only go to three sectors; (i) health, (ii) agriculture and (iii) trade and industries because we will need to support our poor people and the business community, especially the small business people as they find life after COVID-19.
I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Kivumbi - and your ghost members who are not visible but are behind you - for your minority report. Honourable members, you have now heard the two reports. Can we have your comments? 

MS OGWAL: Point of information. 

THE SPEAKER: No. To who? To hon. Waluswaka? No, because there is nobody on the Floor. Let us have hon. Waluswaka, hon. Abala, hon. Amoding and then I come this side.
 
MS OGWAL: Point of information. 

THE SPEAKER: Point of information to who? There is nobody on the Floor. Who is that one there; hon. Ssengo? With your masks on, I cannot see your faces. (Laughter)

3.57
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Chairperson and the Committee on Budget for the work they have been doing. In fact, amidst this crisis of COVID-19, the committee sat, including on weekends, to scrutinise issues from ministries. I am very happy with the committee.

However, I would like to request hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi – with due respect – when you have a car, however cheap or expensive it is, you have to lock it. We cannot do away with security.

As we speak, our Covid-19 rating is fairly not high; we are in a better position than other East African countries. The challenge now is with people coming in through our porous borders. This is where we need security but that security has to be equipped. For example, Rwanda has drones to monitor people who are not abiding by the curfew and quarantine measures. 

With some of the support we have, we have had very many people donating to the health sector. This is also part of funding. However, I am also happy, chairperson of the committee - I have been singing here about Busolwe Hospital – that it has been included in the forthcoming budget. I would like to commend you for that. Thank you very much, on behalf of the people of Butaleja. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to implore members to agree with the main report. On the minority report, having studied how the condition will be in the 11th Parliament, we shall consider you. I would like to thank you and I beg to submit. For God and my country.

3.59
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. At the same time, I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. One thing that I would like to say is: on the money we have put up for the health sector, we need to add more, given the fact that COVID-19 is now a big global challenge to everybody.

As we all know, there are about 58 people who are confirmed positive here. We do not know what tomorrow will hold. This means this amount of money here is small, in my view. If there was any way we could, we should add money to the health sector. I will be a happy man and the people of Ngora will be happy and excited, if that is done.

Secondly, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had a plan to verify people to benefit from compensation from Teso and other places. They had budgeted for Shs 15 billion for that exercise. Unfortunately, given the allocation here - remember hon. Elijah Okupa took Government to court and very many people from Teso are waiting for that. Unfortunately, they have not been verified.

Madam Speaker, I do not know where we are going to get money for that verification exercise. That is why, as spokesperson for the Teso Parliamentary Group, I have a concern. We should actually put back this money to enable that verification exercise take place to help people from Teso get compensated by the Government of Uganda.

The last issue I would like to say is –(Interjection) – yes, I have very many things to say but I would like to mention one. 
Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Health has a plan to upgrade Kayunga General Hospital to a referral hospital, which is a very good idea and I support it 100 per cent.

Unfortunately, there are about three schools to be constructed in only one district and that is Kayunga. That is why I would like to be helped such that the other people can get to know, why.

There is going to be Kyayaye Primary School, Namagabi UMEA Primary School and St Peter’s Kibuzi S.S, all in Kayunga. That is why, as a Christian - the Bible says, “Speak the truth and the truth shall set you free” - I am raising this matter so that it goes on record. Madam Speaker, we must actually –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Abala. Let us have hon. Amoding. Where is hon. Ssengo? Come and take the chair there and after you, we will have hon. Pacutho.

4.02
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to appreciate the Committee on Budget for the good work they have done on our behalf as Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I particularly want to appreciate the prioritisation that they have set, on behalf of the country. They have tried to draw the attention of Parliament, in line with the priorities that we should give attention to, in view of this pandemic – see content from page 16.

Globally, we are aware that countries are generally trying to reorganise their budgets, particularly to go to the health sector to improve it. Many countries are also taking advantage of this COVID-19 pandemic to reorganise what has not been going well in their health budgets.

I would like to appreciate the committee for this initiative and effort that they have put in, in trying to draw the attention and resources of the country to the health sector.

The health sector certainly has received great support from this House before. When we look at the budget increment, we see Shs 1.5 trillion in the last financial year coming to about Shs 2.36 trillion, which is a good push. 

With all that we have been doing in the House with the recent supplementaries, I believe this money will have a trickledown effect and will go up to the next financial year to improve this sector.

Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament, I would like to emphasise to the Executive here that given the money we have invested in this sector, they should not come back here next year to lambast us again for failure to invest in this sector.

Let this be an opportunity where we can say that during the Covid-19 pandemic outbreak – (Interjection)– whatever name that we call it, there was at least some improvement in the health sector.

Madam Speaker, unfortunately, some of our members in this country shall be running after this Covid-19 money like we ran after the locusts – we call them, emaase in my language – yet when they do that, there will be no translated services in the health sector. 

We are now lambasted, as Members of Parliament of this House for buying ambulances and constructing health centres, work that we should not be doing. Let us take advantage of this situation to do our part, in terms of service delivery and implementation.

Secondly, I would like to appreciate the Committee on Budget for the work –(Member timed out.)

4.05
MR EMMANUEL KALULE-SSENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. I would also like to thank the Committee on Budget for this wonderful work they have been able to give us in such a short time.

I represent a rural constituency and that being the case, I am always concerned about the growing of food. When we met the other week, I requested the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to avail funds for buying more seeds and planting materials for our people in the rural areas.

You will appreciate that in this period of COVID-19, our rural people have a lot of time to be in their gardens. Unfortunately, the problem is, they do not have enough planting materials. I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can think about providing money for buying more maize seeds and other planting materials so that by the time we come out of this period, there is enough food to feed all Ugandans.

You will appreciate that after such a period, people will have a tendency of consuming more food because during these hard times, they do not normally consume enough food. Therefore, when this COVID-19 period is overcome, the tendency will be for people to consume a lot of food. That is why I am appealing to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide funds for planting materials.

Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with my neighbour from Butambala, hon. Kivumbi, about his proposal that we should cut down on the money we spend on travel overseas. I have a feeling that by the time we come out of this pandemic, it will not be very easy for us to go overseas. Let this money that we can save from travel overseas be devoted to buying more planting materials for our people. 

I would also like to appreciate the committee for the proposal that we should have a hospital in every district. I think this is long overdue because we are having medical problems in our areas because of the distances that people have to cover to go to hospitals. For example, in my place of Gomba District, my people have to cover over 100 miles to reach Gombe Hospital where they can get treatment. 

Therefore, if this proposal is put in place, I will be very happy to see a hospital constructed in Gomba District –(Member timed out.)

4.09
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee on Budget for coming out with this report. I also would like to thank hon. Kivumbi for the minority report. 

Whereas I thank hon. Kivumbi for drawing the attention of Government to construct hospitals in new districts and buy ambulances in the number of areas he has mentioned, I would like to bring to the attention of this House that the way budgeting is done in this country has changed. We have moved away from output budgeting to programme based budgeting.

Therefore, for the honourable member to have brought such a report, beautiful as it is, he should have taken into consideration the basis upon which Parliament should be urged to make Budget cuts and reallocation to the areas he mentioned. These are Budget estimates brought by different MDAs based on the programmes that they have envisaged to implement in the next financial year. 

Therefore, I would like to urge him that as we plan for the next Budget, he should look in depth at the basis on which Parliament should be doing Budget cuts and reallocation. 

Besides that, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Committee on Budget for increasing the budget for the health sector. Like hon. Amoding has said, this should translate into real effective service for our people in the coming period. 

I would also like to ask the officials from the Ministry of Health; what is happening to the off budget funds that we are getting during the COVID-19 Pandemic? We are not seeing it well translated to our people out there. Health workers are still crying about the personal protective equipment. We would like to see that our people are more protected in future because COVID-19 has come, Ebola was there and we never know what will come again. Therefore, as we increase the budget for the health sector, we would like to see effective service delivery for our people.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, it is not the industries that are going to pull us out of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is going to be agriculture. Therefore, I would like to urge members that as we scrutinise the budget, we should think of how we can increase the budget for the agricultural sector so that we can supply our people with seeds that can bring them out of COVID-19 crisis as we go to the second season. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Who has taken our chair? 

4.13
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those thanking the Committee on Budget for a work well done under very difficult circumstances. 

Having said that, my view about this Budget is similar to what my colleague said; that we should also think about security in this kind of situation because we are seeing more pressure. As the cost of living increases, we are going to see more criminality in this country. In the part of the country bordering Karamoja region, we are seeing a lot of cattle theft. I think we need money for this to be addressed. 

Other than that, in respect to health, some of these areas are sparsely populated and yet too wide. The roads are bad and without lights, among others. It is difficult for ambulances to pass. Therefore, we need the health centres IV to be empowered if we cannot get district hospitals. In Agago, we do not have a district hospital. In my constituency, there is not even a health centre IV. Our people are finding it very difficult to drive all the way from the border of Karamoja to Gulu.

I have already talked about bad roads. We need tarmac roads to help us pass. During this rainy season, it is very difficult to pass on these murrum roads. Moroto Road is a traditional road that was there before I was born. We do not have any tarmac road passing through our area. This road cuts across almost five districts; it is a security road and a tourism road but it has been neglected overtime. It is time for us to deal with it.

Madam Speaker, we need to look into processing. We have seen how importing goods has become so difficult. We have seen how racism is killing our brothers and sisters who have gone abroad. We need to be self-contained by developing our industries. We have to have storage. Home is the best, from what we have seen during this pandemic of COVID-19.

Madam Speaker, other members have things to say. Thank you so much for the opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: After hon. Mpuuga, we shall receive hon. Lucy Akello on video before we go to the others. 

Where is our chair? There is supposed to be a chair there for the next speaker. Put back our chair for the next speaker, please. 

4.16
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to join colleagues in thanking the committee for a task well accomplished. I have two issues to comment on about the allocations. 

First of all, I would like to partly associate with the minority in as far as avoiding to address immediate post COVID issues are concerned. I do not know why the committee was shy in addressing the very serious challenges that are going to hit us hard before or even after COVID. Madam Speaker, there is no doubt, for instance, that jobs are going to be lost. In fact, jobs have already been lost. 

I associate with the minority because the three sectors they have identified can give this country the necessary momentum to keep jobs. We need more money in agriculture and industry, especially small-scale industry, and health. The COVID pandemic has exposed the fragility of our systems. As Parliament, we have a chance to use the budget to plug these gaping holes in our systems, especially health. 

I feel shy seeing the President begging for ambulances. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, this is the chance for you to help the President to stop begging for ambulances when he has the “knife” and the “beef” to cut. 

Madam Speaker, this House has a duty, and we can borrow from the proposal of the minority, concerning the Shs 300 billion or so. Can’t we ask that this Shs 300 billion be properly divided among the three key sectors identified by the minority report? I have no problem with the rest of the sectors. Of course, they have issues but we want to see more money that will keep the economy going despite the challenges of COVID. 

Madam Speaker, the external inflows are going to slacken this financial year because our benefactors too have problems. Before the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brings to Parliament a comprehensive package that is going to keep the economy robust, as Members of Parliament we can use this budget to try and guide on how we want to see the economy moving. I believe if we do not buy something from the minority report, we shall miss a chance of helping these sectors 

The health sector has been - (Member timed out.)

4.20 
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I am on video conferencing and I hope you can hear me. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we can hear you. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me add my voice in thanking the Budget Committee for working very hard. Thank you, Madam Speaker, at least now the technology is working today and I am able to speak from home. 

I would like to associate myself with the minority report that has been presented by hon. Kivumbi. In my view, I think he summarises what many Ugandans are thinking about. When you see the options that are brought here by the minority members, if we are to do percentage cuts, say for travel abroad – We are not going to travel abroad, anyway. 

My only point of departure is in line with travel inland. Madam Speaker, whether we like it or not, and whether coronavirus is here or not, we will definitely be travelling inland. I think some percentage of money for travel inland must be maintained. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to comment briefly about the component of the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE). As a member of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, I want to say that this has been a pain in our necks because year in, year out, these monies have been reduced or cut. I am not seeing this coming out strongly and yet we are seeing people struggling with little money or even receiving little food. I have seen old people lining up to get food and it is not easy. 

I think this is also an opportunity for us to have in our budget a system where all our old people will have an opportunity to get their money. Yes, I see the minority report mention coupons for getting food, but then we need to take care of these old people through SAGE, which is an ongoing Government programme. If we cut those percentages that are being suggested, I am sure we will make money to give our old people. 

Allow me to comment briefly on the health sector. There are so many other Members that have talked about this. The COVID-19 situation has shown us how our health sector is doing badly. Yesterday, I raised the issue of the border but I can tell you that Amuru District does not have a functional ambulance or even a district hospital. I am therefore assuming that when we do cut and give more money to the health sector, we will then have money that will strengthen our health sector and also have more money for agriculture, because we know that agriculture is our backbone. 

Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity. I hope this time it has been clear enough and the technology has worked. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. We are improving on our technology. 

4.23
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I also would like to thank the Budget Committee for the sacrifice they have made during these bad times. I also thank the Members for remaining here; it is a sign of patriotism. 

I come from a district that has no district hospital. I would like to propose, as suggested by hon. Kivumbi, that we find money to build some hospitals in this country in the districts that do not have them, just like Buhweju. 

I again come from a district where we have waited for two years – In Buhweju, we largely depend on tea. We have been asking for tea seedlings for two years now and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries says it has no money. We would like to request that we find money to give the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries so that they do not continue saying that they have no money and people continue to find problems getting seedlings, equipment, agricultural inputs. We will then have a budget that is pro-people. I would like to thank you for the opportunity, Madam Speaker.  

4.25
MR CHARLES ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the Committee on Budget and also appreciate the minority report, which has been presented here very ably. 

I think it is important that we look at the health, agriculture and then trade and industry sectors. These are areas that are very important in our economy. 

Madam Speaker, if we want to do this, I am abit concern about the silos. We have some silos in this country but they are empty. I think that we have now been provoked by the coronavirus. 

Madam Speaker, as we have the coronavirus, we also have the “hunger virus”. Down in the rural communities, people have no food in their houses and even in their granaries. I would like to propose that in future, we have seed regional research centres, not only in Kawanda and Namulonge. We should have them at regional level so that we know because climate change has brought so many challenges. 

Unless we work at regional level and get to know what can be produced and at the right time, we are not going to succeed. At the moment, as we have been challenged by the coronavirus, there has been no food in those stores; so, what should be done? I think the scientists should be spread out so that they know what exactly should be planted in a particular area, at what time and the type of seeds. Otherwise, even in our industries when we go to trade, we shall have no produce at all in order to get food, which is really required. 

Madam Speaker, that has resulted into very low production. The weather has now affected the development of agriculture. Now, when you go to the north, you will find that some people are planting beans before it is time; the season is for simsim. Simsim is a very tricky seed; when you plant it before its’ season, you cannot produce anything. That is why we need regional seed research centres in Uganda.

Secondly, I would like to comment on our road network. Up to now if you try to travel from Kamdini to Lira, the road is impassable. If you have to drive, you will drive at zero speed and it will take you about five hours because those potholes have never been managed. We do not understand why this has been so –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We shall have hon. Okabe by video link. We are going to hon. Patrick Okabe. Is hon. Okabe on? He is not there. Okay, let me get hon. Asamo.  
  
4.29
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope I am clear.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we can hear you.

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker,I have been following the debate on the budget and I think my area of concern is the health sector. 

The money that has been allocated to the health sector is limited. As the Chairperson of the Committee on Equal Opportunities, I have moved around this whole country and checked on some of the regional hospitals. I think there is need to really vote in money to bring the regional hospitals to a status that can impact other people in Uganda. The COVID-19 pandemic has showed us that all of us will be treated in these hospitals. Therefore, it is high time we came up with a system where all the hospitals are raised to a certain standard, and this is the time. 

I would think that looking at roads is good but for now, let us look at the health sector. Let us try to have a budget that by this year, as a result of COVID-19, we will ensure that people will be benefiting from these hospitals and we improve on the health sector. 

I also heard the President, in his previous address, saying that we need to increase allowances for the health sector and the science people. Maybe we need to look at that structure and see how we can support it.

The other concern, Madam Speaker, is the sector for the vulnerable people. I want to think that up to now, some of the old people have not received their money from SAGE. The budget line seems not to have come out clearly on this and even on the money for the youth and the women entrepreneurship fund. 

Maybe we needed to see, when we are voting, whether this money is going to clearly cater for all our people. Where we are now in this economic impasse, we need to lift the people, especially the vulnerable people, from where they are and bring them to some level to begin coming up and manage business.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for the technology.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.33
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just have two issues to raise. 

One issue, which I want to go directly to, is the issue of compensation of war claimants in the northern and eastern regions. This matter has dragged on for long and most of the expected beneficiaries are dying. It is only surprising that money was not again allocated for the verification of these persons. Every budget year, we are saying verification is not done and even this time, there is no money to do verification and these people are getting finished as they wait for this money.

I would like to recommend that money be returned to this activity and that this verification is done within this year, and whatever money that is available is used to compensate those we can compensate. We can compensate in bits other than having everybody wait until the whole verification is done. 

Madam Speaker, I think that we are not being fair to those people because many of them are dying off and their children cannot account for what they should have claimed; they may not understand what was going on at that time. When they are subjected to defending that position, they may not actually manage to defend it well.

Secondly, we have talked about the health sector. I appreciate the increase to the sector but we have still not arrived at the Abuja Declaration of 15 per cent, especially knowing that COVID-19 is presenting a very uncertain situation in the whole world. I would agree with Members who say that we take this opportunity to upgrade all the hospitals. 

When we create subcounties and constituencies, the Government policy is such that every subcounty must have a health centre III and every county or constituency must have a health centre IV. I do not see that here; instead, I only see Kayunga District having hospitals that are going to be upgraded. Can we have this done equitably in the whole country, looking at the situation we are facing? 

A health centre III is the second place of call in terms of a health situation in any district. So, if there are districts that do not even have health centres III at the subcounty level, I do not see why we should go on to progress something that has already been upgraded to some level and yet there are areas that have nothing at all. For purposes of equity, Madam Speaker, I think this needs to be addressed. Thank you.

4.35
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. First of all, I thank my colleague, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, and the group, for the minority report. 

I support the views expressed in the minority report. We need to use this bad situation as an opportunity to strengthen the health sector. Security should be approached from the health perspective, because if you die from causes other than military ones, it will also be bad. So, please build hospitals. 

The regional referral hospitals need to be strengthened with ICU facilities. Even for the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF), one regional referral hospital per region is important. Health centres IV also need to be strengthened. Honourable members, you never know from where you are going to get sick. It could be in your constituency. Is there a bed worth your status at the health centre IV in your constituency? We need hospitals. Obongi District does not have a district hospital; please, build one there. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we should also use this opportunity to strengthen the information and technology infrastructure in this country. Look at this situation where you are supposed to attend Parliament online through Zoom. Are there facilities in your constituency where you can access internet facilities like this one? I bet there are none.

This disaster of COVID-19 has come when we have other disasters with us already. We recently passed a supplementary budget to address the issue of floods. We also had the issue of refugees. I draw your attention to the issue of refugees. Honourable members, when you get to the stage of appropriation, in the interest of time I would like to draw your attention to Vote 003, code number 1499 - the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) - a programme called “Dr Dip” or Development Response for Displacement IMPACTS Project (DRDIP). 

Monies to the tune of approximately Shs 217 billion, which is intended to have been allocated and appropriated under the votes of refugee-hosting districts, is lumped as a block under the OPM, far away from the users. This puts this money at a very high risk of corruption and mismanagement. 

Honourable members, I appeal to you that when we get to the stage of appropriation, kindly let all this money go to the targeted beneficiaries, that is, the host communities and the refugees who are burdening the people at the grassroots.

There is also a programme called Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID). We, as Members of Parliament, borrowed money from the World Bank to improve the situation of the host communities and the refugees. However, these programmes are being mismanaged from the centre as if they are supposed to be –(Member timed out.)

4.39
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some years ago, Government allocated money to buy 70,000 bicycles for the then Local Council I (LC I) and Local Council II (LC II) chairpersons. In the middle of the exercise, some billions of shillings “grew legs” and disappeared. By the time that money disappeared, Mayuge, Kamuli and other districts had not received the bicycles.

THE SPEAKER: Fifty-five districts had not received the bicycles.

MR WAIRA: Yes, they had not received those bicycles and these people are still passionately waiting for those bicycles. I would like to thank the Committee on Budget because in their report on page 22, they have identified Shs 40 billion hanging under the Ministry of Local Government. 

Remember, Madam Speaker, you have been reminding the Ministry of Local Government to identify money for this item and they have maintained a deaf ear. Even last year, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development committed to raise money in this budget to ensure that these people get their bicycles. The matter had been raised by hon. Mary Mugeni. 

Madam Speaker, now that the Shs 40 billion is here hanging in the Ministry of Local Government, it is now or never. It has been allocated to other entities but I would beg that we follow this money up to wherever it has been taken and we get only Shs 5 billion to cater for and clear that obligation. That is my request.

Two, let us think outside the box when debating this budget. Let us not think and debate the budget vis-à-vis COVID-19 when we are panicking. Nobody knew that COVID-19 would be here at this time and nobody knows when it will depart. Supposing you take away the money for international travel and then COVID-19 is cleared by May, will you just sit as a country when other countries are moving? (Interjections) Yes, you have to think outside the box. Will you sit as a country? 

Other countries have reopened and are only emphasising the procedures to follow in controlling coronavirus. Now, for you, you are saying that because of COVID-19, we remove international travel. Let us not panic. Let us plan for the country in the normal way. Supposing COVID-19 goes away in – (Member timed out.)

4.43
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. In America, as we speak today, about 700,000 people are infected with coronavirus. About 45,000 have died but 21 million have filed for unemployment. I can see the temptation to concentrate on dealing with health issues but issues of survival have actually become more urgent than health in some countries. If you look at America, all the packages they have proposed are not going towards health. The first $2 trillion went to companies to ensure that jobs are kept.

I had thought that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would withdraw this budget and propose a budget that is going to keep life. Unfortunately, the minister has maintained the same budget, as the minority report has noted. 

These items that the minority report has pointed out have been troubling me. I remember one time while the President was commenting on the budget that you, hon. Matia Kasaija, presented, he said that you are going to do away with workshops. Unfortunately, the following year, you brought a budget still containing workshops. This year, there is no way you are going to spend Shs 200 billion on workshops and then the same Government reports that as of today, 42,000 companies have closed. 

People do not know where they are going to get the next salary. People do not know if they are going to be able to feed their families, including those who are working. 

Right now, you are concentrating on providing food for the vulnerable but those that are working have not got their March salary and they are not going to get their April salary. The biggest portion of this particular budget should have been on stimulus packages and also for immediate intervention for those who are working. Maybe after COVID-19 has gone, we can go back to these items like travel abroad. My colleague, hon. Majegere, says the country is moving. There are other countries which think that items such as travel can only take place maybe after 2020. 

Madam Speaker, it might be difficult but at least I will propose it, in support of the minority report and parts of the – (Member timed out.)

4.46
MR ROBERT KASULE: (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank you for the technology you introduced. I tried to use it yesterday, only that somebody interrupted me.

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that we are dealing with a normal budget; COVID-19 caught us at the tail end of the budgeting process, therefore adjustments to accommodate the COVID-19 and post-COVID-19 period were not possible. The way we budget is such that agencies do their budgets and Parliament amalgamates all the budgets. I think the best way to implement adjustments is to again go back to the agencies and ask them to reprioritise what they want to do. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should know that this budget would work in normal circumstances but in the post-COVID-19 era, we need to adjust, reprioritise and make sure that we fit into the needs of the people.

Madam Speaker, the minority report wants this Parliament to empower itself to do readjustments but it may not be possible. One MP said we are dealing with programmes-based budgeting. When you remove money from a certain sector, you may end up only paying salaries without giving the workers the implements to use and they will sit in offices for a whole year. Therefore, cutting money from one area and pasting it somewhere else may be very difficult.

In response to the COVID-19 matter, Madam Speaker, I went to one of my health centres II in Kawanda and I found 60 pregnant women being attended to there. This was because there was no transport to go to hospitals or access health centres III and IV. 

It is now very important for health centres II to work. They are working but they are overwhelmed. They do not have the necessary equipment such as gloves. Women were seated there and could not observe social distancing because the health centre is small. I implore Parliament that once the ministries of health and finance have organised themselves, we should emphasise health centres II because they are very important.

About scientists, it has been a call for years to give money to scientists –(Member timed out)

4.49
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Budget for a job well done. I would also like to thank my brother, hon. Kivumbi, for the alternative opinion. 

The COVID-19 situation has helped us to run a check on our health sector and it has been found wanting in all aspects. Right now, what most of us are concerned about is the immediate attention to the pandemic but to me, the problem is much larger. 

Before we focus on a cure, I think we need to focus on prevention. There is very little attention being paid to public health. It is only recently – with the advent of COVID-19 – that we started emphasising personal hygiene. Personal hygiene should be the standard way of living. 

Uganda is a country where you find the average toilet coverage still below the recommended international standard. People are still shitting all over the place and nobody is concerned. It is in this country where you find people staying in houses without ventilators and windows – below the acceptable standards. It is in this country where you find safe water coverage very low –(Interjection)– Okay, it is now at about 75 per cent but it has to reach 100 per cent coverage because this is a basic necessity for everybody.

Madam Speaker, it may not be easy to readjust the budget now, like my brother Kivumbi has suggested, but I think this is food for thought. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should focus on financing public health as a way of saving money that we spend in treating people, which sometimes ends up being fatal.

Madam Speaker, the community development officers, who are supposed to be the enforcing agents, are not well funded. When you talk to them about why they are not chasing after people without pit latrines, they tell you that they do not have transport to move. Therefore, as we enforce public health, the Ministry of Local Government should also take it upon themselves to see to it that the enforcement officers – the community development officers – are –(Member timed out)

4.53
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the good work. 

First and foremost, I have a recommendation to make. The COVID-19 pandemic has strained us – from big countries down to the bottom. We have been suffering because of the production of maize. Some years back, people produced a lot of maize and they were crying everywhere that the price of maize had gone down up to Shs 200 per kilogramme. I wondered why the Government should not build silos in each region to store food for the future. 

We talked about this issue of silos many times but in vain. Money was not availed to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to do this. If they had done this, we would be having a lot of food. People would not be crying for food here. If the railway was to be made, maize would have been brought from Mbale, Bulambuli, Kasese, Kampala and all towns, even up to Arua. 

People are now crying everywhere that they need food. This has taught us a lesson that when people grow food, they have to store it. The Government also has to store food for our nation. They also have to store fuel and everything else. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has to be given a lot of money. 

When   you come to the health sector, we do not have enough hospitals. If people get sick here – They are talking of ICUs but where can we get money to provide all these ICU beds for people who are sick? As of now, we are not many but if it happens like it is in America and other countries, where can we escape to? Therefore, we should give more money to the agriculture sector, health sector as well as the security and transport sectors. These are the main sectors that are supposed to be worked on first.

Some countries have got people who are like termites – they are in billions – but they can feed their people. What about the herbal sector, which we approved the other time? By now, people from all over the constituencies would be looking for herbal medicines to treat our people. I am very sure that – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are some ex officio members of the Budget Committee. I think they should not be speaking because they were part of the process. Let other members do the talking. Ex officio members, please do not speak. Honourable member, I know you are the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs; let us give space for the ordinary Members. Please, chairpersons, allow other Members to speak.

4.57
MR MAURICE KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here, I would like to begin with the point that around FY 2018/2019, the Netherlands Government had an offer of €23 million to equip and refurbish all regional referral hospitals in Uganda. They were awaiting Government’s promise and grant to meet their commitment so that equipping and refurbishing the regional hospitals would be effected. Could the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brief Parliament on this, so that we avoid double spending? Government could be spending when there is an offer on the other side. I think the minister should clarify this.

My second take is on international travels. Madam Speaker, we belong to international bodies like the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA), the Inter Parliamentary Union (IPU), etcetera. We also have the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Committee on the East African Community Affairs (EAC). 

When we begin saying that we remove the allocation for international travels, I think we may need to change and restructure the whole of Parliament. We may need to say that ministers will only have to report to Parliament; they should not travel. The Government officials and civil servants would also not travel and Uganda would become an island since it will not be relating with other countries. We really need to look at that.

My third concern is on the agricultural sector. Given what is going on, we need to focus on agriculture. The other day, we were asking the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come here and brief the House and tell farmers what next after COVID-19. I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should sit and see what has to been done.

Madam Speaker, we have the issue of the Isimba Dam. I think Isimba Dam is in its last year of construction and probably, this financial year is its last year to get Government support. However, there are programmes like the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) programme where the Social Development Action Plan has to be handled and yet money has not been earmarked for it. 

The other day, I was discussing with the technical team and they said they had asked for Shs 19 billon but I think it was not properly handled. When I shared this with the Chairperson of the Budget Committee, he said there was a problem; money was appropriated but it was not properly used. 

Maybe the minister concerned should come and tell the House the way forward and how best we can help these people, so that our people in that area can benefit. These people are around Isimba Dam but they do not have power. Power crosses and moves to other areas but people within the Isimba Dam area do not have power. We, therefore, need to see how best we can help them.

Lastly, we had a programme where the minister committed here that we shall be having -(Member timed out.)

5.01
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for the excellent report they have given us. I am happy that the Budget Committee adjusted the budget according to the current situation in Uganda, especially where we have given attention to the Ministry of Health.

Madam Speaker, COVID-19 has taught us a lot of lessons. We are actually being asked to prepare ourselves and we should be ready anytime. Our health services have been very poor. In every subcounty, we are supposed to have a health centre III. We are supposed to have health centres IV in all constituencies and hospitals in every district. However, in Koboko, the general hospital is not funded at all; it does not have structures. Although we have started, I think there is need to speed up so that we have our general hospital.

There is a programme where health centres III and IV are be upgraded. I think this must be speeded up so that every subcounty has a health centre III and IV. 

On the issue of personnel, you will find that in all ministries there is a shortage of staff. In the health sector, the midwives, doctors and nurses are not enough. As a result of COVID-19, the Ministry of Health is hurrying to employ workers to help. I would like to suggest that the people who are already employed should be made permanent employees rather than having them as temporary employees. Where will they go? We actually need to employ enough staff to serve our people.

The President has been emphasising the issue of sciences. Madam Speaker, it is very important to have enough scientists to help in such situations. If we did not have scientists in Uganda, I think many of our people would have died. Health workers, researchers and scientists have been working day and night. I am therefore begging Uganda to consider paying scientists more than the others since they are sacrificing a lot –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the submissions made by Members. I would like to also commend the committee for the work well done. However, I would like to raise some issues to be included in the budget.

This morning, I was doing analysis with some experts in the civil society in regard to our preparedness as a country. Madam Speaker, if we were to have 1,000 or even 500 patients of COVID-19 in Uganda, our ICUs would still be wanting. We actually have only 178 ICU beds. Imagine that! As a country, we would not be able to manage even 100 people who would need ICU services. 

Madam Speaker, I think COVID-19 has come with an opportunity for us to look at how we can improve our health sector and look at those gaps that should be addressed. They should not only look at the national referral hospitals but at the regional levels also. Soroti, for example, cannot host more than five of these patients yet it is a regional hospital overseeing over 10 districts. Honourable members, I think much money should have gone to those areas.

The COVID-19 pandemic has given us an opportunity; everyone is washing hands and maintaining hygiene. I was talking to some nurses and they said that there are now a reduced number of patients in hospitals with diseases like diarrhoea, cholera and many other related conditions. This is because of the sanitation and hygiene being emphasized, but it is left as anybody’s business. I think more money has to be committed to public health so that even after coronavirus, we are able to save money used in treating these diseases that are brought by poor sanitation and hygiene.

Madam Speaker, in Ngora, we do not have a district hospital. The facility we use as a hospital is at the level of a health centre III. So, I think that most of the money that has been saved from the other - I represent you internationally but because of the coronavirus, we are not able to travel and probably we will not do so up to December. Most of this money therefore should be diverted to help these local governments and empower the health sector.

Let us not forget about agriculture, because 90 per cent of the people I represent are agriculturalists and right now as we are battling with the lockdown, we will need food. In Kampala already -(Member timed out)

5.08
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me first thank the committee for the report. The time they had was quite short and because of that, I think there are some issues which need some further explanation.

As I read the report, I saw where the cuts and new allocations were done. Uganda Air Cargo was allocated Shs 46 billion, and I think that is the biggest allocation out of the cuts they made, in spite of the other priorities that we have. Uganda Air Cargo has been existing for the last 15 years or more. It has been capitalised and recapitalized under Ministry of Defence -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I know about that matter. It has not been capitalised for 10 years. I know that for 10 years they have not been capitalized. They have been coming here to request for money from the Government.

MR SABIITI: Can I continue on that, Madam Speaker? My contention is based on the fact that I happen to have some knowledge about aviation. When you are operating an aircraft, there is what we call operating costs, which are a priority. Maintenance is an operating cost. For every hour flown or for every time that passes, money must be allocated to that portion for maintenance. This aircraft has gone for an overhaul, which means that the money should have been reserved to pay for its overhaul. Short of that, it means you are not operating -(Member timed out)

5.11
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the members of the Budget Committee for the report. 

I have noticed that the budget we are discussing now and about to pass suggests that we are operating under a very a normal situation. I wish to say that the situation is not very normal (Interjection) - Can I get protection from the chairpersons of the budget and finance committees? I know they presented the budget but allow us to speak on it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the honourable member to contribute.

MR AYOO: I would like to support the position of the minority report based on the fact that issues of health have been seriously discussed in this Parliament. To say that we cannot change the budget at this stage – I think there is something we can do. Sometimes we find the budget changed in the middle of the financial year in terms of supplementary requests. When we had killings all over the country, the President ordered for the purchase of cameras for the whole country and this came in the middle of the financial year.

We need to have issues of health as a priority and look at the 20 per cent cut from the budget so that we handle issues of strengthening the health centres and the district hospitals. This is what many countries are doing. This has presented us with the opportunity to cut down on some of the normal activities that we have been doing and concentrate on improving health services in the country. I am imploring my colleagues that there will be need for us to look at how to improve on the intensive care units and ambulance system in the country, so that we are able to give better healthcare services to the people.

Must we close our eyes and pass a budget like we did in the previous year? Even now, with COVID-19, I am not sure of how many countries are not going to change their policies on how people are going to visit them –(Member timed out)

5.15
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Madam Speaker, in African culture, you can turn a funeral into a clan meeting and correct what has gone wrong. The COVID-19 pandemic has done that to us. We now know that we do not have a self-sustaining independent economy. We now know that we have to start national dialogue not by agenda but because of a situation. We now know that a regional government was required yesterday; the functionality of health facilities in our regions and disparities in our areas have been exposed.

As my first recommendation, I would like to request that Ministry of Finance - National Planning Authority - should immediately come next month and tell us how they intend to keep the economy going because we are discussing expenditure. However, where are you going to get the money in the current circumstances?

Therefore, can we be seen to keep the marrow that gives the blood and the economy running? In what we are discussing, that is the most critical thing. We need more inward looking policies. Last week, I talked about the tax policy; I talked about the industrial policy. 

Possibly, it is even time for us to consider mergers, restructuring and centralisation of critical procurement. This is now time for having real import substitution, not rhetoric or lip-service of Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) that we have been talking about.

We need to have inward looking policies that must be seen to be put on table. Of course, we are aware that the data we are using and the forecast is wrong. We do not expect you to be creating your own data but can we come back immediately to this House so that we give this country the true picture?

As we think of God giving us a cure and vaccine tomorrow, what if it takes another one year? Let us also look into the worst case scenario by looking into these areas in the country. How can we continue?

I would like to agree with everybody who says this is a time to remember the rural economy. Can we plant more food at home? The 30 million people are in the rural economy; they can keep us going. For the urban dwellers, it is now time to remember that we have a bad culture of saving. It has been proved and when we save, we save in concrete mansions, not –(Member timed out.)

5.18
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the minority report. As we are all aware, he or she who is healthy can do anything. I bet we are here today because we are all healthy.
	
Since I was born, I have not found somebody who takes medication because he ate too much but you have to take medication when you are sick.

Madam Speaker, I am saying COVID-19 has changed the life of all nations. There are parts in Otuke, including a parish called Atira, where some people have never reached a health centre, simply because there is no access at all. They simply hear about the health centre as history or something of the past. 
In my view, there are four major things we need the country or community of people of Uganda to feel better about and these are a health centre, a school, roads and agriculture.

As I explain on the issue of agriculture, since the President’s directive of no gatherings, I think there are people who are starving. They do not even eat in a single day. For example, I got a car for people who called. They live here in Kampala but are from upcountry in the North. They were planning to walk back home. How can you walk from Kampala to Lira? This used to be only people who were coming from upcountry to celebrate some functions which normally happen here in Kampala.

Madam Speaker, we really need to come up. When this budget comes here, it should be directed in a proper way because our country is more blessed than any country. If we compare with Somalia, these are people who barely see any rains in a year, but we have got everything in this country.

In Ethiopia, people do not see rain at all. However, in Uganda we have rain and as the rains come, let our people be given guidance –(Member timed out.)

5.21
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of Members to thank the committee for the report. Like other Members have said, every Member of Parliament is yearning to have a district hospital in their districts and constituencies.

Just last month, I was watching news and I heard the presenters on TV talking about the baby boom that we should expect in a few months or maybe next year. I asked myself a question, If the environment is the way we are now, how are we going to handle some of these challenges in the near future?

The song of rehabilitation of district hospitals has been sung all along in this Parliament. When you get to most of the district hospitals that we have right now, you may wonder what we are going to do about it. I support Members who are saying that if there is need for an extension of this budget, we should do it.

We need adequate equipment in our hospitals, especially when it comes to issues of women. Here in Kampala, at least, we are doing a bit better. However, when you go down to our districts, the situation is terrible.

Madam Speaker, my complaint is about the delays that we have in the rehabilitation of district hospitals. For instance, in my case, Busolwe Hospital has been on the programme for over three years now. When I went to the ministry to consult, I was told that they have one person who has the contracts of rehabilitating these hospitals.

I asked myself whether we have only one learned contractor in this country. Don’t we have Ugandans who have the capacity and capability to do this work? This is embarrassing; we have unnecessary delays and efficiencies caused because of this.

Therefore, we would like to call upon Governmen to make considerations on the proposals that the honourable members have made here because they are very important for our lives. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.
5.24
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the Members to thank the Committee on Budget. I would like to talk about water.

When this pandemic broke out, we were told to wash our hands with water and soap. If we have soap, then we do not have water. How do we wash our hands? In most of our districts, we have boreholes, which are broken. In Abim District, over half of the boreholes are broken and it is common in all the districts upcountry. So, in this budget, there is need for us to empower and give enough money to the Ministry of Water and Environment, so that we have all our boreholes repaired. 

Madam Speaker, because of COVID-19, all the children are at home. The Ministry of Education and Sports is at crossroads and needs to be supported. 

In the corrigenda, I have seen the Ministry of Education and Sports requesting for about Shs 29 billion in order to do our curriculum. When we are talking about the new curriculum, there was a problem; we all saw that the curriculum was not properly developed. 

Our children are at home and this is the time we need to support the Ministry of Education and Sports to develop this new curriculum well so that it is proper for our children. With this situation of COVID-19, we need a lot of e-learning. The Ministry of Education and Sports needs to do a lot of research on e-learning so that our children are supported to study.
Therefore, I agree with the position of the committee that we support the Ministry of Education and Sports, mainly in their corrigenda request and budget. 

Madam Speaker, I also support partly the minority report, mostly on the issue of travels abroad and workshops. This time, when we are in this situation, we need to avoid some of these expenditures and put the money in the sectors, which are relevant to the pandemic. Thank you.

5.27
BRIG. GEN. FLAVIA BWEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report and also thank the movers of the minority report. 

I will begin my discussion on the minority report with the submission that touched on where my heart is, which is on the classified expenditure. The honourable member questioned whether there is need to buy more arms and equipment instead of giving the money to the health sector. 
My submission is that in this pandemic and when the locusts invaded Uganda, we have seen how the security sector generally needs funding more than ever before. If you heard what the President said and actually what we got from Kenya, Uganda managed the locusts better than Kenya, which played with them. The country managed the locusts because of the role of the security sector generally. 

So, I think that today, more than ever before, we need more funding – (Interjections) That is my submission. I am saying how we came in to solve the problem –

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Do not heckle. 

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: Madam Speaker, please, protect me. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow Brig. Gen. Byekwaso to speak. 

BRIG. GEN. BYEKWASO: That is my first submission. The other one where I am in agreement with the minority report is on the issue of the Shs 4 trillion that is going to travels compared to what we are giving to agriculture. Agriculture is getting less than that. The sector has been given an increment of only Shs 300 billion compared to the trillions that have been given to others. 

The minority report gave to us – we really need to beg the ministers if they could cut on their entertainment and travels so that we give money to the agriculture sector, which supports the bulk of Ugandans and the economy –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbaju – I know she was speaking well but we are approaching curfew time. 

5.30
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice by thanking the committee and my senior colleague, hon. Kivumbi, for the minority report. 

I would like to concentrate on two issues. In a way of deviating a little from the minority report, I would like to support the majority report on the issue of the classified funding for the security sector. This country has come a long way. Nobody knew today that we would be having the coronavirus. Nobody knew that other schedules would have changed today. We do not know what is going on. They were not foreseen. 

For matters of security, we know what has been happening with our borders. Anything can happen and therefore, we must prepare our army. They must be equipped. Therefore, the classified funding for the security sector must be increased. 

However, on the other issue, I would wish that some money that is available for reallocation be taken to the education sector. We cannot have big people in the country spending resources on travels and special meals when we do not have certain education institutions in this country. For example, I have seven sub counties in the mountains. I have mentioned this before that there is no single secondary school in those sub counties. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware that I have addressed this matter to the Minister of Education and Sports, to you and the President. You have written special letters concerning the lack of secondary schools in Busongora County South. Of recent, on 11 March 2020, you wrote a letter to the Ministry of Education and Sports about this matter. I have also written to the ministry and the minister said she will include it in the budget for the next financial year, which is this one. Unfortunately, there is nothing.

So, I am praying –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Gonahasa, hon. Akamba, hon. Katusabe, hon. Nabulindo and the Leader of the Opposition. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you normally get time to speak. Please, we are approaching curfew time and I am endangering the workers. 

5.33
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to join the other Members in thanking the Committee on Budget for this report. I also very strongly support the minority report considering that these are really extraordinary times. I keep showing off my age that at 64, I had never ever seen anything like what we are going through with the coronavirus.

Therefore, the extraordinary circumstances we are going through mean that we have to plan differently. We have been saying we cannot change the budget and that we just have to go ahead with it because that is what the procedures say. However, I would like to assure this House that without debating in anticipation, things are going to be different. 

This budget we are presenting will be for formality because we have to present a budget to the nation. However, these alternatives are going to be part and parcel of our time, possibly until the end of this year. 

I would like to thank the movers of the minority report for their presentation. I still say we need more money for the health sector. I think we will be changing - I would like to thank the team that has been working on especially the coronavirus epidemic in the hospitals because, so far, we have not lost any people. I thank you very much for the hard work you put in. 
Nonetheless, you never know what will happen tomorrow and so, we need to work towards getting more supplementary budgets for the health sector. 

 The proposal to increase the money for the agricultural sector should also be seriously considered. I mean a little bit of cutting here and there is great but I think considering what we have seen, as far as the feeding of our people is concerned, we need to have a serious disaster preparedness budget, especially for the agricultural sector. We need to produce enough food for our people so that we do not have to panic and run around to look for it when needed. The major suppliers have failed to give us what we wanted. I am referring to the beans story. We have had to go to the small suppliers out there. 

We should also look at how to make sure that we have good results in this country. We have produced a lot and if we had our own food reserves, we would not be struggling to look for the supplies. We would not be struggling to make sure that they are of the right quality. What happens in many of the countries around us is –(Member timed out.) 

5.37
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for presenting the report. I have perused the report and found that the committee considered referral hospitals but the issue of the health sector should be handled from the grassroot level. 

Madam Speaker, they have not provided for the health centres III and IV in the districts. In Namutumba alone, we have over eight sub counties that do not have health centres III yet it is a Government policy that each sub county should have a health centre III. We need to provide for the establishment of these health centres and equip the existing ones like the Health Centre IV in Namutumba District. 

It is also Government policy that every district should have a district hospital. However, there are many districts in Uganda that do not have hospitals and the examples are Namutumba, Buyende and Namisindwa districts, among others. I pray - 

THE SPEAKER: And Kaliro. 

MR AKAMBA: Yes, Madam Speaker, I pray that we provide money for the establishment of these hospitals. 
To emphasise the matter, for us in Namutumba District, when they say that somebody has been referred to a referral hospital or Mulago, we just know that person is not going to survive because such people are referred when they have never been handled at the ground because there are no facilities at all. Hence, I emphasise that we provide money for that cause. 

The other issue I would like to comment on is about the Law Development Centre (LDC). They have provided money for the LDC but they left out a very important aspect of providing money for the operationalisation of the LDC Campus in Lira. 

Government decided, in its wisdom, that LDC should have campuses in Mbarara, Lira and Mbale. Next financial year, they are supposed to operationalise the Lira campus but there is not even a single coin that has been provided for that purpose. I propose that we provide for that. 

Climate change is real and its effects will affect this country even much more than COVID-19 has done. Why don’t we provide for the proposal by Government to 40 million trees? The Minister of Water and Environment –(Member timed out.) 

5.40
MS ROBINA SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the committee for this noble job they have done. 

Madam Speaker, I am going to mainly focus on the entire health budget because that is where my interest usually lies. Health is wealth. I think we should enhance the health budget in conformity with the Abuja Declaration, of health taking 15 per cent of the national budget. 

As much as we look at COVID-19, which has now wrecked our health sector, we must not forget that other diseases are still in existence. A number of non-communicable diseases are killing our people silently. For example, HIV/AIDS is still in existence. We passed the HIV Trust Fund in Parliament here but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has refused to operationalise it. 

The other issue that I have looked at and which needs to be enhanced – and I will avoid explaining it because of the limited time – is research, whose budget has not been enhanced. We understand that every activity we do requires a scientific research so as to be efficient and effective.  

The Uganda Viral Research Institute is doing a noble job. As you all know, they are doing all the COVID-19 tests for us. However, they are not getting any support. We need to include them in the coming budget. They told us that they get funding from development partners, who may decide to stop it any time. We need to have testing facilities in all the regions to sort out all possible delays like the ones we are facing during this COVID-19 pandemic. Samples now delay reaching Entebbe because we have only one centre doing the tests in the entire country. We should provide for funding for the Uganda Virus Research Institute. 

As for the Uganda Blood Bank - we need blood banks for health centres IV. That is where our mothers go and die of bleeding because there is no blood. The Government trained 89 anesthetic officers and 184 assistants but no money has been provided for them in the coming budget. What are they going to do? Why was the money given for training spent? We need it to be increased in the coming budget. 

In the regional referral hospitals, we do not have the MRI machines that are used to identify the many diseases that kill our people. 

The issue of TB has not been funded well yet, it still kills our people - (Member timed out.) 

5.44
MR MAXWELL AKORA (UPC, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the Chairperson and members of the Committee on Budget for coming up with the budget for the next financial year in time despite the very difficult circumstances we are operating in. 

I note that most of our debate has been on the allocation of the little resources that we have on the expenditure side and little debate has been heard on the revenue side, as if it is not important. 

We know that our tax revenue to GDP has been reported as being below the regional average of about 20 per cent. In fact, ours is only about 13 per cent, which, considering our very low GDP, is indeed quite low and cannot finance all our priorities. Therefore, it is important that as a country and as Parliament, we try to assist Government to mobilise domestic resources. At the moment, our Budget is funded to the extent of only 42 per cent through domestic revenue. The rest of the domestic resources are actually borrowed funds, leaving a total of 52 per cent of our Budget being financed by borrowing. 

However, that borrowing is deferred taxation for future generations and if we are borrowing this money mainly to meet recurrent and consumption expenditure like salaries, allowances and workshops, then we are not doing any service to this country. We are doing a disservice to the future generations.

Therefore, I would like to request that the House focuses on domestic revenue mobilisation. The report indicates that there is a domestic revenue mobilisation strategy. Last week, we debated the revenue Bills to finance the Budget; the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill and other Bills. 

Madam Speaker, you may recall that most of the recommendations of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development were actually rejected by the House. We are discussing these financing mechanisms piecemeal. Therefore, I would really like to urge that Parliament tasks Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come up with a comprehensive strategy to increase our tax revenue to GDP from the current 14 or 16 per cent to at least 20 per cent so that we have adequate resources to deliver – (Member timed out.)

5.47
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a question to both Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Every year, this country loses Shs 3 trillion to corruption and Shs 600 billion to procurement fraud. I wonder how much of what we have in this Budget will be a loss again.

Can this be the Budget? Can we pronounce ourselves as the 10th Parliament that there will be no more loss of money to corruption, including procurement fraud? 

On 10 July 2010, the United Nations passed a resolution making universal access to clean drinking water an international right. You have been to Bukonjo County West and my people there continue to cry and plead with you to have clean and safe drinking water so that they are saved. The dehumanisation of sharing water points with animals is still the case. It does not only apply to my community but to all communities across the country. 

Like you have always done, can you make that a gift in this Budget; that we give clean safe drinking water to our people so that we do not have two worlds in this country, where we have animal keeping communities with safe and clean water for the animals and yet, we have human beings in some other parts of the country without safe and clean water.

Madam Speaker, the electric wires around conservation communities still remains a challenge. I would like to implore the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Budget to include that in the Budget so that we have that problem solved once and for all.

As a shadow Minister for Foreign Affairs and Minister of Foreign Affairs in the people’s Government, I am concerned about the land – (Member timed out.)

5.50
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Committee on Budget for their presentation and the movers of the minority report. 

COVID-19 is an eye opener to the people of Busia and the people of Uganda at large. I come from the border and I would like to request that more money should be added to security. I have 200 porous entrances and only 60 security men. They cannot control the border; people are crossing and trucks are crossing from these porous entrances.

Madam Speaker, the second matter is to equip agriculture. I come from a cereal growing area whose market is now blocked. If agriculture was giving us more than 10 tonnes of maize, these people in Busia would be in their gardens and not on cross border trade through the porous border points.

If members of Parliament had not bought their ambulances, the whole of Busia District would have no ambulance. As I add my voice to that of other Members, my request would be that the health sector should be equipped almost 100 per cent. For us, the people of Busia, we could cross to Kenya for medication but now, the border is closed. We do not have any district ambulance, we do not have an X-ray machine and no scan in the whole district. We rely on Kenya.

Madam Speaker, I heard when the Minister of Education and Sports was saying  that children are to learn online. Sincerely speaking, most of our students are in the villages. We do not have power, we do not have internet and they cannot even afford data to study online. 

Even regarding the primary section, children do not have internet or televisions in the villages. It is very difficult to say that the children should learn online and that you are giving the Local Government education materials to go and distribute in the villages through the parish chiefs and LC1s. They may not reach all the homes. 

Madam Speaker, this is my concern. Thank you very much.

5.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank all the members of the Committee on Budget and more especially hon. Kivumbi, for the minority report.

Honourable members, we always take our resource basket as 100 per cent. If we try to allocate the 100 per cent, we see where our priorities are. At this time, we have this big problem of COVID-19 and we cannot close our eyes to the real warriors; the soldiers. People got up to say that the Ministry of Health budget was increased. If we say 100 per cent, it was decreased from 7.9 to 6.1 per cent. Let us put it in percentage and see that the Ministry of Health budget decreased. 

I would like to take you back to my area; Gulu Regional Referral Hospital. I was there on Monday and we still have one ambulance of CHOGM. And this, for a regional referral hospital. 
There is no working ventilator. Even the oxygen cylinders are not working. The tubes are not there. So, how do we help our people? We need more funding in health. It should go to about eight per cent. Why do you reduce it? Why don’t you just add 0.1 per cent to make it eight per cent?
	
Let us really look at health. Even in the universities, we need to improve and enhance the laboratories. These are Mbarara and Gulu universities. I am sure they have already put in their requests. 

When we go to agriculture, the budget was also reduced from 3.2 per cent to 2.9 per cent. And your budget strategy is about improving on agroindustry. How do you improve agroindustry when you are reducing the budget of agriculture? 

I was in Gulu –(Interjections)– the bodaboda riders, because they have no work, kept coming to me. I got some 200 hoes and I would give them one by one to encourage them to engage in agriculture. I told them to do some vegetable growing that can give results very quickly. 

How can we reduce the budget to this? We need to enhance the agricultural budget. That is why the minority view is the best view. 

We can take something small from the classified expenditure. Right now, the whole world is fighting COVID-19. We are not going to have enemies fighting us in order for us to buy big equipment. Let us fight COVID-19 by improving agriculture and budget funding. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 34 members have contributed to this debate. I apologise for keeping you here an extra hour but we had to finish this debate. 

Tomorrow, we shall just go to Committee of Supply. We shall give the minister an opportunity to respond tomorrow before we go to the Committee of Supply. 

House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much.
 
(The House rose at 5.58 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 23 April 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)
