
Wednesday, 11 April 2012

Parliament met at 3.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.
                   
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. We apologise for the delay in the commencing the proceedings; we had a meeting of the Appointments Committee and it took much longer than we expected, but we hope we shall be able to run through the business for today.

I also want to alert you that as we agreed yesterday, Members of Parliament will be moving a motion relating to the IPU. We shall allow them to do that later. I also want to remind our Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs that we want you to do quick work on the ID project. We are going through the budget cycle and the outcome of your report may have bearing on how we budget. So, I do hope that our committee is working fast on that issue.

3.04
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising under rule 27 of our Rules of Procedure to present a petition from the people of Bujumba constituency, Kalangala District, which I represent. This constituency is unique and it is located in a unique district, which is an island district, connected to Masaka by a free Government ferry. 

A commercial company called Kalangala Infrastructure Services Limited (KIS), which is a privately owned firm, has entered into an agreement with Government of Uganda to develop, expand and maintain key infrastructure services on Bugala Islands on Lake Victoria for a period of eight years in an exclusive manner. This means that not even a development partner or a Government ministry can come and offer the people the same services. These services include provision of rural water, provision and operation of ferry services, provision and generation of electricity and maintaining a trunk road on this island.  

Madam Speaker, the areas of concern by your humble petitioners are the terms and conditions in these agreements. They raise serious procedural, legal and political concerns that will affect the residents’ social, economic and political order. In the view of your humble petitioners, implementing the agreement in its current form will result into alienation of part of Uganda to foreigners and thus surrendering the sovereignty of the country, powers and authority of Government and its organs as derived from the Constitution, which derives its authority from the people of Uganda.

Your humble petitioners are also concerned with the agreements and arrangements about issues of exclusivity, road tolling, charging of services that should have been provided by Government. They are also concern about the lack of consultation with the local leaders whom they intend to serve. 

Your humble petitioners seek the indulgence of this august House to intervene in the matter so as to avert any unclear dealing by Government in this arrangement, which could be detrimental to the country, exploitative and oppressive to the people. They request that the matter be handled expeditiously. I beg to lay the petition on the Table. It is signed by 1400 residents.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you will appreciate, the issues of the islands are unique. Ever since we came to the Ninth Parliament, we have been battling issues of concessions, issues of exclusivity; so, I think this is a matter which deserves the attention of this Parliament so that we do not condemn our people to things that they have not understood or participated in.

I want to pass it on to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and they should be supported by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to study the memorandum of understanding and report expeditiously to this House.

MR JOHN SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, the petition is a serious issue, as you have said, and we are passing it over to the committee for scrutiny. However, Government was supposed to sign these agreements by the 6th of April. There is fear that by the time Parliament concludes the process through the committee, Government could have signed these documents. If we allow Government to sign, it is like going back to the IBEA Company, apportioning parts of Uganda to a private company for management.

Madam Speaker, we would request for your guidance whether this House should not consider halting the process until the committee comes out with the report.

THE SPEAKER: Can I know who is in charge of this agreement? 

3.11 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, this project falls under Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but the biggest component is infrastructure. It is not true that we are going to sign the agreements. We have a meeting tomorrow; we are renegotiating the agreement and we have asked the concerned parties for an extension, of which they have agreed, because we also have our concerns which are not clear. So, it is not true that we are about to sign the agreement, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know whether you had consulted the local leaders of Bugala Islands over this. I think that is what hon. Badda is complaining about. You are signing agreements on their behalf and they do not know.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Since you have ruled that this should go to the Committee of Physical Infrastructure, I will be more than willing to go and attend the committee and explain, with my colleague from Ministry of Finance. People were consulted, we have some agreements signed by the local leadership and we shall table them there in the committee. I think since the committee will be convening very soon; I beg that we go and explain to the committee about the consultations which were made. Those which were not made can be made because we are not about to sign. 

THE SPEAKER: So, you are assuring this House that you are not going to sign until the committee has reported back?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, we have not signed anything. We are renegotiating the agreement and now you have put it to the committee and you have said this should be handled expeditiously. I beg that it should be handled expeditiously and we all move in tandem. This is because we have a commitment and we do not want the country to lose. However, we also cannot sign any agreement which Parliament has got doubts about. I beg that you give a timeframe when this committee should present its report to this House so that we can also go there and work with them.

MR TIMOTHY LWANGA: I want to thank hon. Badda for bringing this issue here. It has been on for some time, even before I came back to Parliament. 

Our concern is that a project which affects the lives of people on the island went on, papers were signed and assignments were made to such an extent that electricity and water were given to a firm which is foreign to come and control. What people want is that they should be consulted and they want to be part of the decision, because the decision affects their lives. I am surprised that the minister is saying that people were consulted. Is the minister implying that this is already a done deal and nothing can be done about it?

MR BYABAGAMBI: It is not a done deal because initially, the concept of the project was almost as he has said, but later on when the President went to Kalangala, we had to change the concept. As we talk now, when the road is developed, it will be handed over to the Government of Uganda. I think the confusion is between shadow toll and toll, which we can clarify to the committee; otherwise, the deal is not done.

MR FRANK TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I am about to say is not really about finance. I am seeking some guidance from you because, Madam Speaker, you superintend over our institution. I think we need to harmonise the working relationship between Members of Parliament and members of Cabinet. The point raised by hon. Tim Lwanga is about consultation. I have just gone through a very bad exercise because of lack of consultation with a Cabinet minister. 

When we come to the Floor of Parliament, we raise petitions in two ways; either through formal petitions signed by the petitioners or we raise matters of national importance. A matter of national importance is also a petition in a way. I remember I raised a matter of national importance about a public road, which had been closed above Serena, and there was a pledge that it would either be opened or they would make a statement. 

Why do some ministers – I do not want to make a blanket accusation because some ministers do good jobs, and at some time I will mention the good ones and the bad ones if you allow me, Madam Speaker. (Laughter) Why do some ministers find it difficult to respect their colleagues, the back benchers? Today you are there but tomorrow you will be behind. Tell us the programme to be done in my constituency and seek my opinion.

I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker; when a member raises a matter of national importance and there is a pledge from the responsible minister of a statement or something and that statement never comes, what should the sanction be? The Hansard is recording that there was a promised statement in two weeks but it was never done; what should be done? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue raised by my colleague from the island affects me also. It is like mortgaging a whole population into the hands of one company - transport, water, electricity, to mention but a few. 

Given the current problem in Uganda, a contract can be given to a company that does not have the capacity to implement the work. It wins the contract through the back door and when they fail to deliver, the people are faced with a problem where the Government cannot intervene, and removing this company becomes a problem. Compensations in billions of shillings come up. We should halt any proceedings on that agreement until we are sure that the people are safeguarded.

Madam Speaker, in Obongi we have a ferry delivered by the Government of Uganda but the contract to construct a landing site was given to a company which does not have capacity. How did that company win a contract here in Uganda? In fact, we should investigate all the people who are awarded contracts from Kampala here. A weak company can be given a contract. How do you make your decisions even when we have clear PPDA regulations? That is why I share the fears and worries of the people of the islands. We need your help, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

3.21
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my honourable colleague for presenting that petition on behalf of his people. The tone in the petition raises three fundamental issues, namely, foreign powers are taking bits and pieces of this country, it is against the will of the people, and it is unfair. This has now turned synonymous with the day-to-day management of public affairs in this country. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, let us acknowledge that in the management of modern economics of nations, there are three fundamental methods that are used namely, using our national resources, borrowing, and public-private partnerships or Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT). Build, operate and transfer is normal, and it happens all over the world. If at all the government is trying to follow the BOT route, I think as Members of Parliament we should support it. The question that stays now on the Floor is the level of transparency and efficiency which, traditionally, we have failed to achieve in whatever we set out to do or whenever such deals are cracked. 

So I would like to beg you that the idea of public-private partnerships, which we passed in the past Parliament, should be acceptable. We should be able to sell it to our constituents as an acceptable mode of developing something that we should have developed using our own resources. However, because you do not have these resources, you give somebody 25 years to build it, run it and then give it back to us after they have recouped their money. This is standard procedure the world over. 

The third issue that has been raised, and was raised by hon. Tumwebaze as well, is something that itches me to the bone - our relationship in this Parliament. I happened to serve in the past Parliament and we had a silent code of conduct such that if a minister is going to my constituency, courtesy would demand that I receive at least a phone call from them or their offices. However, since this Parliament started, like he has said except for a few, the majority of them do it at will. 

Secondly, when we come on the Floor of Parliament with something that is affecting our people, we are told to first write to the minister and consult before bringing it to the House. They demand courtesy from us but they are not willing to reciprocate. So, Madam Speaker, I would beg you, as the adjudicator, to at least institute a subtle code of conduct for the good working relationship in future. It is very important that we build that, otherwise in the next couple of years we will go on a clash course. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: What I would want to remind the House is that in the Eighth Parliament the then Leader of Government Business, Rt hon. Robin Apolo Nsibambi, wrote very clear instructions telling members of the Cabinet that they must consult Members of Parliament when they are going to their constituencies - (Applause) - and I think it was adhered to. I doubt if it has been done during this tenure. 

So, I am reminding the Leader of Government Business that that is a standing instruction from your office during the Eighth Parliament. I think it is only courteous for you to let me know that you are going to my village in Mbulamuti so that I do not just hear that the minister is there and then I start chasing you to find out what you are doing.

The other thing is to remind ourselves about the Constitution: Article 1 of the Constitution talks about the sovereignty of the people: 

“(1) All power belongs to the people who shall exercise their sovereignty in accordance with this Constitution. 

(2) Without limiting the effect of clause (1) of this article, all authority in the State emanates from the people of Uganda; and the people shall be governed through their will and consent.” 

So, please consult the MPs; even if you have to go many times, do it until they are satisfied.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank those who have contributed to this topic. This project has been on the drawing board for a long time; it started way back in 2005 and many people know what has been going on. However, as you have ruled, I have agreed that the best way to move – actually, I want to thank hon. Tanna because it is a PPP. 

As you have ruled, we have not signed any binding agreement; let us work together and consult each other in the committee because this project is good for our people in Kalangala. Maybe we did not consult a lot, but this is not a bad project at all. This is the time we can move, since now it has gone to the committee. Let us consult and we tell them what this project is all about rather than killing it. Moreover, this project is funded by our development partners like USAID and DFID. So, I beg that we go to the committee and those who need to be consulted will be consulted.

Madam Speaker, I am one of the ministers who go out for visits after writing to all Members of Parliament - (Interjection) - I do it! I have just come back from Kisoro in Western Uganda. I want a member from Western Uganda to bear witness that they received my letters. I usually do that. However, at the same time – (Mr Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Are you from Western Uganda? He has testified about MPs from Western Uganda; are you one of them? (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I also want to beg my colleagues; since I am also a Member of Parliament, if they meet something they are not clear about, let them also consult us, the ministers. We should not be seen to be on the other side of the river as though we were not Members of Parliament. 

Actually, I was consulting him here before he petitioned. I asked him why he did not first consult me or at least tell me as a friend that he was going to do that so that I could tell him where we have reached. So, I beg that honourable members, as much as I show you respect, you should also look at our side; we have a lot of things to do in these ministries but we need to consult each other. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we ask the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to handle this quickly. I know we gave you something about the border dispute in Adjumani but this is equally urgent. 

3.31
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. This matter concerns Uganda’s candidature for the post of secretary-general for the Organisation of Islamic Co-operation (OIC). This is more or less equated to that of the Secretary-General of the United Nations. 

This is an international organisation with a membership of 57 members. Uganda has already presented its candidate for the election of the above post. On this note, I would like to thank the President for having supported this cause. Uganda stands to benefit a lot if a Ugandan succeeds in becoming secretary-general of this organisation. Allow me at this moment to briefly highlight one or two benefits to be accrued out of this organisation -

THE SPEAKER: No; I do not think you are justifying anything. Just ask the question you want to ask. You said they have not paid subscription. Do not justify anything.

MR MAWANDA: Yes. I agree with you, Madam Speaker. There is a candidate whom the government has presented, and that is hon. Isaac Musumba. He has already presented his credentials but there is a snug, which I would like the Leader of Government Business and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to take up seriously. 

One, there is subscription that has not been paid, which amounts to US$ 500,000. If this amount is not paid, then our candidature will not be taken seriously. Secondly, there is the issue of the facilitation to be given to the ministry officials and our candidate to be able to move around soliciting for support from member countries.  

Madam Speaker, I would like to request the Leader of Government Business and the ministry officials to take up this matter and be able to update us as Parliament so that we can participate in soliciting support for our candidate. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Finance is listening. 

3.34
MR LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. Of recent, we have heard conflicting information regarding Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). As we talk, there were investigations which were carried out and the board was suspended. The reason as to why I stood up is to get more clarification from the line ministers or from the Leader of Government Business. Before these people were suspended, this team used to go out in the field, and on various television stations we used to see factories being closed on grounds of producing counterfeit items.  

We would like to know if this issue can be handled by our Committee on Trade and Industry because there is a lot. The information we are getting is that some of these companies which were closed are now operating and yet they were closed on grounds that they were producing substandard items from building materials, juices- (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue of UNBS is very serious. I have had an opportunity to interact with some of the people who work in this very organisation and to our surprise and shock, there is now hardly any supervision of the goods which are imported into this country. That means that from drugs - both human and animal – to food stuffs, commodities, etc, there is hardly any supervision. We get the worst goods from any country and from any person and they are just imported into the country. That means a lot. 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious issue and we are seated on a time bomb. 

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, I happened to serve on the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for five years in the last Parliament and they used to come to us. I happened to have interacted with their heads of department. I would like to clarify on what he has said. 

While hon. Otafiire was the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry he suspended the board and the Executive Director and the other directors continued operating. When a new a minister was appointed and the ministries separated, that same board was reinstated. Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) has gone to court saying that it is not represented on the board as is required by the law. That case is in court. 

Now they have interdicted the Executive Director and all other directors there below. A group of that organisation used to come to the committee and they always complained about being under facilitated, being fought by very powerful people in this Government, especially those that were importing substandard batteries that many of our constituents use for 15 minutes- (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter is not really for debate here. We will send it to our committee on trade to examine quickly and give a report to this House. Let us hear from the trade committee. 

MRS EVERLINE TETE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the vice chairperson of the committee. We are handling that issue and we are soon bringing the report to the House to be discussed. So, do not bother, my brothers, it is coming.

THE SPEAKER: So you are doing it already? You are handling that matter?

MRS TETE: We are handling the report on counterfeits and Uganda National Bureau of Standards. We have summoned them and they have given us information, so we are bringing the report to the Floor of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: That is wonderful from the committee. Thank you.

3.40
MR CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I am raising an issue of national importance in accordance with rule 41 (1), which says that with the leave of the Speaker, a member may raise an issue of public national importance regarding the functions of the House. The matter I am raising concerns security and defence. 

Last night in my constituency, a group of Karimojong – (Laughter) - went and stole animals in three sub-counties that border Karamoja and Katakwi District. In Magoro sub-county, over 15 animals were taken; in Ngariam, over 20 and in Palam sub-county, over 20 were taken. 

I remember recently, the Minister of Defence was asked to tell this House about the security in this district and my constituency in particular. The minister clearly stated that the situation had greatly improved and actually, there was a lot of progress that could not cause alarm. However, today as we speak, my people are traumatised. Yesterday, I remember I told you the situation had improved; little did I know that we were seriously going to be given an Easter gift.

In Karamoja as we speak, there are around 2700 LDUs that had been recruited by Government to keep security and defence. I am wondering, and I suspect that some of these guns - the 2700 - are the ones that were used to steal our animals. The situation at hand is that more are yet to be recruited, but on our side we do not have any LDUs-(Member timed out­_)

THE SPEAKER: I saw the Minister for Security. I do not know whether he has captured the situation in Toroma. Has the minister captured the raids of last night in Toroma? Can we ask you to check the Hansard and identify the areas mentioned by the member in Toroma where he says there were raids in three sub-counties last night so that you can give us a response?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Much obliged.

3.44
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJUSSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of national concern. About five years ago, the Government of Uganda undertook to improve water transport on Lake Kyoga especially on the landing sites that exist in Buyende District. Preliminary stages were undertaken namely, the surveying of the landing sites that were to be covered by this ferry, and that is Bukungu in Buyende District, Muntu in Lango sub-region, and Kaberamaido and Kagwara in Teso.  

The surveying process took some money, which was paid by the government. Recently, the designing took place and Government of Uganda paid almost Shs 5 billion for designs. I am saying “about” because I am not sure of the specific figure. What is happening now is that the ferry does not exist in the budget process that is on-going. 

Recently, the President visited Buyende and this issue of the ferry came up from the wanainchi. The President confirmed during a public rally, which he held, that the ferry was going to be constructed and provided for easy water transport in those areas. I am, therefore, finding it very disturbing that up to now, in spite of what has already happened like the surveying and the designing process which took colossal amounts of money by Government, the ferry is nowhere to be seen. We are told through our informal interactions, and I am not ready to reveal this for obvious reasons, that the money is not there to construct this ferry. Now, what do we tell our people back at home in Buyende District? I want to register this serious concern to the Government of Uganda-(Member timed out­_)

THE SPEAKER: Minister, that pledge is over 40 years old to the people of that area; I do not mention which one. (Laughter)

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much, and I thank the member for raising the matter. I want to correct the records on the Hansard, that we have paid the consultant Shs 5 billion. That is not true. We only received Shs 2.8 billion from Prime Minister’s Office and we used about Shs 1 billion for the consultancy. So, we have never received Shs 5 billion and we have never contracted a consultant at Shs 5 billion. That one has not been done. 

However, it is true the designs have been made and we are only waiting for - We even went ahead to advertise. Madam Speaker, you know very well how we changed this ferry from the ferry to a ship, more or less like that one of Kalangala, the multipurpose ship. So, we are only waiting for more release of funds from Prime Minister’s Office so that we can award the tender for the construction of the ship, but all the preparations by the ministry are already done. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I think the House will be taking that as an assurance.  

Honourable members, I have now received the programme for tomorrow’s proceedings to pay tribute to late Prof. George Wilberforce Kakoma. The body will arrive here at 9 o’clock in the morning. I will receive it together with my entourage. It will be placed in the central lobby where it will lie in state. Mourners will view the body and sign the condolence book while the Police band is playing dirges. They will be sitting up there. 

At 2.00 p.m., the Speaker’s procession will enter the Chamber. We shall have prayers. The Police band will play the dirges. The casket will be transferred from the central lobby into the Chamber. We shall sing one verse of the National Anthem, lay the wreaths and then a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute will be moved by hon. Mary Karooro Okurut, the Minister of Information and National Guidance. We shall try and close the debate and eulogies at 4.00 p.m. From here, they will leave for the National Theatre as the Police band again plays the dirges. So, that is the programme for tomorrow. It will be issued in the morning. 

Also, I just wanted to amend the Order Paper to say that there is a motion which the Shadow Attorney-General wants to bring and we shall give him time later. So, let us go back to Order Paper.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, between yesterday and today, I received information that the committee and the ministry are not yet ready to handle this Bill. They want it to be handled next week. So, item No.4 will be deferred to next week.

MOTION FOR A RESOULTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO HON. SEBUTINDE JULIA

3.50
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to beg for your indulgence because I knew the Bill on public order management was coming on and I was not ready with my motion.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. So we defer that.

MR TASHOBYA: I beg that it be deferred to next week. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE PROF. ANTHONY GINGYERA PINYCHWA

THE SPEAKER: The mover is not here. He is out of the country.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

MS ACAYO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am to move the motion, item number six.

THE SPEAKER: Oh?

MS ACAYO: Hon. Omach is out of the country. So, I am going to move the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Did he assign it to you?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE PROF. ANTHONY GINYERA PINCWA

3.51
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Prof. Anthony Ginyera Pinycwa under Rule 43 of the Rules of Procedure:

“WHEREAS the late Prof. Anthony Gingyera Pinycwa was born on 22 January 1938 in Pacego, Panyango sub-county, Nebbi District, and attended primary school between 1946 and 1952 at Pakwach; and was awarded the West Nile Full Merit Scholarship between 1955 and 1957 to pursue his secondary education at St. Aloysius College, Nyapea, present day Zombo District, where he attained his Cambridge Overseas Certificate in 1957.

AND WHEREAS Prof. Pinycwa then joined Makerere University College where he won the Shell oil company prize for being the best in the bachelors degree programme and proceeded to the prestigious University of London, graduating with a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Political Science, Sociology and History in 1962 with an Upper Second degree class.

AND WHEREAS in 1963, he won the United States Department of States Scholarship for Graduate Studies under the staff-student exchange programme at the University of Chicago and in 1964 graduated with a Masters Degree in International Relations and Political Science from the University of Chicago;

NOTING THAT between 1965 and 1967, Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa proceeded to study for his PhD in International Relations at the same University of Chicago under the sponsorship of the Rockfeller Foundation, and graduated in 1972; making him the first student from West Nile to obtain a PhD –(Applause)- and at a young age of 34, he became one of the first Africans to obtain a PhD.

AWARE THAT that the late obtained other university grants, awards and honours including a Fulbright Senior Fellowship at Boston University, USA and a fully-sponsored visiting professorship in Political Science at Duke University, North Carolina, USA in 1996;

AND WHEREAS he worked at Makerere University for 36 years, rising through the ranks from a lecturer in 1967 to senior lecturer to full professor in 1975. He was Dean for Social Research and appointed the first ever full Deputy Vice-Chancellor in July 1978, and he served in that capacity until 1986;

APPRECIATING THAT because of his patriotism, the late professor declined various offers to leave his country for greener pastures and spent half of his life teaching and managing Makerere University; exhibiting his exemplary character and dedication to this country;

COGNISANT of the fact that Prof. Ginyera retired as a full professor of Political Science in 2003 but continued and volunteered to supervise Masters and PhD students of Makerere University and other new private universities including KIU, and also served as an external examiner; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

1.	That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this illustrious son of Uganda.

2.	That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by the late Prof. Anthony Ginyera Pinycwa in the academic arena and Civil Service both at the local and international levels.

3.	That the Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants the late Prof. Anthony Ginyera Pinycwa eternal peace.

4. Pray that a scholarship scheme be put in place in his memory.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

3.57
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank my colleague for moving this motion. I would like to support this motion for this fallen great man of Uganda. 

I knew Prof. Pinycwa when I was at Makerere for both my Bachelors Degree and my Masters in International Relations. He taught me and I know that if he taught you, you could not fail. I think that is one of the reasons why I am here.

Prof. Pinycwa was very articulate and committed to his work. He loved his work. One of the things which showed that he was committed and loved his work is that he was a professor who could not miss lectures without reasons. At least if he was not going to be around, he would make sure he lets you know. It is very rare to find such committed people, especially in this era where people are more bent towards making money other than rendering service. So, Prof. Pinycwa is very much remembered for that.

As we pay tribute to Prof. Pinycwa, I wish that he had been alive. This brings me to the point that we should recognise our heroes when they are still alive instead of waiting for them to pass on then we pay the tribute. We should work out a scheme where we value these people when they are still around because they make great contributions to this nation.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Acayo, to whom is your prayer number 4 directed; the issue of the scholarship? I do not know whether it is to the government, to the local government or to whom. I think we should clear that before we finish. 

4.00
MR STEPHEN BAKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. I wish to support the motion that this House pays tribute to the late Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa.

Beyond recognising fallen heroes of this country, I wish to support the idea of hon. Onyango that this House and Government should move a step further and start recognising distinguished Ugandans who have made a contribution towards the development of Uganda. 

I know for sure that there is something going on; the national medals which are awarded during the national days. But my observation is that those medals are awarded to NRA liberation war heroes. I think we need to go beyond that. We have distinguished Ugandans in the academia, wehave large-scale farmers who have sustained this country because this is an agricultural country. So, we need to widen our scope and include all Ugandans in all spheres of life. But also, beyond just giving medals, we should make tangible benefits. Why should we have distinguished Ugandans recognised in Kololo when they cannot afford a meal? I know some of them; I saw them on TV being recognised yet they cannot afford a day’s meal; they are in a very bad state. Therefore, let this be accompanied by economic benefits to sustain our distinguished Ugandans. 

Tomorrow, we are going to have a distinguished Ugandan brought here for recognition, but there are issues that have been coming up on his welfare, his compensation and so on. This House needs to come out very clearly on how we treat Ugandans who have contributed to the development of this country.

4.02
MS GRACE FREEDOM KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support this motion and say that in West Nile, not to mention the country as whole, now that professor is no more, we have very few professors left. They may not even be five.

When we talk about a scholarship scheme to be put in place in his memory, I do appeal for this particular thing on behalf of the disadvantaged districts which are lagging behind in education; where the education institutions are dilapidated. I also want to praise him not only for being a professor, but also for his other side of life; for supporting development in the region, especially Nebbi, where I originate from; for supporting good governance. If professor knew that you were an upcoming leader, he would support you. If he knew that you were making efforts to study hard, he would support you. If professor knew that you had a poor background and are suffering, he would support you. 

I am grateful that today we can pay tribute to the late professor and I pray that even if he is dead, he should still be recognised as a hero. We have lamented here how often we recognise people when they have already died. I thank him very much for the exemplary life he lived; for the profession and for all he did when he was still alive; for the community in West Nile and for the country at large. Thank you.

4.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, for those of us who hail from West Nile, Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa became the shining light and opened the academic horizon for our people. Nyapea became a shining beckoning star for every young kid to aspire to go to. That is one big tribute I would like to pay to Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa for opening our eyes and leading the way.

Secondly, where he came from, Jonam, perhaps there is no region in this country that has a concentration of brain power like Jonam has. Let me give you an example: The late Prof. Odong from Makerere Medical School hailed from there; the late Pinycwa Ali hailed from there; the late Henry Pinycwa, former foreign minister, hailed from there; the current Archbishop of Uganda, Bishop Orombi, is from Jonam; the late Governor, Bank of Uganda, Onegi Obel is from Jonam. One of the earliest entrepreneurs in this country, in the days of the Indians, was A.B. Wadrif; he had buses throughout this country. These people live along the Nile; maybe we should make inquiries about the chemistry of this fish Angara and what it does to their brain power. 

Madam Speaker, Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa made substantive contribution as was said earlier in academic excellence. This was through the discipline of research and publication. I do not know about professors these days, but he did research and published. He was well known globally as an academician.

He did not only publish and do research, but he also held court in public debates and presentations. Those of you who are old enough can remember the debates in City Hall with others like Ali Mazrui, Akena Adoko - Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa was one of those stunning performers during those days. He spoke special English, not the English you people speak these days. He had a special tone in his voice which was very captivating. Actually, his classes in Makerere were some of the largest because of that attractive voice that this gentleman had.

Madam Speaker, people who have contributed so much to the body of knowledge and have brought up intellectuals in this country should be honoured. First of all, Makerere should consider establishing a chair in the name of Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa for the contributions he has made. 

My own Government, in which I serve, should support this prayer for a scholarship endowed in Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa’s name for outstanding students from all over this country. I pray and support this motion and may his soul rest in eternal peace.

4.09
MR BENSON OBUA (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity. It goes without saying that Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa was a great man and his contribution to this country will forever be remembered. It is unfortunate that we lost him. He died when I was out of the country, so I could not bury him. 

But one aspect of his life which perhaps nobody might mention here, which must be known to Ugandans, is that Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa was a very political man. He was a UPC member and perhaps one of our best brains in the party. But at the same time, he was a very moderate person who probably contributed in making sure that this country begins on a good and clear political path. 

Apart from that, Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa was a great teacher. He taught me Political Science at Makerere University. He was a very kind man and we are going to dearly miss him. But I want to implore our country that we need to honour our heroes when they are still alive. We are here saying that Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa was a patriot who never left the country when it could have suited him. But how do we honour such people who gave their whole to this country? Is it enough to come here and talk about their legacy and pay tribute to them? What do we do for them when they are still alive? Tomorrow we are coming here to talk about another great hero. I do not want to pre-empt the debate for tomorrow. But the country is replete with such people of great repute which has made Uganda proud. I beg that as a nation, we begin to honour our greats and heroes. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to pay tribute to the late Prof. Anthony Ginyera Pinycwa. I came to know Prof. Pinycwa when I was working as a Research Assistant in the Department of Political Science at Makerere. 

I remember the wisdom and love he showed me, young as I was in the department at that time. He was a personal friend and he silently loved my early politics and that is why I am here in Parliament. (Laughter) He is a person who tolerated me at a very young age and allowed me to attend all the departmental seminars without segregation. I was not supposed to attend those seminars; they were too crucial and intelligible for me, but I was tolerated by him and Prof. Ali Mazrui. So, I would like to pay tribute to him.

In terms of his expertise as a great orator in the academia, he specialised in the area of international politics and he guided Uganda very much in foreign affairs. That is why in the 1970s, Uganda was doing very well in terms of international relations far from what changed later on.

I also remember Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa as a person who wished others well. During a very turbulent time when Prof. Ali Mazrui was the Head of Department of Political Science and he went away because of the brutality mounted on him by the Idi Amin government, I remember Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa nursing me because I was also scared and nearly run away from the department. He asked me to stay around and he was able to give me a recommendation that assisted me to be shifted to the Law Development Centre where I sought refuge because I could not stand the situation as it was. 

I am paying tribute to Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa as a man who by character sketch was a reserved man, a patriot at heart, a nationalist. Very few people knew he was UPC because he handled things in a manner that allowed him to survive the vestibule of challenge. (Laughter) God bless Prof. Ginyera Pinycwa!

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think we need to close. I put the question that this House do resolve to pay tribute to the late Prof. Anthony Ginyera Pinycwa. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Motion carried.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Acayo, I think we may have to think further about the scholarship; who is going to do it?

Now, honourable members, yesterday we had agreed to have a motion moved on the IPU success. Can I invite hon. Latif Ssebagala to move the motion?

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO RECOGNISE THE SUCCESSFUL ORGANISATION OF THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION CONFERENCE HELD FROM 31ST MARCH TO 5TH APRIL 2012

4.15
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will move under Rule 43. The copies are being circulated:

“WHEREAS the Inter-Parliamentary Union is an international organisation of parliaments, which was established in 1889 with Uganda becoming a member after getting Independence in 1962; 

AND WHEREAS a decision for Uganda to host the 126th Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference was taken by the Governing Council of the Inter-Parliamentary Union at its 185th Session on 21st October 2009 in Geneva after intensive lobbying by the Rt. Hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, hon. Rebecca A. Kadaga, which eventually beat Canada that wanted to host the same event;

AWARE THAT the Union is the focal point for world-wide parliamentary dialogue and it works for peace and co-operation among peoples and for the firm establishment of representative democracy in the world; 

FURTHER AWARE THAT the IPU is sensitive to the workings of the world parliamentary institutions and fosters contacts, co-ordination, and the exchange of experience among world parliaments and parliamentarians from all countries;

ALSO AWARE THAT it considers questions of international interests and concern, and expresses its views on such issues in order to bring about action by parliaments and parliamentarians and the Union also contributes to the protection and promotion of human rights, which is an essential factor of parliamentary democracy and development;

AND FURTHER AWARE THAT the IPU supports the efforts of the United Nations, whose objectives it shares, and works in close co-operation with it; 

ALSO AWARE THAT the Union also co-operates with regional inter-parliamentary organisations, as well as with international, intergovernmental and non-governmental organisations in promoting good governance and democracy among its member states. 

AND AWARE THAT the 126th IPU Conference was held in Kampala on 31st March to 5th April, 2012 under the theme: ‘Parliaments and People: Bridging the Gap’;

FURTHER AWARE THAT a lot of issues were discussed during the conference, including maternal, newborn and child health; and several resolutions including the promotion and practice of good governance, international peace and security, women empowerment and access to health as a basic right, among others were made;

ALSO AWARE THAT through the IPU conference, Ugandans were able to tap the great opportunity of marketing their country, especially in the tourism sector, considering that recently, Uganda was named as one of the best tourist destinations in 2012;

CONSIDERING that there is a need to recognise various stakeholders who selflessly and tirelessly participated in the organisation of the auspicious conference;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that –

1.	Parliament of Uganda applauds and Congratulates His Excellency the President of Uganda, the Rt Hon. Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, the Deputy Speaker of Parliament, Honourable Members of Parliament, security agencies, stakeholders, organisers and delegates for organising a successful IPU conference;

2.	Parliament of Uganda congratulates the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, upon being elected the President of the IPU;

3.	Parliament adopts all the resolutions passed in the 126th Conference of the IPU and that they be reflected and integrated in the budgetary process.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

Madam Speaker, the seconder was hon. Paula Turyahikayo, but she is currently in South Africa. On a special note, allow me to express my inner most appreciation on behalf of other delegates because Uganda was represented by 12 delegates that you appointed and I was one of them. 

Allow me to also express my inner most appreciation for the conference paving the way for the Ugandan Parliament to pass our Bill: The Anti-Homosexuality Bill. This was rejected in the conference and we were bombarded with information in as far as supporting homosexuality and abortion is concerned. I thank it has paved way for our Private Member’s Bill. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite Dr. Baryomunsi to second. Three minutes please.

4.20
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by hon. Latif Ssebagala and also congratulate you, Madam Speaker, the President and Parliament, upon the successful hosting of the IPU. Madam Speaker, we also want to appreciate your efforts because we know the struggle was on to apply to host this conference, especially in the last Parliament, and you played a very big role in convincing the delegates in the various conferences to accept Uganda to host this conference and, therefore, we would like to thank you for that great effort and also the effort you put in arranging and organising this conference. 

The theme of the IPU conference was also appropriate: “Parliament and the people: Bridging the gap” and the topics discussed ranged from democracy and human rights where the issue of maternal health was discussed; issues of peace and international security, sustainable development, finance and trade among others; and we want to appreciate the work done by the delegates who represented us in the conference because you did represent us ably and did a very great job, particularly when controversial matters were raised during the conference such as issues on abortion and homosexuality. Our delegates were very firm in presenting the position of the country and also presenting the views of this House and we want to thank you and appreciate your representation in the conference. 

Madam Speaker, as part of the organising committee for this conference, I also want to express our appreciation to the Members of Parliament because we had an organising committee which eventually and progressively was expanded to include many Members of Parliament, and also the staff of Parliament. During the arrangement and organisation of the conference, one issue which was noticeable was that our partisan differences were put aside and both Members of the ruling party and Members of the Opposition as well as Independent Members worked together for the successful hosting of this conference, and we want to register that appreciation and also call for unity on issues of national importance such as the IPU conference which we held. 

Madam Speaker, you may wish to know that some of the Members, for instance, who were working at the airport as part of the protocol team to receive the delegates slept on the cement. Some of these were Opposition Members as well as NRM Members and, therefore, as part of the organising team, we want to appreciate the work and the effort put in by the Members. 

Lastly, a number of resolutions were passed by the IPU conference and one of the prayers in the motion is that we should own these resolutions passed in this meeting. But also most importantly, we must allocate resources towards implementation of these resolutions and one of the key areas covered is the question of maternal health and, therefore, we want to urge the government and all the Members of Parliament that when it comes to the appropriation of the budget, as we are now in advanced stages of our budgeting process, we should be able to put money on these key issues, particularly those that are aimed at saving the lives of Ugandans, notably the women and children. I thank you very much and once again register appreciation to all the Members for the active participation in the IPU conference. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us hear from hon. Netalisire. 

4.26
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Manafwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to take this opportunity to thank you for lobbying for the IPU to be hosted in this country Uganda, without forgetting the former Speaker, who is now the Vice-President of this country. Allow me thank the organising team that worked together with you to enable us as a country have a beautiful IPU that was hosted here. I will also not forget thanking the A4C for behaving during that period and not walking around, but enabling us to have a peaceful IPU. 

Madam Speaker, there were so many things and issues that were discussed during the IPU Assembly and those include the issues to do with maternal health and the theme was: “Parliament and the people: Bridging the gap.” I hope and I pray that as you chair the IPU this year, the parliaments will put in consideration the issues you discussed and the resolutions that you reached at so that our parliaments will be visible and the recommendations that we pass in these parliaments will be recommendations that help our people and change the lives of our people. 

Uganda was recommended as one of the best tourist destination. I pray and hope that we shall improve on our tourism sector so that we don’t only benefit from these sectors when we have big functions and occasions like IPU, but people continue coming to our country to visit our tourist sites. I want to thank you and we want to wish you the best as you chair the IPU during your regime. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Before I get hon. Okwenye, when I was meeting many of the delegations, my observation was that they felt that we are not doing enough marketing of this country. They said they were surprised, they did not know Uganda was like this. So, I think we need to do more. 

4.29
MS ANNET OKWENYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I will start on a note of congratulating you, Madam Speaker, upon being elected as the new IPU President. You have really made us proud and we hope and pray that you keep it up. This has been a conference that has changed the face of Uganda on the international scene. Most people in the Diaspora did not actually know what was in Uganda. Most of them knew the negatives. They were thinking that Uganda is politically unstable; Ugandans are so poor; the negatives that are always out there. But we want to thank you for bringing this conference here and for opening up the eyes of the people in the Diaspora that Uganda is actually a very beautiful country with the best climate in the world and now we are going to boost our tourism sector because of this IPU conference. 

I also want to thank all those who participated in the preparation of the conference. They did a good job. I thank all the security personnel for the good work done and I also want to say that next time, don’t leave some of us out. We are able, hardworking and very energetic and willing to work for the good of this country. Thank you very much. 

4.29
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for all that you have done that enabled us to host the Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference. Your actions made us proud and filled our hearts with laughter.

The IPU delegates’ stay in Uganda was not rigid and yet nothing was cheap. Every issue was given due consideration without any signs of boastfulness. You demonstrated the best scope of skills in handling such an international conference. (Applause)

I was particularly struck by the high level of interface that you have with our partners in development, which saw AMREF organise a luncheon for the delegates in recognition of the fact that infant and maternal mortality remain an unacceptably big problem.

The advocacy drew the attention of the whole world to the plight of the African woman with a focus on mobilising people worldwide to ensure that mothers receive the best medical care that they need during pregnancy and child birth. Believing that no woman should die while giving birth, in October 2011, AMREF launched a campaign code-named “Stand up for African mothers.” This campaign should enable this parliament to influence policies in the right direction. 

Leaving no slightest trace of discontent, such a successful conference has left many speechless. It has caused paralysis in the public domain, Madam Speaker. And it is likely to remain unforgettable. The IPU Conference has positioned Uganda as a coherent society with a consistent manner of life admired worldwide. 

Madam Speaker, in so doing, you have left a legacy that there is a certain form of behavior to be followed for success to be actualised. I want to once again thank you, Madam Speaker, for organising that conference. 

4.33
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam President of the Kampala IPU Assembly and Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. (Laughter)

Some of us who were not part of the Ugandan delegation were lucky to keep getting updated information from the IPU Secretariat. I would like to say that I have picked something from that information. In some of the information, it has been said that Parliament is the central institution of democracy in a country. Some of the information also says that it is true that the sovereignty of a state is demonstrated through the existence of a parliament.

In the circumstances, I would like to say that you should stand on your two feet to protect the institution of Parliament of Uganda now and for the future generations. For instance, you should be able to protect us from Government, which is undermining Parliament of Uganda. (Laughter) Yes, for example, as Members of Parliament, aren’t we entitled to transport? (Laughter) If we are, why should Government follow up on the money they gave us under the guise of taxation? If we weren’t, then Government should have withdrawn that money. The problem is that we have been burying our heads into the sand. That is why Government has taken advantage to undermine us.

Yes, I thank you, Madam Speaker, for organising that conference. However, I would like point out the fact that there was some kind of failure on the part of the security and protocol teams. I am saying this because there were some Members of Parliament who were sent away by security personnel. I was also sent away from Imperial Royale when I went there for accreditation. They told me to drive back to National Theatre, park the car and walk back there to pick my accreditation card. I found this very unfair to me. As a Member of Parliament, if I explain to you, as a security personnel, my status you should be able to give me the respect I deserve.

I have been talking to hon. Benson Obua about this issue to which he said that in Kenya, when a Member of Parliament approaches Police, they have got to salute. (Laughter) Yes, that is how it is in Kenya.

After this IPU conference, I would like to say that Parliament of Uganda shouldn’t be undermined anymore by any institution, be it Government or otherwise.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, let us hear from hon. Ssimbwa, hon. Nakabaale, in that order, but only two minutes each.

4.37
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, as the host of the recently concluded IPU conference. I would also like to thank all the members of the organising committee who ensured the Assembly was successfully organised.

This was a historic Assembly. For example, it was my first time to see Members of Parliament from the Opposition working very harmoniously with Members from the ruling party to ensure the success of the conference. I want to thank both sides of the House for the work well done.

As a Member of the Tourism Committee of Parliament, I would like to say that I was impressed by your actions that brought in tourists. I am saying this because by the time they left, Bwindi Impenetrable Forest had been visited by about 200 delegates. This was a big success to us as a committee in charge of that sector. I pray that we keep marketing our country as you did.

I would also like to thank His Excellency the President and all the security organisations for having ensured such a big Assembly is hosted without any incidents. For the first time, I would like to register my appreciation to the Minister of Internal Affairs for improving the style of checking delegates. You will all bear me witness that the kind of check-ups that we went through when we were at Speke Resort Munyonyo for the official opening of the IPU, were fairly good. For example, there was no need for anybody to keep their vehicle outside. There were also not many body touches here and there by the security agents. I want to thank the responsible ministry and the relevant security organs for the work well done. If they can only keep it up, that would be good for us.

Lastly, I would like to request that in future, when we happen to host such big conferences, like my colleague, hon. Waira Majegere said, we need to have more information about them. For some of us who were not delegates to that conference –(Member timed out.)

4.39
MR AHMED AWONGO (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to join the rest of the Members in thanking you for a job well done. Before this meeting took place, there was a lot of talk on whether it would be a success or not. Many of the people pegged their arguments on our history, but you have proved that there is nothing impossible.

Secondly, I would like to thank you for uniting both the NRM Members of Parliament and those from the Opposition; you made them work together. And I think that was due to your skills in handling parties in this House. But this should not end with the IPU; we must continue with this kind of harmonious working relationship so that our people can know that we are all here for a common purpose.

Madam Speaker, I had the opportunity to host the delegates from Togo and New Zealand at my residence. The impression from these delegates first of all about you was so positive that I felt I should inform you about what happened. Yesterday, at about 11.00 p.m., I got a telephone call from the Deputy Speaker of Togo. She asked me to give her number to you because there are certain things that she feels she wants to share with you especially about the skills you used to organise this event. I want to urge you, Madam Speaker, and encourage all Members of Parliament to ensure that we emulate what you have done for this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, actually the person who is going to host next is very worried. Before he left - and he was the one we competed with when we were bidding - he said, “I want to talk to you so that you explain to me how you did these things.” (Laughter)

4.42
MR PATRICK NAKABALE (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also wish to congratulate you, Members of Parliament and all participants that contributed to the success of IPU.

Going with the theme, “Bridging the Gap”, I would wish to use this moment to propose something to this august House, in appreciation of the fact that this IPU sitting was concerned with bridging the gap between parliament and our communities. Looking at the way of life in our country, I wish we could come up with a way for our local Ugandans to continuously benefit from this conference by, for example, creating a Uganda IPU bureau. Here we could continuously have access to that databank in order to get our tourism sector grow, create more employment bureaus for our young people and harness more investment opportunities. 

I appreciate that many conferences have been coming to Uganda and when you walk around the country, some of them are still memorized; for example, we have the CHOGM Square. This time round, since this is the Ninth Parliament, with your exemplary leadership and the wisdom of these honourable colleagues, I wish to say that we could make this IPU conference a memorable conference that came to Uganda. When I was sharing with colleagues, somebody was saying that it will take us many more years, about 50 years, to have another such sitting here. We could continuously harness this and see that our people understand the concept of bridging the gap. Thank you.

4.45
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I also want to add my voice to specially congratulate you as a person for the effort you put in throughout the whole process, from the time you started lobbying for this conference to come to Uganda and the time you spent organising with your team and the different persons. I congratulate you for the skills you put in, especially as demonstrated in the plenary, and for your negotiating skills with our brothers in the different political shades to respect this historical moment in our country and welcome the visitors. 

We were on our way back from South Africa and I was surprised to see members from both sides of the House receiving delegates deep into the night. I was really impressed with this spirit and the messages that you might have put through for our colleagues to work selflessly. Sometimes these days, you start to question whether there are any patriots at all, whether there are any Ugandans interested in working for the common good of the country because of the actions you see them doing. 

This IPU conference has put Uganda on the world map. If you read in the different media - the French media, the American media - during and after the conference, there is a lot of good talked about Uganda. The people who came here were not about to come given the picture of our foreign missions. Uganda is very beautiful, and that is why some of them were surprised. They wondered whether this was the country that had an image like Katanga or Katwe because our embassies are in a sorry state. Go to Washington DC or South Africa, Sudan, Brussels, go everywhere – what is happening to our foreign missions? (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: We are going to debate that particular issue on Tuesday. I will give you half a minute. 

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: In conclusion, I am proposing that given the distinguished efforts you put into the IPU, this Parliament resolves to give you a special award for successfully hosting this occasion. (Applause) We also remember the contribution of this conference in improving the image of our country abroad. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we were having a review meeting on Good Friday, one of the members of the committee said that for the first time, he saw patriotism in the work of the Members of Parliament. People surrendered their cars, people were there the whole night; so, it was really good. 

4.48
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to congratulate you for the successful conference. I must add that as women, we feel very proud of you. (Applause)

I also want to commend the harmony which was shown by Members of Parliament from both sides. I would particularly thank the members of the Opposition who showed Uganda that you can stand above party lines and stand for patriotism and for the good image of Parliament. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you because much as not every member was a delegate, you gave opportunity to many of us to participate in committees. You also involved civil society organisations in the country, because there were a number of side events which were organised where many Members of Parliament participated. I must inform the House that civil society organisations, mainly those working in the area of health, are very appreciative of the opportunity they were given to participate in this very important conference. 

Like many of my colleagues have said, this conference clearly brought out the role of Members of Parliament. I will specifically talk about the issue of promoting maternal, newborn and child health. This morning, a number of us under UWOPA and the Committee on Social Services were interfacing with the National Medical Stores and the Director General of Health Services. Much as Government is putting effort to provide drugs, one of the key issues that came out, which nearly made the Director General of Health Services cry, is the issue of the acute shortage of health workers. I must inform this House that in Uganda today, we only have three percent of the required number of doctors. So, there is no way we can save mothers and children when the human resource for health is that appalling.
 
Another issue which came out was about the human papillomavirus, which causes cervical cancer. The Director General of Health Services informed us that we have got a donor who has donated vaccines to cover immunisation in 12 districts. What is lacking is facilitation in the ministry to operationalise this programme. The Ministry of Finance has failed to provide only Shs 3 billion to help the Ministry of Health facilitate this. 

The GAVI Alliance, the international alliance for vaccines, has given a condition that Uganda must first implement vaccination in those 12 districts before we can have vaccines to vaccinate the rest of the country. So, Parliament has a very important role to play here in order to ensure that Government provides the Shs 3 billion that is required to operationalise the vaccination of women against cancer in the 12 districts. If we do this as Parliament, I think we shall be living up to the resolutions of this conference. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.52
MR ONYANGO KAKOBA (NRM, Buikwe County North, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to extend my appreciation to you, Madam Speaker, and the Members of Parliament who were behind the organisation of this conference as well as the staff of Parliament. A lot of things have been said by my colleagues but I will take it from the international perspective. 

When you look at page 5 of the resolutions, specifically clauses 4 to 6, they emphasise the issue of democracy, human rights and governance and the need for our governments to make sure that we ratify and implement the international conventions that we normally adopt.  This IPU conference has come at the right time because we, Africans, are good at adopting international instruments but not very good at implementing them. I hope this conference will now energise us to make sure that we do not only adopt but also ratify and implement them. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to draw your attention to two important documents that we have. The first one is the African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance. This charter aims at promoting democracy, human rights and governance on the African Continent, but we have not done much as a country to ratify it because Uganda has not yet ratified this instrument. In fact, in the East African region, it is only Rwanda which has ratified it. This instrument was adopted in 2007 but up to today it is only Rwanda in the region which has ratified it. 

The other one is the African Court on Human and Peoples Rights, which we have ratified. Accessibility to this court is given first to state parties, and then secondly to inter-governmental organizations, thirdly to individuals and then to the NGOs. However, as I speak now, it is only the state parties and intergovernmental organisations that have access. For the individuals and NGOs to have access, the government has to make a declaration to enable them access the courts, which has not been done. In fact, on the African Continent, it is only five countries that have done so and Uganda is not one of them. 

As I said, I hope with this IPU conference, we shall ensure that we ratify all these instruments and also implement them. 

4.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues to thank and congratulate you, Madam Speaker, in particular, and Parliament for hosting such a successful IPU conference. In particular, I would like to thank the organisers and especially the Members of Parliament who shared roles and responsibilities in handling the IPU organisation. I had the opportunity to meet some members during meetings but also along the way at the airport where they worked as ushers, receiving visitors. I would like to thank you all for this patriotism, and I would like to call on all of us to continue with that spirit. 

Madam Speaker, I would also like to congratulate you, in particular, upon your election as IPU President. Honourable members, you will note that very few African countries are able to host such a conference. So, we should thank Government for having created, first of all, the atmosphere but secondly, the facilities that are necessary to handle such a conference. (Applause) 

I would also like to call on the movers of this motion; we know that this conference was almost fully funded by Government to the tune of Shs 11 billion besides the strict budget that Government is executing.  So, I would like to implore the movers of this motion, besides resolving to thank Parliament, H.E the President, the Speaker and Deputy Speaker plus members on page 3 of the motion, to thank Government for funding this conference. In our culture, we have a proverb that says that if you do not thank the giver, next time you may fail to get. So, since Parliament and other people of Uganda have enjoyed the conference, I would want to call upon the movers to include, on page 3 of the resolutions, thanks to Government for funding this IPU Conference. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Coming from the finance minister, that is a veiled threat. (Laughter) 

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Rebecca Amuge Otengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you for having attained that very high office of President of IPU. Madam Speaker, the honour which was given to you is the honour of the women of Africa, and I would like to thank you so much for having worked hard and taken up that challenge. (Applause) We are going to give you all the support so that it will be an opening for more women in Africa to gain such a status. 

I would also like to thank the President for being a very good host; you saw how he handled the guests. I would also like to thank you for being a good lobbyist; I watched you on the television while in Bern. You showed people how Ugandans dance, and indeed that was just a bit of it. (Applause) When they came to Uganda, they confirmed that we can really do it. 

I would like to thank the Members of Parliament who worked so hard to make this a success, and the security agencies for giving us a good environment. May I also thank you for being so firm against the negative agencies which were almost disrupting the IPU conference. I would like to thank you for being so firm and telling them off.

What are the benefits we are going to get? One is in the tourism sector. I have been listening to the media and we have already gained, but this is just an opening. We should all continue as Ugandans to make sure that we market our country. It is not a one-man show. In this continent, and also in the world, you fight to get space. So when you are fighting to get space, you do not talk negatively about yourself. No one will talk positively about you if you talk negatively about yourself. So, I would like to tell Ugandans that we should work hard to make sure that Uganda is marketed because it benefits us and not anybody else.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank your team for standing very firm against the negative influence, which almost tampered with our cultural values in this country, and for rejecting what they were going to propose. May I thank you for that.

I also want to thank you and the government for marketing the country even beyond. At a very critical moment when some very funny film by the Invisible Children came up showing that Uganda is under war, I want to thank the people of Uganda for having disputed that. I want to thank everybody who came and participated. This is a challenge for all of us. The country is ours. Nobody will correct it; it is us to correct it. Nobody owes us a living; we owe ourselves a living. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.02
MR WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukhooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to take this opportunity to thank you and the team with which you worked with and delivered a great conference, which has made our country proud. It is in leadership and management and doing things as a team that we are able to identify who are good leaders. I think this has shown that you are a good leader and we thank you.

There is an idea that I saw about the involvement of our children in entertaining our guests. This was an innovative and great idea for which we thank you. The justification I read was that actually by the time another IPU is organised here, we shall all be dead and even the children who have performed will be already old. So that was an innovative idea and we thank you.

The Minister for Finance has just said we should thank the government for funding the meeting. I think we should thank the people of Uganda because they are the ones who contribute the money, which runs this country, and not just the government.

Secondly, I think that the NRM government, and especially the Ministry of Finance and all Ugandans, should take a lesson from the organisation of the IPU and compare it with past meetings namely CHOGM. The CHOGM was for about 53 countries and we spent over Shs 500 billion; this was a conference for about 160 countries and I hear we spent about Shs 30 billion. You should compare the level of organisation, the strictness and also see how CHOGM was and what we are talking about it and what IPU has achieved. It is important that we learn – (Mr Byabagambi rose_) - I do not want information. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, during the time of CHOGM, this country had only 550 beds. During CHOGM, this country had no infrastructure at all. We spent the money to put infrastructure and hotels in place. Everything was put in place and when this conference came, it found everything in place. Therefore, Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to compare the two when actually the conditions and circumstances were quite different? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a friendly motion; I do not want to polarise this House.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The minister is giving us information, which is not very useful because the Shs 500 billion was not spent on building hotels. The hotels were built not by government but by individuals. That is what I know, unless you give us accountability that from the Shs 500 billion, the government built a number of hotels and provided the beds. So do not give us that information, hon. Minister.

There were also some terrible moments for some of us. I speak as a member of FDC. The IPU meeting we held here had people and delegations from parliaments who are members of an organisation called International Democratic Union (IDU) to which my party is a member, and to which the FDC President is the Vice President and also President of IDU Africa comprising of 13 countries.

We organised a side meeting for those members from about 60 countries who belong to IDU and we organised the meeting at Fairway Hotel. We booked the hotel and invited the guests. It was a side meeting not interfering with the conference. The government decided to prevail upon Fairway Hotel and cancel our booking three hours to the time of having the meeting. We were embarrassed as the visitors went to Fairway Hotel and bounced. We were forced to organise another meeting at Grand Imperial Hotel and only a few people turned up. 

It is not that we do not care about our country or that we are not patriotic, those guests were our guests as Ugandans, so what we were doing was not illegal. We are a legal organisation and it was unfair that the government behaved the way it did to embarrass the guests. In any case, it is the government which lost in the eyes of these members who went to Fairway Hotel and bounced and were told later that the government had stopped us from meeting them. I just want the government to note and put on record that it was not proper that the government interfered with a side meeting, which was legitimate and legal.

Lastly, I was vice chairman of the media committee but at a point when we even had visitors, we begun to hear murmurs that some of us the in Opposition had taken over IPU. There were subversive rumours, which I think were very unfortunate because it was questioning our patriotism and us accommodating our visitors. I have heard colleagues talking about how we work together; it was necessary to work together but it was also wrong for some members of NRM or members of government to begin questioning the integrity and patriotism of some of us who are members of this Parliament and Ugandans and yet we love our country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Just for the record, I was surprised that you had a side meeting which I even did not know about. (Applause) All the organisations that wanted to either exhibit or to have side meetings wrote to me as the host. So, I am really surprised.

5.11
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, as one of the people who were privileged to be among the 12 delegates, I thank you for the opportunity to represent Uganda at the conference. While there, we interacted with the delegates and felt what they felt. 

As you were at the highest level, I want to tell you that the excitement and appreciation that the delegates from all over the world had for you as the organiser was great and passionate. I thank you. (Applause) You actually made delegates to go back with fears; Canada, which is the next host, came and said, “What are we going to do if Uganda, a developing country, has put up this show?” The Speaker of South Africa came to me and said, “Your Speaker has set a terrible standard for Africa; we are now scared to bid.” (Applause)  

At first, as delegates were arriving, they were asking themselves if they would get what they deserved. Even from the airport up to the conference, some of them thought the interpretation would have problems and so on. However, when it reached the second day, they started testifying that as Africans, you have set such a high standard that they do not know whether or not to bid for the conference. The African group went with their heads held high, knowing that Uganda made them proud. (Applause) 

The rest of the world went with a changed perception that Uganda, the third world country they had heard about and thought could not organise and host a conference of this nature, has done beyond expectation. Most of them were saying, “You know, when we go to these conferences, we are not even picked from the airport and we are not even given vehicles to move around, but here we were being driven.” All of you saw what happened. It was as though all the police vehicles were - even when it was only one delegate, the sirens were sounding. (Laughter)

I am sure that most of you have attended international conferences and in most of them, you have to take a train to your hotel. When you reach Europe, for example, you will be directed on which train to take to reach your hotel. Uganda picked delegates from the airport, each one in his or her own vehicle. We must thank the organisers and the Speaker for making us proud and putting Uganda on the map. The number of the delegates going to report back to their respective countries – the report is going to be unanimous that they had a great time. No wonder some delegates went after Easter - (Interjections) - Now someone who was in charge of protocol tells me the last delegate left yesterday. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: No, it is tomorrow.

MS BETTY AMONGI: So, Madam Speaker, we should thank Lt Gen. Kayihura and the Ministry of Internal Affairs for the great work they have done. I want to put it on record that for me and the rest of the Opposition, when we go to international conferences, rule number one is that we are Ugandans. When you are a Ugandan, you put your differences aside and represent the country. So I think we should have that attitude that whenever we are in the company of delegates as Ugandans, we speak for the country but not our parties.

I also thank the staff. There were challenges with finances but the staff worked – actually most of them will be paid later. They worked using their own airtime. They moved delegates from one place to another. They worked as Ugandans. 

However, the greatest lesson we should learn as we talk about investment is that most of the buses were brought from Kenya. We should look at this and ask ourselves which strategic areas we want investors to go into. Because of our previous success, most people will now refer conferences to Uganda. Let us now look at where we can reap from after learning lessons. Let us get people who can invest in such things as buses and other things required for conferences so that next time, we are not stuck. I am told hon. Baka had to sleep over in Nairobi waiting for the bus -  

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Baka not only slept in Nairobi but even went to Mombasa and Dar-es-Salam to retrieve all the buses and bring them here. It was that bad. 

5.19
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to thank you and Uganda at large for having hosted a very successful IPU conference in Uganda. The praise goes to Uganda as a country.

Madam Speaker, I congratulate you for having been elected the IPU President. (Applause) While others are awed and wondering how you pulled it off, I say it is because you are a woman. (Laughter) 

I thank the government for its contribution and putting all the necessary things in place. I wonder why some people are saying there was no difference. We are all Ugandans; whether you are FDC, NRM, UPC or DP, we are all Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, there is no ideal situation. The IPU conference went on successfully and was beautifully done, however there were a few breakdowns in communication here and there. I heard some members complaining about the process of getting name tags and stickers. Some had to drive to Munyonyo, only to be told to go back to the airstrip for the car sticker before they could come in for the dinner. So, there are some small things which we can evaluate. There is still room for improvement. 

I want to thank the tourists who toured the country. As you put it rightly, we need to market our country. Yesterday, hon. Kamateeka was talking about the embassies and she asked why we do not find nice beautifully woven mats to depict Uganda and to attract tourists to our country. We have to look at the tourism sector now that we are getting into the budgeting process. Kenya invests about $18 billion in tourism, Rwanda injects about $12 billion and Uganda was only putting $0.3 billion in the tourism sector. So, Members of Parliament, I hope that when we go for this budgeting process, we shall put some good funding into our tourism sector so that we can attract revenue for our country.

Another problem we are facing in the tourism sector is that we do not have a national airline. In Kenya, they have Kenya Airways. That is where you can market your country very well.

Madam Speaker, we talked about bridging the gap between people and parliaments. We are representatives of the people. We talked about maternal health. The health situation in Uganda is appalling and we are waiting for the report. For instance, in Busia, we do not even have a children’s ward or a female ward. The one ward which we have is shared between the men and the women and we have only one Health Centre IV in my constituency. 

There is only one thing which came in during the IPU meeting and we had to keep quiet. We are talking of good governance, human rights, women empowerment and the like, but there was an issue of Sharma Kooky. This man killed his wife and he was sentenced to life imprisonment. To our surprise, it was just yesterday that he was released and pardoned by the President. Really, it hurt us as women in Uganda. I think on this, the President should revisit his decision and wherever he goes, all these countries should deny him residence because he killed a woman. What the President did was political defilement. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we regret the inconvenience of the security, but in the same week, we had just had a problem in Kenya where there was a bomb blast and I do not know how many people died. In the same week, there were other bomb blasts in Mombasa. So, we are sorry but we had to do a few things. 

5.25
MS JENNIFER MUJUNGU (Independent, Woman Representative, Ntoroko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take the opportunity to congratulate you on being the IPU President. Of course, as women of Uganda, you have made us very proud. I also want to appreciate the efforts and good skills you exhibited to make this Assembly a success. We appreciate your efforts together with the team you worked with. 

I cannot forget to congratulate His Excellency the President of Uganda, for sustaining peace in this country. Since the country is peaceful, IPU had to be successful. We congratulate him. 

I also want to thank the security agencies for the job well done. The visitors proved that Uganda is a safe and comfortable place to live in and since we did not get any insecurity incident, I commend the security agencies. 

I also want to thank the Opposition. Thank you very much for your co-operation and I request that you always do that. Personally, I was worried and I thought that maybe walk-to-work might come in and disrupt the whole Assembly, but that did not happen. I do appreciate and ask you to always co-operate. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.28
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much for the work you did to ensure that the IPU was brought to Uganda. I would like to thank you for your lobbying skills. It was not something easy, I am sure, but through your perfect skills, you managed to bring the IPU to Uganda. May God bless you. We are very proud of you and we rally behind you, all of us the women in Parliament. I thank you for the good marketing that you have done for our country Uganda. You have been saying that Uganda has not been marketed, but you have done it within a few days. Thank you very much for the marketing that you have done for the Pearl of Africa. You have done it perfectly. Out of 156 delegates who came to Uganda, I am sure they met our ambassadors. They talked for us in those different countries. I am sure they came from all the continents in this world. So, Madam Speaker, you have marketed us.  Thank you.

I interacted with some of the delegates and they were really happy. They appreciated Uganda and they said they felt like staying here. Some of them said their countries are really bad. I talked to someone from Palestine and she said that they live in camps and life there is very miserable. But when she reached here she felt like remaining in Uganda.      

5.30
MR HARUNA KYEYUNE (Independent, Kyotera County, Rakai): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had a lot to talk about this conference, but since I have been given one minute, let me zero in on one issue. You said that some Members were patriotic enough to surrender their vehicles to transport delegates. This was unfair because -(interjections)- yes, because we never budgeted for this crisis.  I would like to know, Madam Speaker, from the corridors, we hear that the budget was not fully financed. We need to know who wanted to sabotage this conference -(Laughter)- to the extent that Members were patriotic enough to surrender their vehicles. It was good; it was successful. We need to bite this person who wanted to sabotage this conference by not fully financing our budget. I rest my case. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, what happened is that more people than those who had confirmed turned up. Suddenly, off the plane, you would see six speakers when you were expecting two, then their deputies had also come with them. You know that is how we had to now say - we got more people than those who had confirmed their arrival.

5.32
MS RHONAH NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to thank you for the opportunity you gave me as a new Member of Parliament to be able to be part of this great delegation during this historical event. I actually sympathise with you because some of the Members were bold enough to come and ask me the criteria that was used for some of us to be included on the delegation, and some were bitter. Am surprised that this has not come up to this point and I thank God for it.

But it gave me the idea that maybe, since you still have the opportunity to go for other meetings, in Canada possibly, if we can raise it and say that maybe host countries be given an opportunity to have all their Members involved so that it makes life easy for you and for people to stop questioning here and there.

I failed to explain and I told them to continue - you investigate; I will also be happy if I know the criteria that was used, but I was just thinking - because to me, when I look at the Bern experience, I realised that you really did a lot to involve Members of Parliament. In Bern, it was ideally staff of Parliament, and Members of Parliament were not very much involved. When I looked at the way Members came to tell me they are having meetings, and they want to investigate the criteria and what not, I then wondered how host Parliaments could be given the opportunity to attend meetings and maybe the Assembly, whether they may vote or not, but to see how they can all be accomodated.
 
I also, of course, cannot leave the Floor without thanking the Police. It is only when you have a function that you can really appreciate the security of a nation. When I look at the way the Police helped in leading our guests through the heavy traffic, and the way they endured the cold, I really feel it is important for us to salute them in some way. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, about the attendance; you know each country is only given five delegates, but as a host we were given 12. Otherwise, if I took the whole of my Parliament there, we would overrun the entire Assembly. It is not possible to take everybody.

5.35
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I want to add my voice to those of Members who have congratulated you for being elected current President of IPU. I want to thank you very much as well as staff and Members of Parliament who participated, for having organised a successful international meeting.

I thank Government for not only funding the occasion, but for also creating an enabling environment that was really conducive for such a big conference. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to say something on the level of preparedness. I do not know whether it was late funding, but you could see that KCCA was doing what would have been done much earlier, even when the conference was ending. We need to look at how we prepare ourselves when visitors are coming -(Interruption)

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: The Speaker will be lenient enough to give us one minute. The information I want to give is that much as KCCA did great work almost at the end, we pleaded with KCCA. We have been pleading with KCCA after seeing that nobody was mentioning KCCA and we were going to host IPU in a dirty city. I think the Speaker consulted the KCCA, but we also individually went to KCCA and said, “Please, clean this area” and we were very happy. 

For the first time, we saw these streets around this area very clean. I had an opportunity to travel with some delegates from the Risk Disaster Management Forum, one of the official side meetings that were prepared and most of those delegates were very happy with the cleanliness around this area. Much as we blame them for doing it too late, I think we should thank them for doing it hurriedly but thoroughly, and the place was clean.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe, can I inform Members that actually, KCCA had no money to beautify the city. They wanted money from us and we also did not have it; so we partnered with the corporates to help them; MTN, Simba, etc. that is how they did it in the end. It was through cooperation. (Applause)

MR SSEMPIJJA: So, that was very good. Even now, I think they are still doing some work, which is really good, but we need to do a lot, Madam Speaker and Third Deputy Prime Minister. We need to do a lot in terms of cleaning our city and even putting it to the standard that is really required, because as you know, since we have started hosting these big conferences, we have the infrastructure. People have already known us and I think they will come back for other bigger meetings. So, we need to do a lot more.

5.39
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating you and the Members of Parliament for having participated very actively in the organisation of this very important function.
 
Some of us participated very actively, but indirectly. Not all of us were involved directly in the organisation of this very important meeting. We participated through prayers and we thank God that he listened to our prayers. (Laughter)

I would like to propose to this august House - you know history is really very important. Therefore, I really feel we need to get a team of experts; let them write a book on this very important occasion and if we keep our records in the newspapers or other journals, automatically after two or three years they will disappear. Let us write a book which our grandchildren will read in 100 years to come. Let us keep the history for memory.

This occasion has been remarkable and we are so proud of your organisation. I am very sure with the kind of organisation we had, next time in case of any important occasion; other countries will support Uganda to host it. This is not the last one. 

I thank all those who participated and I pray to the good Lord to continue helping us.

5.41
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I rise to say no more than what my colleagues have already said, but in particular, I do not want to keep on thanking you because those who keep on thanking you perhaps do not know you enough. For those of us who had the opportunity of knowing you from childhood know that you can only get better. (Laughter)

I would like to say that the unity and harmony with which the IPU was organised is completely reminiscent of the spirit with which you have guided this House to make both sides of the divide move together on topical issues. When you see us rubbing the wrong sides of each other, that means the issues have not been well-articulated. Continue and continue.

Secondly, I would like to add my voice to the great showcasing the IPU brought to Uganda. And in you, I could see a complete, completeness from the way you organised the conference to becoming a great socialite. Those strokes, Madam Speaker -(Laughter)- were wonderful - paka chini. (Laughter)

I thank you for demystifying the misconceptions about not only Uganda, but also Africa as a whole that with so little, we can still do so much. There is this story about somebody who went to America and was asked by the children of America, “I hear people in Uganda sleep on trees.” This man was very smart and said, “Yes, they sleep on trees. Actually, the American ambassador sleeps on the highest tree in Uganda.” I am sure with what has happened during the IPU, being in charge of over 160 countries, there will be no more misconceptions in Uganda, that people sleep on trees. 

Madam Speaker, -(Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to complete. 

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker, I want to add my voice to those who think this Parliament is being handled very well and things are going on very well because it is being handled by a lady. I would like to add that it is because it is being handled by a lady; among others, because it is not enough to be a lady. You know this has now come full circle to justifying what a certain group in Betty Amongi’s constituency say, “Gwok a dako twero mako le” meaning that even a female dog can catch an animal. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very vehemently. I know that people have thanked you and there is a Government – of course, I am hesitant about thanking Government. After all, didn’t somebody say that a monkey is not supposed to thank the forest in which it resides because it is its natural habitat? If the Minister of Finance was here, I was politely going to tell him that we owe him no thank you because that is exactly what he ought to have done, even better. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.46
MRS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. While all of us have rightly and proudly boasted about the success of IPU, I would like to bring to the attention of this House that it is a good thing to boast about it and we are proud of it. But it is also a challenge to us. We are very excited, but as we are expressing this excitement, I was thinking; are we up to it? Are we going to stand up to the challenge to maintain the name which we have made, to prove to the world that what we put on, on that day during the time of IPU, was not just a coat for that season, but it is a time for Uganda to move ahead? It is a step which is going to grow and grow, and get better? 

I said it is a challenge, moreso, because now you are president of IPU and at the same time presiding over the Ninth Parliament, which had the privilege of hosting this kind of conference. Maybe in the next 50 years, it might be the only conference hosted by the Parliament of Uganda. I want to request and to praise this House that we just do not stop at the excitement, but let us count the costs. 

How are we going to promote democracy in this country? As a Parliament, I think we have a big role to play. One of the main issues which was brought out in this conference was about good governance, human rights observance and democracy of countries. I think as a Parliament, we have something we can do to make sure that Uganda stands out as a democratic nation; as a nation where human rights are observed; and as a nation where good governance is upheld.

Today, using my constituency as an example, arbitrary arrests are being carried out. I doubt that that is an example of democracy. Young men are being held incommunicado. That is not a good example of democracy and it is not a good observance of human rights. I believe as a Parliament, we need to go a step higher and override whoever is trying to step on this Parliament and make sure we play our part as a Parliament of Uganda. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We have set up the Committee on Human Rights. I hope they will be able to look at those issues. I think we have already moved ahead on that.

5.49
MRS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament to recognise the successful organisation of the Inter-Parliamentary Union conference held here from the 31st of March to the 5th of April. 

I got the privilege of being one of the IPU delegates from the Parliament of Uganda for which I must thank you. I wish to take this opportunity to thank, like others have mentioned, the delegates who were in that conference, especially the ones who were assigned specific responsibilities. The hon. Betty Amongi who was chairing the women meetings; the hon. Janet Kataaha Museveni who chaired the committee which was discussing malnutrition in children; the hon. Paula Turyahikayo who was a rapporteur to one of the committees; and because of the hard work and possibly the competence which these Members showed, one of our own Members, the hon. Betty Amongi, was elevated to the post of Second Vice-President of the IPU Women Coordinating Committee. (Applause) The hon. Dombo is now a substitute committee member on the Committee for the Promotion of Humanitarian Law. He is a Member of this Parliament. Our one and only Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Alitwala Kadaga is the IPU President. What a joy that the Parliament of Uganda has really gained from hosting this prestigious and wonderful conference; we want to congratulate all of you. But this comes with the challenges of what Parliament of Uganda has gone through with the people of Uganda. You have done a tremendous job to attain this. We want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the charisma you portrayed to the delegates, that actually in Uganda, we do not follow the African standard time. The Madam Speaker was always in the conference room minutes before the conference time. So, I want to report that we the people of Uganda are proud of you. 

During the conference, I realised that there are some countries which are limping with regard to women’s issues; and I was happy to note that at least in Uganda we have made a step forward. Although there is still more to be done, other countries are still crying. 

Madam Speaker, during your tenure, and with the influence you have in the IPU, we request that you help our sister countries to attain the emancipation of women, because when a woman is emancipated, the entire nation is emancipated. 

We want also to take this opportunity to thank the new woman President of Malawi and I think at an appropriate time, you will send the congratulations from Parliament of Uganda. It is a step forward for the women and let her know that we the women of Uganda shall give her all the support she requires. 

We feel sorry for the loss of their former President. I know at an appropriate time, a proper motion will be brought to this House. But in the meantime, we want to congratulate that lady for having ascended to that great seat. I know that in the near future, it will not be by accident if in Uganda we also get a woman president. Because, with all these praises to you Madam Speaker, many people believe is because you put in a female touch. That is what a woman can do when given responsibility. 

We want to thank you, Madam Speaker, for the expertise you put in; for the good work you did to make us what we looked like on that day, and for making an African country – Uganda - portray itself as the Pearl of Africa. 

5.54
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Government, I would like to wrap up what has been said. Indeed these are the characteristics of human beings; people want to associate with success. If this IPU flopped, I do not think we would be here yapping. But we are very happy and everybody wants to associate with the happiness. 

To you the initiator, Madam Speaker – you initiated the bringing of IPU here; and indeed you presided over it effectively. If there is success to be claimed, it is you to claim it first. This was your baby and we must thank you. 

And this issue of women; I know some women are more thorough than others, but not every woman is thorough (Laughter). So, one of those who are thorough is Madam, and we are proud of that. For the women who are not thorough like some men also are not thorough, let them mix at their level (Laughter).

Now, whether we thank Government or not is up to individuals. But definitely, we cannot run away from thanking Government. Whether it is cutting you, or cutting your heart, that is your business. You must thank Government –(Laughter)– yes; because you need stability first, which you got. 

For the first time, I am very happy for our brothers. I did not expect anything good from them; but I am surprised that at least they cooperated and accepted to go and conduct their meeting in Kololo. That day there was a very nice flow of cars; that was very nice of our brothers and I never expected it. So, for the first time, I want to thank them, because you have to give credit where credit is due. I want to thank our brothers and sisters across for their cooperation and contribution.

Madam Speaker, I have been listening to everybody who spoke and they have thanked many people. But if we go into the details, we must thank the mass media; we must thank the cooks wherever they were. We must thank the drivers –(Applause)– we must thank the security personnel. Sometimes they stand in the rain. These people must be thanked. They quietly contributed at their level. 

Madam Amongin was talking, making noise; that noise was necessary and useful. So, we want to thank those people. And those put together is Government, by the way. Those cooks who made good food are part of Government because there is peace. When you eat without being disturbed, it is because there is security. So, even if you do not want to thank Government, I will thank on your behalf –(Laughter)– we must thank Government very much for its contribution. 

MR SABIITI: As you bring in the issue of Government, yes, Government has to be thanked. But I want to tell you that the Opposition at times never participates in this type of conferences. Take the Independence Day, take women’s day; you took it as a party function. You dressed in yellow and did whatever. That actually stops the Opposition from participating in such functions. 

That is why we thank the Speaker. Her neutrality made it possible for all Members of Parliament to work together to ensure that the IPU was successful. Thank you very much.

MR MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I was saying that I am very happy for the Opposition; especially the A4C, and especially for allowing to hold their meetings in Kololo. I give you 100 percent for that. 

Madam Speaker, I want to thank Madam Musisi of KCCA for her contribution. (Applause) Madam Speaker has explained how it came about, but we think that the next important meeting like this should find Kampala shining, because as Government, we shall help and contribute very executively to KCCA to make Kampala shine and you will see for yourselves. 

Otherwise, I think everybody has thanked you and we do not want to kill you with a lot of thanks. (Laughter) In the Army, we do not over thank people. We say you have tried and that is enough thanks to you; it means that there is still more to be done. 

So, I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank everybody for their contribution and the whole of Uganda for making this meeting a success. As Government, we shall try our best to keep the country peaceful and also make it easy for the Opposition to stay in the country peacefully, despite –(Interjections)- A4C –(Interjections)- that we shall handle. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay honourable members, there are just three other people who have not been thanked. When we were starting this journey, I had on my delegation hon. Paul Kawanga, former Member of Parliament for Masaka Municipality, and hon. Ben Wacha. At a very critical moment when the executive committee was about to change their decision, I also had Gen. Mugisha Muntu of EALA. (Applause)

So, when I received information that the whites were trying to steal our date, I deployed Gen. Muntu whom I told to go and talk to the executive committee members from Asia. I deployed hon. Kawanga to go and talk to the Latin Americans and hon. Wacha to go and talk to the other Europeans, and I handled the others. So, we really worked as a team and I want these people to also be recognised. (Applause) 

6.03
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Motion.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, motion.

DR BAYIGGA: Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, we have heard from both sides of this House and the words of wisdom from the General and also Third Deputy Prime Minister who has spoken on behalf of Government; all praises for you and your organising committee in organising this major event in the country.

I move that a question be put. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question now be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do resolve to recognise the successful organisation of the 126th Inter-Parliamentary Union Conference held in Kampala from 31 March to 5 April, 2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We wanted to continue with some other business, but we have some incapacity that I will not mention. So, we adjourn to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. No, tomorrow, we receive the body of Prof. Kakoma at 9.00 a.m. but Parliament will convene at 2.00 p.m. Otherwise Parliament will resume on Tuesday at 2 O’clock. House is adjourned until Tuesday at 2 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 12 April 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
