Thursday, 14 April 2016

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to thank you for the work you have been doing in the committees, especially in ensuring that the ministerial policy statements are deliberated upon and the draft estimates done to enable us finalise the national budget on 28 April 2016. I would want you to also keep that date in mind because that is when we intend to complete discussions on the Appropriation Bill. 

I request the committees to conclude all their work by Monday so that we can start with the presentation of the reports to the Budget Committee. We expect the Budget Committee to sit continuously from 18 to 22 April to receive, consider and harmonise recommendations and figures proposed by the sectoral committees. Thereafter, the Budget Committee will prepare a report that will guide the House on the figures to supply. We expect to receive and debate the report of the Budget Committee from 25 to 26 April 2016. Like I said, on 26 April, we shall constitute ourselves into a committee of supply to eventually complete appropriation on 28 April.  

Honourable members, over the past two days, a number of unfortunate incidences have happened. Prince Besweri Mulondo passed away and he was buried on Saturday. On 11 April, Kyaseka Towers, an incomplete building on Makerere Hill Road, collapsed; some people died and others were injured. I would like to invite Members to stand up for a moment of silence in honour of hon. Besweri Mulondo and the people who were killed in the building at Makerere. 

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is a matter of great regret that this is probably the 10th incident of a building collapsing, mainly around Kampala, in the last two years. However, I have not heard of anyone being prosecuted for that negligence. I do not know whether the families of the victims have been compensated. Unfortunately, the bulk of these are ordinary people who are not very rich, such as labourers. I do not know whether the Government is planning to strengthen the building regulations and inspection. We hope that something can be done so that these incidences do not continue to occur either in Kampala or any other part of this country. Therefore, we appeal to Government to wake up and do something about the building regime in this country. 

I would like to amend the Order Paper to permit the Leader of the Opposition to table some of the remaining alternative policy statements, which she had mentioned last week. Thank you very much. 

2.46
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I have an issue of national concern about the radiography machine at the Uganda Cancer Institute. 

Honourable members, the new machine was paid for by the International Atomic Energy Agency and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, to our surprise, yesterday during a meeting of the Committee on Natural Resources, we were shocked to discover that while the machine was procured in 2013, the Ministry of Health did not have the capacity to bring and operate it and now the two machines in the country have both collapsed. It is becoming very difficult for good doctors to treat our patients because the best doctors must have good diagnostic machines. Without those machines, they cannot diagnose and treat patients appropriately.  

Secondly, Uganda also received a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) machine, which was donated through the Ministry of Defence. There is one machine in Mengo Hospital and the other should be in Mulago Hospital. However, they have failed to get money to prepare the foundation on where to place it. This has deterred operations of the doctors in these referral centres. 

I wish the Government did not relay information through the media alone. The country and this House deserve to have the right information. We are told the machines are there but we do not know why they cannot be brought and installed. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Does the Minister of Health have something to say about that machine? 

2.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kwizera for raising this important issue. Like I said on this Floor a few days ago, we have a problem of cancer with respect to the increasing cases in Uganda and in other developing countries, and there are many reasons why the incidences of cancer are on the rise. 

I would like to specifically respond to the issues raised and also clarify on some of the information which has been given to the public. An impression has been created that because of the breakdown of the machine at the Uganda Cancer Institute,- which I am going to explain- cancer patients can no longer be managed or treated in Mulago. Also, an impression has been created that radiotherapy is the only form of treatment for cancer patients. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to explain that there are various options and measures which we use to manage cases of cancer. First of all, cancer means that cells in the body at a particular spot develop an abnormality in terms of growth. Their growth rate is abnormal or different from the normal process so the cells become cancerous or malignant. 

Cancer usually starts from one spot and progresses depending on how fast somebody seeks care from health facilities. If you delay to get care, this cancer grows and spreads to the rest of the body, a condition which we call metastasis – meaning cancer starts in one spot and then the cancer cells split and affect the other parts of the body. This means that cancer can start in the hand but spread to the chest, the brain, the abdomen, the bones or the blood and it becomes systemic.

There are various options and measures for managing cancer. The first option is surgery, especially if the cancer is in the earlier stages. The parts of the body which have become cancerous can be excised and through surgical measures, cancer can be managed. The second one – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, my good brother and friend, Dr Baryomunsi, is really trying my patience. I have a lot of pain because of the very lengthy explanation, which in my view is not necessary. He is talking about understanding cancer and what causes it but at the end of it, it is about cancer and one broken machine in Mulago.

Hon. Baryomunsi, the minister, is telling us that we are being given an impression - it is not an impression. The reality is that since that machine broke down in Mulago, the patients who are supposed to have their round of radiotherapy are not getting it. That is the problem. It is not about impression or circumventing the question; the issue is, we need a machine which is functional. 

Two days ago, we buried a priest in Serere. He died because of failure to access his cycle of radiotherapy. When you go into realities and perception, I think it only solidifies one thing - the Government has no answer and yet Ugandans need a machine that is working because people are dying. Many people are at risk. That is the real problem, honourable minister. It is not our understanding or lack of understanding of cancer. What we need is a functioning machine. Is it there? When are we getting it? That is what we need.  

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, how I wish that the members were patient and listened to what I would like to say –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the concern of the Members is that the machine is not there. You are going into the causes, how it spreads from the finger to the toes - (Laughter) - They simply want to know where the machine is, whether it is working, whether it is accessible to the Ugandans, among other things. (Applause)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, much obliged. However, I thought that in order to explain about the machine, some of this information is extremely necessary, for instance the various forms of managing cancer. 

What is the implication of the absence of the machine? Let me just be fast and say that the second mode is chemotherapy - use of drugs to manage cancers, especially if the cancer has spread to the rest of the body. The third option is radiotherapy, which we are talking about, and that is for palliative care, which means symptomatic management. Radiotherapy has two forms; there is what we call – (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: That is a relevant explanation, to show whether the machine is essential. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, radiotherapy is one of the various options we use and we usually use a combination of methods to manage cancer cases. There are two forms of radiotherapy. The first form is where you emit a radiation beam from outside to heat a cancerous lesion on the outer surface of the body. This is called teletherapy, and it is the machine providing this which has broken down. The other form is brachytherapy, where you emit internal beams to manage cancers which are in a cavity – (Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am reluctantly raising a point of order against Dr Baryomunsi. In yesterday’s the Observer newspaper, the Director of the Uganda Cancer Institute, Dr Orem, conceded that there is a very big problem. He actually said that the available treatment now for the patients is the last one you pointed out – the palliative care. In other words, they give you medicines or drugs to manage the pain, to keep you from dying with a lot of pain. He also conceded that this is as a result of the processes they fail to undertake to get the machines working in time. 

The question therefore being raised to the minister is: when will this machine get to the Uganda Cancer Institute so that people can be treated? There are people who cannot go to Nairobi or other places due to lack of finances. Is the minister therefore in order to tell us the causes of cancer and the processes of treatment when we have a problem in Mulago due to a machine that has broken down? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the country is anxious to know when that machine will be working. Are they able to use it? I think you need to go to that.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As early as 2013, Government had already realised that the machine was old and Government paid for a new cobalt-60 machine. At that point, we thought that it would be shipped in but the experts from the International Atomic Energy Agency advised that we needed to construct a new bunker. A bunker is the housing for the radiotherapy machine. Since then, the Uganda Cancer Institute and Government have been trying to get the design for this bunker and also to initiate a procurement process. As of today, the design has been completed and the procurement process has also been completed. Beginning May, the construction of the new bunker will commence and once the construction starts – (Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, before I came here I inquired from the Director of Mulago Hospital whether a bunker is worth Shs 30 billion, which may have led to the failure to ship the equipment. He told me that unless they want to build more than 10 bunkers, they do not need Shs 30 billion.

It is up to the minister to tell us why, if the machine was procured, they have not budgeted for the money to build the required bunker. After all, this machine that is obsolete now was in a bunker and yet you want to bring one machine.

DR BARYOMUNSI: This is what I was trying to explain; the experts advised on a new bunker. The bunker that is going to be constructed will actually be seven bunkers in one because we intend to procure additional equipment to put in these compartments. Therefore, in May the construction will start and once it starts – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, we are talking about an emergency situation. Yesterday, I read in the newspapers that there are 17,000 people at risk. Is it in order for the honourable minister, who is also a medical doctor in whose hands our lives are supposed to be entrusted and in whose hands we are supposed to feel safe, to come here and handle an issue which should be an outright emergency and a disaster waiting to happen on this country as if it is business as normal? “We are doing procurement tomorrow; we shall start in May…”- Who is going to compensate the thousands of people who are dying?

He is even talking about palliative care - you die peacefully. Is the honourable minister in order to talk as if he is not a medical doctor who should rescue our lives? Is it fair to this country?

THE SPEAKER: The minister is explaining the long-term plan of the Ministry of Health on that issue.

DR BARYOMUNSI: How I wish Members could listen. Madam Speaker, patience is a virtue. We at the Ministry of Health are not relying on what you read in the papers. We are giving you factual information - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I wonder whether from what the minister has explained to this the House, it would not be procedurally right as a country to also put an embargo on certain people from going out for cancer treatment. The minister’s long-term prospect of dealing with cancer for the ordinary people in Uganda may leave room- 

If the minister had cancer, the medical board would clear him to go for treatment outside the country. I wonder whether it is not procedurally right that after the minister’s statement, we place an embargo so that the medical board does not clear anyone to go out for treatment for cancer until we have a new radiotherapy machine in the country.

THE SPEAKER: Is it for anyone from the country or from the Ministry of Health? (Laughter)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the honourable minister, Dr Baryomunsi, and I am worried because with his profession, he is meant to be much more organised and also give facts because he is a scientist. From what I have listened to, politics has spoiled the minister’s submission. He is being more political than scientific. 

My procedural concern is: are we going to benefit from the submission of the minister without any tangible facts? My take on this matter is based on what I listened to yesterday from the Atomic Energy Council. According to them, there could have been an immediate solution to the problem. The defective machine and the parts that need replacement can be replaced as we wait for the long term plan.

However, from the minister’s submission, it seems they are not treating this matter as an emergency. They are only looking at the long-term plan on how to solve the problem and yet they can combine brains and get an immediate solution to this problem. That is why I am concerned about this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, assure the country that there are some measures that can be taken for emergencies, if any. You can also tell us if they are not there. However, we would like to know where the patients are going to go in the meantime.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, the construction will start. The contractor has agreed that he will work day and night to ensure that in six months, it is over. The money for the bunker is also available. The question now is what happens between now and when the new bunker and machine are in place. 

There is a brand new radiotherapy machine available in Mulago only that it is different from the one which broke down. The one which broke down emits external beams but the one for managing cancer which is in body cavities like cancer of the cervix, cancer in the anal cavity, cancer of the throat, cancer of the tongue or cancer of the oral cavity is there and it is functional. That is why I was explaining the difference.

What Dr Orem said in the media is that the majority of the patients who come and have been benefiting from the machine which broke down are cases of advanced cancer. It has been largely used for palliation, which means symptomatic pain relief.

The clarification I would like to give Members is that the various options of treatment are available. We have surgery, chemotherapy, radiation for internal cancers and palliative care. Those options are available in Mulago. What broke down is a small segment of the menu for treatment and that is the external beam, which has mainly been used for palliative care, as the head of the Uganda Cancer Institute explained.

We have been assured by the experts in radiotherapy that you can mount external probes to the machine which gives internal beams and it can emit radiation to the external surfaces of the body. Therefore, the available machine can do part of the work which was being done by the machine which broke down.

Secondly, the machine was mainly being used for palliative care but there are other forms of palliative care. It was largely used for pain relief but there are also other forms like use of strong pain killers like morphine. The patients who require palliation in Mulago will be carefully assessed so that other forms of palliation will be provided. 

In case there are cases which require primary treatment using radiotherapy on external surfaces, like tumours on the hand, those will be carefully evaluated. We have got an offer from Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi to treat up to 400 patients. We are going to arrange transport, accommodation and upkeep for those patients as Government –(Interjections)– No, this machine has been for the entire East Africa. We have been treating people from Rwanda, DRC, Tanzania and Kenya. If patients go to Kenya, it is still in the East African spirit since we have been treating patients for free in Mulago. The oncologists will carefully assess the patients who need that external beam of radiation, especially those who come with early stages of cancer. They will be carefully evaluated and we shall support them to get that care from the Aga Khan Hospital in Nairobi.

However, I would like to point out that this matter has been unnecessarily exaggerated. I am speaking to you as the Minister for Health. You can rely on papers and the media but we are giving you information as the Ministry of Health. The matter has been unnecessarily exaggerated and presented in a hyperbolic manner. There is also no crisis at all. Those exaggerations of saying patients are dying and so forth – Patients have also been dying when the machine was there. 

Of course, the radiotherapy machine is not a cure for death; people will still die, but the crisis is not as big as has been portrayed to the wider public. That is what I want to put forward for emphasis; that cancer patients will still be managed in Mulago Hospital and the other centres where we have been managing them from. The few cases that require primary treatment using external beams, through teletherapy, will be carefully evaluated and measures will be put in place to ensure that they get treatment.

Therefore, cases of cancer from all parts of the country will still be able to get care from the Uganda Cancer Institute and the other health facilities – (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Baryomunsi for trying to shed more light on this issue. However, the nation is taken aback by the situation because every life matters in this country. 

You have said that people die. We know we will all die someday but saying to the patients that are seated there that, “oh, you are going to die; we are only trying to lessen your pain”- that statement from the Minister of Health will make some even die faster. The most important thing is to come up with empirical facts on the number of cancer patients that are in this country and are waiting for that form of treatment; other than coming here and only telling the nation that “yes, there are huge numbers and the only offer we have from Agha Khan is for 400 patients.” Now assuming there are 19,000 or 7,000, where will the rest go, because each life matters? 

I would like the minister to clarify on the figures of all those that are awaiting that treatment, so that we know that even if we have a solution from the Agha Khan Hospital for 400 patients, the rest shall also be catered for. We want a comprehensive solution so that we can go back to the remaining patients and tell them to either prepare for death or for something better. Clarify to this country how many of these patients are awaiting this treatment that the Aga Khan solution has provided, and those that are going for morphine or any other forms of pain killers and those that will have no attention at all.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I could come back with the exact figures, but everybody will get attention. To clarify, I said that the machine that broke down was largely being used for palliative care- symptomatic relief, and the most common symptom is pain. There are alternative measures that can be used to relieve this pain including use of strong pain killers, especially morphine. However, I also said that the probes of the brachytherapy machine, which we use for treatment of cancers in body cavities, can be mounted to give external radiation and therefore, the machine will also be used to do the work which was being done by the machine which broke down.

Therefore, it is only a few cases which will be carefully evaluated. I said if somebody comes with a cancer which is external and the oncologists think they should use an external beam as the primary form of treatment, there will be a careful evaluation. It is a few cases that will require going to the Aga Khan Hospital but the majority of the patients will be managed at the Uganda Cancer Institute.

I would like to emphasise once again that there is no need for alarm; it is the media and the social media that has created this kind of crisis. I invite Members of this House, maybe the health committee, to visit the cancer institute and assess and discuss with the radiotherapists and the oncologists. The crisis is not as big as has been portrayed in the public; it is manageable. We are in charge and all patients will be able to get care in Uganda. There is no cause for alarm, Madam Speaker.

However, I will come back next week with the figures, as hon. Nsereko asked. The assurance I would like to give is that there will be no patient who will fail to get treatment because of the breakdown of this machine.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We will ask our Committee on Health to remain seized of that matter and give us updates, but you can bring the other information too.

Honourable members, join me in welcoming students of St Mark High School, Lusanja, represented by hon. Semmujju Nganda and hon. Sseninde. You are welcome. (Applause) 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.18
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table a multi-year commitment and counterpart funding for the projects for financial year 2016/2017 to financial year 2018/2019.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance for perusal and report back.

3.18
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Ms Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, as I promised last week, I have six alternative policy statements for the financial year 2016/2017. I beg to lay on the Table the following alternative policy statements for the financial year 2016/2017:
    a) Ministry of Defence; 
    b) Ministry of Karamoja Affairs; 
    c) Ministry of Education, Science, Technology and Sports; 
    d) Ministry of Presidency; 
    e) Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs;
    f) Ministry of East African Affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Committees are invited to make use of those alternative policy statements in preparing their work and reports.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE APPROPRIATION BILL, 2016

3.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Appropriation Bill, 2016” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is committed to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2015

3.21
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Sexual Offences Bill, 2015” be read for the first time. However, I would like to inform the House that this Bill is not accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications. I am however protected by section 76 (4) of the Public Finance and Management Act. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I wish to further inform the House why this is so. For the last 15 years, the Uganda Women’s Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) has been advocating for the Sexual Offences Bill to be brought to this House. In the Eighth Parliament, we worked hard to see that this Bill comes but it did not. We were informed that the Bill was at Cabinet level. In the Ninth Parliament, since the first year we have been telling the ministry responsible to table this Bill before the House but it had not come.  

Madam Speaker, before me are communications that UWOPA has been engaged in with the relevant ministry. This is a communication from UWOPA dated 15 December 2015. The permission to bring this Bill was given to UWOPA on 30 July 2015 and on 15 December 2015, we wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for the Certificate of Financial Implication. 

I beg to lay on the Table a letter to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development dated 15 December 2015, requesting that a Certificate of Financial Implication in respect to the Sexual Offences Bill be given to the mover of the Bill, but it did not happen. In response to this letter or communication, the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance wrote to the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development on 18 December, requesting that a certificate be issued to us so that we can expedite this process. This was received and I beg to lay this communication before the House.

In response to this communication, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development wrote to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, specifically the Solicitor General, requesting that UWOPA be facilitated in moving this Bill. I beg to lay before the House the communication dated 23 February 2016 in respect to that. It is a letter written by UWOPA reminding the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs about this matter.

Madam Speaker, I have two last items to prove our request and communication with the line ministries. A letter was written by UWOPA on 14 March 2016, reminding the Ministry of Finance about this certificate but there was no reply. I beg to lay a copy of the letter before the House. On 23 March 2016, a reminder for a Certificate of Financial Implication was written by the Ministry of Finance to the Solicitor-General and they were given only a week to expedite this process. We did not receive any response to this matter. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, we requested you to allow us to bring this Bill because we already have protection under section 76(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, which says that if a request is tabled before this House and it exceeds 60 days from the first request when it was officially written, a Member should be allowed to move or bring the Bill for first reading. This is the communication I would like to lay before the House by UWOPA requesting your office to allow us do that. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Amoding. For the record, there was a rationale behind the Certificate of Financial Implications. We used to make laws that were not implemented- the Government would say they did not have a budget - so we decided that they inform us how much would be required for implementation of the laws. That is why we need a certificate.

However, it seems the Ministry of Finance is now using it to frustrate Private Members’ Bills. I know that hon. Arinaitwe has been struggling to get a Certificate of Financial Implications for the Minimum Wages Bill, which has taken more than a year. Hon. Alaso just recently got one for the Miscellaneous (Amendment) Act. That is why we have made that provision under the Public Finance Management Act, saying that if they delay inordinately we move ahead. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. Thank you.

MOTION THAT THE HOUSE RESOLVES ITSELF INTO A COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY TO CONSIDER THE ADDENDUM ON SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULES 1, 2 AND 3 OF THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Vote 216 - Uganda Mission in Tripoli

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are matters we had stood over last week and one of them was the issue of the Uganda Mission in Tripoli. I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 11,886,000,000 be provided for as development expenditure for financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Vote 200 - Other Missions’ Additional Funding

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question is that a total of Shs 6,267,193,872 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/ 2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Wage Shortfall across Votes

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 26,839,517,581 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for financial year 2014/15?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Vote 130 - Treasury Operations

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a total sum of Shs 389 billion -

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I am still not comfortable. I would like to know who the accounting officer for vote 130 is. I also wonder why we do not get specific ministerial policy statements to manage that particular vote 130. You find that almost all expenditures are lumped under vote 130. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as to who the accounting officer is and what that account takes care of, so that our minds are cleared on what exactly that vote does.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When we stayed consideration of this supplementary schedule, we had asked that the Auditor-General first looks into the transactions that occurred under vote 130. We would like Government to tell Parliament whether the Auditor-General has looked into these transactions and what conclusions and opinions he has given. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, we would like to know the accounting officers and any other information.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The accounting officer of vote 130 - Treasury operations - is Mr Lawrence Semakula, the Accountant-General. Concerning the issue of having a separate ministerial policy statement for this vote, we laid on the Table a ministerial policy statement for vote 008 and vote 130 and it was referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Actually, this morning we discussed that ministerial policy statement. 

Thirdly, we deferred some expenditure for further investigations by the officer of Parliament, who is the Auditor-General, and he is making good progress. We request that this expenditure, which has already occurred, be appropriated as we wait for the final report to get final results from him. However, we have tentatively got court orders restraining the Auditor-General from questioning a court order because all these payments are from court orders. That is the dilemma we are in. We beg the House to conclude this process and since the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament, we still have a chance to look at this issue. Thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that payments in respect to the order of mandamus are from that vote and that vote is loaded with payments, which are suspicious. (Interjections) Yes, I have to say that! That is why we are querying the orders of mandamus and the payments to be made from that vote. 

Let the minister deny, if it is not true that payments for the orders of mandamus are supposed to be made from that vote, and there are several other so called debts, which come in a wrapped up form. It is very difficult, unless you have a keen financial eye, to see what this vote takes care of.

Madam Chairperson, I think it is important that – (Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, the minister has said that Mr Lawrence Semakula, who is the Accountant-General, is also the accounting officer. Reference can be made to the list of the accounting officers submitted to Parliament; is he the one who appears there?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, maybe the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should clarify. I do not think that after passing the Audit Act, where the Auditor-General is supposed to verify all the expenditure passed and confirm that it is verified, a court order can stop the Auditor-General from looking into that expenditure. The law is clear that where the Government has spent public money, it is the Auditor-General to confirm if it is genuine expenditure. Once it goes through to the Treasury account, it still must be the Auditor-General to confirm that that expenditure is genuine.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I am disturbed by what hon. Bahati is raising. The Auditor-General raised the issue of court awards as an audit issue and there was a matter in which the Auditor-General was involved. When you look at these payments in the Auditor-General’s chamber, they have preferred these payments yet there were other payments before for which we are not making an arrangement.

Madam Chairperson, I am a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we were even proposing a policy, but they told us that they start with old cases in terms of payment - first come, first leave - because these cases have interest -

THE CHAIRPERSON: First in time, first in right.

MR MWIRU: Most obliged, Madam Chairperson. Today for the minister to make a case for us to budget and pay in this matter, where we have made an appeal, is to render the appeal nugatory. It is only in the interest – (Interjection) – Yes, there is an appeal in that matter where the Auditor-General was served an order. 

It is only in the interest of this country that we deal with other matters first, since there are other people who have claims against Government, which have not been dealt with, so that we give proper scrutiny to this matter. Once Parliament appropriates, that will be the end of it; they will pay and there will be no way we shall be in a position to give classification to this matter. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we would like to respond to what hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised on this Floor, that she is suspicious of some of these expenditures. 

I would like to assure this House that the court orders, which are being referred to, are court orders which were transferred to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development after mandamus orders were issued against the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury. This letter was laid on the Table. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not handling all other court orders; it is only handling those court orders, which were referred to us by the Attorney-General in this letter which we have laid on the Table four times. Every time this issue is raised, we lay it on the Table.

Madam Chairperson, it is also important that we respect systems because these payments are done through a system. We have no control over the judicial system and what it refers to us. As we said last time, once a mandamus order is issued against the permanent secretary, you have no choice but to pay. The Auditor-General is staff of Parliament –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Honourable minister, Parliament should be what it is supposed to be. In this case, the Auditor-General was a party in this matter and there is a court case in the Court of Appeal where the Auditor-General appealed against the award. The Auditor-General raised audit issues. For some of the claims where consent was entered, there was no trial in this matter. It was a consent which was entered –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one was that? 

MR MWIRU: The Ocip matter; it was compensation in the north. The Auditor-General raised the issue that the contingency liabilities were accepted by the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs without a proper process. The Auditor-General has appealed in this matter. So, these people have acted very fast and got an order of mandamus against the permanent secretary. However, there are also many orders of mandamus in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, which they have not presented to the Secretary to the Treasury to be acted on.

I am talking as a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and all this information is there. Why are you handling this particular matter as a special one, because this will cause a very big problem? I know there is an order but there are also other orders which exist within the ministry which have not been transmitted from the ministry to the permanent secretary.  

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank Members for giving me information. This now raises more concerns and we need to do much more scrutiny on how vote 130 is being managed and for what purpose. I have just given you very vital information that the orders of mandamus are paid from that account. That definitely should cause some action to be taken on our part.

However, I thank God that last week this Parliament was able to subject the orders of mandamus to more scrutiny. There are more investigations that are supposed to take place before we can look at the orders of mandamus again. Madam Chairperson, I remember you also expressed concern about why some orders are paid as a matter of priority and not others. They are all orders of mandamus, they are all matters of priority; I wonder why some orders of mandamus take priority. 

We have laboured to tell Parliament that this also paints a bad picture of us because the lawyers who are behind those orders of mandamus are lawyers that are easily identifiable with some regions. I do not want to raise the issue of tribalism – not at all - but it causes concern. We are Ugandans and we are supposed to be concerned about everybody across all the four regions, but we wonder why the orders of mandamus are most urgent only when it comes from certain lawyers. 

Madam Chairperson, it is important that vote 130 be brought under closer scrutiny. The Auditor-General must also advise us on how the payment, which has been made under that vote, is being handled. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we need to find a way of helping the beneficiaries of these judgements. There are those who get judgements or a decree but they do not proceed to apply for an order of mandamus; they just sit there with their decrees. There are others who go beyond the decree and actually apply for the writ of mandamus, directing payment.

Therefore, if it is true that there is a list of other writs of mandamus – not just decrees - that have not been presented to the secretary, I would like the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to lay them here. They are actually directed at the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, I do not even know what they are doing in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. 

The writ of mandamus is an order to the Secretary to the Treasury and not to the Attorney-General. So if you have those writs of mandamus, separate the decrees from the writs. If you have those writs, we want you to bring them here so that we can find out why some writs are sitting in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs while others are being paid. That is what we would want to know.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, there is an impression being created, which as a lawyer you will have to guide us on. What I get from hon. Mwiru is that part of the money which was paid here for some of the cases - He has referred to the case of Ocip that the Attorney-General appealed but court went ahead and issued an order of mandamus to us and we paid and the same Attorney-General wrote to us to pay. I do not think that you have that appeal on you.

Secondly, we also need to get this cleared. Corruption remains corruption and a corrupt person remains corrupt whether you are an Acholi, Mukiga, Munyankole or any other tribe. I think we should not mix issues of tribe with financial management, which I hear from some Members. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, you are right not to mention it but it was mentioned by hon. Nandala-Mafabi the other day about the people who have been paid. I think that should not be mixed. Whoever is corrupt should be dealt with; it does not matter where you come from. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, let me make something very clear. You recall that when the Public Accounts Committee was dealing with ex gratia payments, they became ex gratia because when they filed their case the President ordered the Attorney-General’s chambers to settle that matter. The Auditor-General had raised issues that there were even people who had claimed bicycles but later when it came to valuation, they actually valued cows. Therefore, as we were dealing with that matter, we got instructions that we should wait until court disposes of the matter. The Auditor-General did appeal this matter. 

Madam Chairperson, Uganda is not ending; I do not know why my good friend, hon. Bahati, thinks this is one matter which we should deal with now and in case we do not expeditiously deal with it, Uganda will end. What we are saying is that we have a duty to protect the funds of Ugandans, and due diligence in that regard does not deprive the intended beneficiaries. We are only calling for proper scrutiny of this matter because after we have paid, we shall not go to these claimants and say that we need this money. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, just to inform you that actually this money was paid long time ago. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: The reason you are here is to get our authority. If you paid it without parliamentary authority, that is a different matter.

MR BAHATI: You know the process of a supplementary budget; this money was paid within the limit of three per cent. We are coming to seek parliamentary approval as required by the law. 

Secondly, we need to get guidance from you, Madam Chairperson. We received this letter from the Attorney-General to pay. As a minister of finance, if I get legal opinion from the Attorney-General which I know you can only reverse when you go to court, what can I do? These payments are here.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, it is for the very reason that you paid that you should not be in a hurry. You want parliamentary approval but if you do not get it and we find out that actually there was a problem and Parliament withholds its approval, then someone will be responsible. This is what we are saying.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we are splitting hairs - (Interjections) - Yes, we are, and that is my humble opinion.

The issue we are dealing with is this: when there is a court order compelling the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to pay a judgement debtor, should he pay or should he not? The answer is only one; he has only one alternative and that is to pay - (Interjections) - Hon. Anywarach, I do not want us to engage in a bilateral discussion on the Floor of the House. This is the law that I know. When there is a court order, you conform. If you do not conform, you appeal. 

In the case of Acholi war debt claimants, my brother, hon. Mwiru, is a fine lawyer and he knows that an appeal is not a bar to execution; that is first year law. When you appeal and you do not want to comply with the order, you apply for a stay. If there is no stay and the court issues a writ of mandamus, the Treasury officer of accounts has only one alternative – that is to pay. 

The second issue is: when he has paid in compliance with the court order, does Parliament have the power to refuse to approve that payment? That would be the most absurd thing we would do as Parliament.

Madam Chairperson, I would also like to address the other issues that were raised about vote 130. I sit in the Budget Committee together with hon. Cecilia Ogwal and we have, as a committee, decided to summon the accounting officer for vote 130. 

There are problems with the management of vote 130 but those problems are not the subject of discussion now. The subject of discussion is the writ of mandamus which is a known court order. I do not know why we should still continue spending time on monies paid. These are monies paid in compliance with a court order that we are not even going to audit.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, under the Constitution there is nobody who can remove money from the Consolidated Fund without approval of Parliament. The only problem that we have is that the mandamus orders issued by court go to the Secretary to the Treasury and yet it is not his money; he is just a store keeper. If I am a banker, for example, I am supposed to keep people’s money, so you cannot go to court and ask me to get that money and pay some debt because that is not my money. I must go through a channel that authorises me to pay that money. 

The best way to do this is to amend the law to say that once court orders are given to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, they must be returned to the accounting officer of that particular ministry, who should pay back that money, but not to the Secretary to the Treasury because that is not his money. That is why there is suspicion that you connive with the Attorney-General to get paid. 

The best way to deal with this is to use the law. Even if a mandamus order comes, let it go to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs where we have a board that can hold any accounting officer responsible. I think it is the best way to deal with it.      

THE CHAIRPERSON: Until we amend the law, if a writ of mandamus is issued by the court, it has to be complied with. That is the law.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, that is the law but the writ was not issued against Parliament. I think that we should contextualise this. The writ of mandamus was issued against the Secretary to the Treasury. Our duty is to appropriate. What we are saying is that before we give our consent to this expenditure, can we be informed by whoever is responsible for informing us about what we are supposed to know and get proper clarification on how this liability arose.

Madam Chairperson, you will agree with me that your office – (Interjections) – Yes, it could have been made but once we withhold our consent to that expenditure, whoever may have made it will have to answer.

I am of the humble view that we are not asking for much. Since this money was spent, I do not know where the mischief would be if this House requested the Auditor-General to give a brief to the relevant committee and then the committee comes up with advice to Parliament on whether to give the consent. For us to proceed as if hon. Bahati is going to stop being the finance minister is not proper.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: The way forward, Madam Chairperson; I did consult with the finance minister and he agreed that because this Parliament has ordered for an investigation, we can go ahead with the appropriation but we have to deduct the figure of the orders of mandamus amounting to Shs 78,000,144,841. I do have the list with me. Madam Chairperson, if you do not have a copy, the orders of mandamus are here.

In this case, since the orders of mandamus are going to be paid from vote 130, the figure Shs 78,000,144,841 should be deducted from the total amount and we supply the balance. I have already consulted with the minister on that issue because this Parliament has already ordered for further investigation and we have not yet received the report. For the purpose of moving forward, we can deduct the amount in the mandamus orders but move forward with the rest. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have just received a letter from the Auditor-General relating to this matter, which I need to read. I will defer this particular matter and we deal with the others that are not controversial. I will come back to it on Tuesday. Let us move to the others.

MS CECILAI OGWAL: May I move that we deduct?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have made a ruling; we have deferred it.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I am very happy that you have deferred the matter. However, if we are going to use this as leverage to get money through a supplementary because it takes care of unforeseeable expenditure, then we may have to come up with a law or resolution on Tuesday. 

I was about to ask whether it would be procedurally right to also issue mandamus orders against the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for taking away Shs 10 billion from the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) or refusing to give the Shs 8 billion, which donors want, to enable SAGE to proceed. I am about to consider that. Otherwise, if the mandamus order only works to benefit lawyers like – I am not about to accuse hon. Odoi-Oywelowo. I thank you very much. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you will first have to go to court and get judgment and if the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development does not respond, then you ask for a writ directing him to produce the money.  Honourable members, we defer that matter and we shall return to it on Tuesday after I have read this document. 

Please, join me in welcoming pupils of Namugongo Girls’ Boarding Primary School. You are all welcome. They are represented by hon. Nganda Ssemujju and hon. Seninde from Wakiso District. (Applause)

Additional Requirements for Pension and Gratuity

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 131,330,225,110 be provided for as supplementary recurrent expenditure for the financial year 2014/2015.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mwiru, I would like you to produce those writs that are asleep. If there are writs that have not been handled, bring them here, we speak about them and we make a resolution so that people are paid.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I perceived your directive to be to the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I will convey it to the chairperson as a member of the committee. We shall work hand in hand with hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo. (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, maybe the right procedure would be to instruct the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or the Attorney-General to forward the remaining orders of mandamus to the Ministry of Finance rather than involving Members of Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: They told me that they have them; they know where they are. Let them go through the right channels. If there are writs which have not been paid and they are being sat on somewhere, that is what we want. We are doing the arithmetic.

Members, I think we shall complete this matter of the totals on Tuesday. Let us move the motion for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered supplementary schedules 1, 2 and 3 of financial year 2014/2015 and passed them with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 2 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you recall, we deferred this matter to try and understand the import of the amendment better. I have been made to understand that this was the position before 2014 and this House amended it to the present position. I wrote to the minister to let me know whether there has been any improvement in revenue collection arising from this amendment of 2014 and this was his response - the letter is dated 13 April: 

“Reference is made to your letter of 13th April regarding the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill. 

Honourable Speaker, we have analysed the concerns raised in your letter and we wish to highlight that the proposed amendment to section 28 of the Stamps Act seeks to distinguish transactions with no consideration paid to the transfer of property. The proposed section disregards the cardinal principle in taxation of equity where all transactions of a similar nature should be equally subjected to tax. In addition, passing the proposed decision into law will create room for tax planning and avoidance, which will undermine revenue collection.

We also observed that the proposal emanates from similar treatment offered to companies. However, the exemption to companies is predicted on the fact that companies only exist in the contemplation of the law on behalf of individuals. To that effect, transferring property between these legal vehicles when the beneficial owners are the same is to put an extra burden on the shareholders.

In regard to actual revenue realised as a result of fulfilling this provision since 2014, the table below highlights the changes in collection of stamp duty over the years.

It can therefore be observed that after 2014, the growth in revenue has significantly improved as a result of the repeal of the exemptions in section 35 among others.”

It says that in financial year 2010/2011, the collections were Shs 32 billion; in 2011/2012, it was Shs 33.9 billion; 2012/2013, Shs 26.6 billion- I do not know why it came down here. In 2013/2014, it was Shs 39.6 billion and 2014/2015, Shs 48.7 billion. He says that in 2014/2015 there was a growth of 23.1 per cent. That is his response to my query. The rest I leave to you - whether to revert to the old position or to take this.  

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, the last time we were here, we failed to generate consensus. I am glad that you went ahead and consulted further on this very subject and you have just informed the House about your findings. For purposes of moving ahead, I concede. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you withdraw the amendment?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Yes, Madam Chairperson.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, there were three schools of thought on stamp duty. Some thought that it should be one per cent while others say 1.5 per cent - I thought he had conceded on the other exemptions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have not reached there.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: There was the issue of the percentages - whether it should be 1.5 per cent, two per cent or it remains at one per cent.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chair, the committee had wanted to substitute two per cent with the figure 1.5 per cent. Also, in this particular case, the other time when we met we failed to generate consensus on the proposal to amend schedule 2 to substitute two per cent with 1.5 per cent as stamp duty charge on transfer of property. This too was deferred. Therefore, I am waiting for the opinion of this august House on this subject.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had three positions- maintain the status quo at one per cent; I do not think that anybody supported the two per cent; and so the question is whether we can raise to 1.5 per cent. No one wanted the two per cent, so the question is about either one per cent or 1.5 per cent. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think this goes to the Minister of Finance. For the time I have been in this House, there is increasingly a growing tendency of laziness with the Ministry of Finance not to think in terms of widening the tax base or getting money from different areas or angles. There must be a commissioner in charge of tax in the ministry whose role should be looking at ways of widening the tax base. If we say that we maintain the status quo, it is like we are against Government raising revenue.

We had good reasons for our position. Stamp duty is supposed to formalize business so that many people come into the formal sector either Kiboga or anywhere in the country, so that as a result we get more revenue. I think the Minister of Finance should take this matter very serious, even if I am alone. When we oppose, it depicts us negatively, as if we do not want Government to raise revenue. Stamp duty is not a tax in itself. It is just supposed to facilitate business. Therefore, I think the minister needs to take it seriously. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I take the advice of hon. Mwiru seriously. Indeed, in the past we have been trying to broaden our tax base and we have brought some measures here and some have been adopted although others were turned down. However, we try every other year to make sure that at least we broaden the tax base progressively at the same time make sure that it is fair and does not hurt the economy.

Madam Chairperson, as a ministry, we want to make progress on this Bill, so we support the middle position of 1.5 per cent. I would like Members to support it because you have seen the pressure involved in it. You have actually told us to get the orders of mandamus and they need money. This is not much; in Kenya it is four per cent but we are saying 1.5 per cent. Therefore, can we agree for purposes of progress to take the middle ground of 1.5 per cent so that we get some revenue but at the same time we are sensitive to other issues that Members are raising? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 2 (c) be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

4.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Stamp Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE STAMP DUTY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passes.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. What is your justification?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to amend the Value Added Tax Act, Cap. 349 to provide for persons engaged in midstream petroleum operations to register as taxable persons under the Act. It also aims to remove compact florescent bulbs and LED lamps or bulbs from the list of exempt goods; to include other specified agricultural processing machinery on the list of exempted supplies; to provide for the tax treatment of suppliers to contractors executing aid funded projects; exempt from tax the supply of goods and services to the contractors and sub-contractors of hydroelectric power, solar power, geothermal power projects; and provide for related matters. The Bill has been considered by the committee and it is ready to report to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

4.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have got the Sexual Offences Bill here; I now know why it is important to have this Bill passed.

Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016. I will not read the introduction, the object of the Bill and the methodology. I will go straight to the observations of the committee. In a way, this report describes all the amendments that have been proposed by the minister.

The committee observes that:
1. 	The amendment of the Act will include investors in midstream storage facilities like it does for the upstream, refinery and export pipeline. Currently, midstream storage facilities are left out of the VAT Act.

2. 	The current law gives different treatment to various types of bulbs; section 20 of the VAT Act deals with items that are exempt from customs duty under the fifth schedule of the East African Community Customs Management Act. The amendment will exclude bulbs other than compact florescent bulbs from VAT exemption so as to create equity in treatment of all bulbs and also generate revenue.

3. 	Imported goods for donor funded projects are exempt from VAT, whereas goods purchased locally attract VAT. This is because goods imported for donor funded projects are exempt from import duty under the fifth schedule of the East African Community Customs Management Act and VAT Act. This creates discriminatory tax treatment and has locked local industrialists especially those dealing in steel, cement, and cables out of large infrastructure projects.

	The proposed law will adopt a remission scheme for domestic suppliers to donor funded projects so that no VAT is paid by contractors to the domestic suppliers of goods, but the suppliers can claim VAT on inputs they use in production of the final products sold to contractors. This will make local companies competitive with foreign companies. In future, Government should remove VAT on all supplies to Government.

4. 	The current law does not allow persons involved in business process outsourcing to offset input VAT on services they import from output VAT on the final product. This has negatively affected their competitiveness as it has increased their operational costs. The Government is proposing, in clause 6, to allow offsetting of VAT.

5. 	Value Added Tax (VAT) is not charged on the inputs for hydropower projects while it is charged on the inputs for solar and geothermal power projects. The proposed amendments will equalise VAT treatment of inputs of contractors and sub-contractors of solar and geothermal projects with that of hydropower projects. This will reduce the cash flow burden of incurring VAT on inputs.

6. 	Various farm implements are still being charged VAT. This has made it difficult for farmers to access this type of farm equipment. As a country, there is need to support farmers in order to improve agricultural output given that most Ugandans are employed in the agricultural sector. This inclusion of more agricultural processing machinery on the list of exempted supplies will help reduce the cost of purchasing these implements.
	
7. 	Uganda continues to charge VAT of 18 per cent on wheat. Since the imposition of VAT on wheat in 2013, there has been a steady decline in the import of wheat; 250,107 tonnes were imported in 2012; 176,045 tonnes in 2013; 170,962 tonnes in 2014; and 146,955 tonnes in 2015. From this trend, we see that it has been reducing. 

	Uganda is losing on wheat flour exports to the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and South Sudan. Cheap wheat flour from Turkey is being imported through Uganda and Kenya and still more competitively priced than the wheat produced in Uganda. Kenya and Tanzania do not charge VAT on wheat. With the EAC trade integration, VAT is making Uganda very uncompetitive in the region and this will allow free flow of goods within the region. Therefore, Government should stop imposing VAT on wheat.

8. 	Madam Chairperson, VAT continues to be charged on energy-saving stoves in Uganda, which has also stifled efforts to use clean energy. Some companies which have invested in energy-saving stoves pay 18 per cent VAT, which has increased the cost of production and made the products very costly. The smoke from cooking on open fires causes indoor pollution which leads to many diseases thus increasing the cost on health, just like we have heard concerns of cancer.

Some of the stoves are used to charge phones as well as provide light to the homesteads, yet they use less firewood. These stoves have also helped to protect and conserve the environment with people using less wood. There is need to establish a special classification and exempt such products which can help reduce destruction of our environment. 

The home stoves on the market, which can produce light and charge phones, are going at a price of Shs 200,000. With the exemption of VAT, these stoves can sell at Shs 165,000 which would make them more affordable. Increase in sales would attract the companies to stop importing and instead manufacture them from here, which would reduce the cost further as they would no longer pay the 25 per cent import duty, and also provide employment to our citizens.

The committee recommends that the VAT (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. For the record, on the question of the stoves, the people most likely to buy those stoves are the women. Therefore, this tax is a tax on the women. In that regard, thank you very much, honourable chairperson, for your recommendation. 

4.28
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is a general comment on these exemptions and my concern is in regard to the policy. In future, the committee should get the details. The Auditor-General has on very many occasions raised concerns when these exemptions are created without details. When it came to the exemption on cotton, for example, people would import raw materials and yet they would want to take advantage of that benefit.

There are a lot of things that hon. Bahati has to improve in his ministry. It is not enough for you to come and say, “We want these exemptions.” Where is the policy and what are the details? We have had a lot of problems where the Ministry of Finance is fighting with the Auditor-General. The Auditor-General says the specifications according to the minister were these ones but when it comes to the actual payment, people import raw materials - I think you have heard complaints from people dealing in the oil sector. 

We need to find a way of streamlining so that Government comes out with a clear policy that ensures total benefit. You realise that even after three months and as they lay these tax exemptions before Parliament, when you flip through those exemptions you find very few people from Busunju, where my good friend, the honourable minister, comes from. I think Government should take this very seriously. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are there any further comments? Honourable members, there being no comments, I put the question that the Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5 agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, under clause 7, the committee proposes to amend the second schedule by inserting a new paragraph immediately before paragraph (a) to read as follows: “(a) by substituting for paragraph (a) the following: ‘(a) the supply of livestock, unprocessed foodstuffs and unprocessed agricultural products.’”

This is because it is a constraint on the local manufacturers, given that other countries in the region do not charge VAT on unprocessed foods. This has made imports cheaper than the locally manufactured flour, thereby constraining the local producers. Ugandan manufactures have lost their market in South Sudan and DRC as these countries import cheaply from Kenya and Turkey. I beg to move.

In paragraph (b), insert a new paragraph immediately after subparagraph (dda) as follows: “(ddb) the supply of energy-saving cooking stoves that meets ISO/IWA 11:2012 tier 2-4 emissions standards and fuel efficiency as approved by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards.”

The justification is that energy saving cooking stoves technology increases efficiency of biomass cooking by 50 per cent and also eliminates smoke by 90 per cent. This directly benefits the environment as well as the poor who suffer from the smoke from cooking with biomass. I beg to move.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment to clause 7 and an objection to the amendment brought by the chairperson of the committee. I would like to propose an insertion of the words, “biogas and wind energy” in paragraph (dda) of the second schedule. The justification is that the insertion of the said word ensures the amendment covers all forms of energy and electrical power. That is my proposal.

On the cooking stoves, the committee’s proposal is to pick out and exempt one type out of the many eco-friendly cooking stoves. It is not right because we also have cooking stoves which are produced here that attract VAT and support women. If you pick out one and leave the rest, it is not right. Therefore, the ministry opined that you give us time to study this matter comprehensively so that we do not penalise the local people at the expense of importers. We can debate it next financial year.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do we do since this is your Bill?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I am objecting to the amendment of the committee. The amendment they are bringing is to exempt one type of cooking stove which meets the international standards. However, we already have eco-friendly cooking stoves locally produced and they attract VAT and they are surviving well in the market without any complaint.

When it comes to tax, it is important you are given enough time to look at the matter carefully. There are other things that you consider- What revenue is affected? What is the view of the stakeholders? Not everybody is complaining about VAT; there are people who are willing to pay it because at the end of the day, they claim it anyway.  However, for you to pick out one company and exempt it becomes unfair for other stakeholders.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, as a lover of the environment who has been championing the fuel saving technology in my constituency, I am of the view that we should have an open exemption for this technology. Look at how much we lose as a country because of the rudimentary methods of cooking. The cancer machine collapsed from the effects of smoke and things like that. Why can’t we exempt this cooking technology so that we spread the use of the technology and save the forests from being felled in this country?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even those other stoves are bought by the women from their small money which they save from the sale of tomatoes.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The analysis of the minister that there are those willing to pay VAT because they would claim it does not go far into analysing who will be disadvantaged by VAT. If you charge VAT on stoves, the person who will sell or supply will definitely claim it but the final consumer in the village will have to suffer with the VAT since it is already included in the price of that good.

If the minister had asked that he would like to present a comprehensive list of all the stoves, maybe we would say that all stoves are exempted and that would be okay. However, to argue that he is opposing the proposal because it is one, and saying that he is studying the situation and that he will bring the matter next year while the tax is still being paid, is unacceptable.

I would propose that he uses language that will accommodate the local stoves that are attracting VAT and are passing the final expenditure to the local woman so that we exempt all of them. You would have played a very good role as an associate member of UWOPA. I can see he is smiling and thinking about it.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I saw hon. Bahati conceding, so I was about to sit down. You can concede and we move to the next stage. We do not have a lot of time.

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, up to this week, Gulu suffered a lot from inadequate supply of water and it was brought about by environmental degradation. If you see the trucks carrying charcoal from the north towards the south, you can sometimes shed tears. We have always been thinking of alternative fuel for cooking, but we have not been able to find the right one. Solar energy and electricity are not yet fully there, and electricity is too expensive. Even with rural electrification, it is too expensive even for the urban dwellers.

When we use energy saving stoves, we will limit the cutting of trees. We should encourage it. Why should we then put taxes on this? Open exemption is what we should all go for. Apart from supporting women, we are also going to protect our environment. Even if it is a little bit, it is something. Therefore, I go in for the open exemption for energy saving stoves. Let us really consider that.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, my opinion is not different from what my honourable colleagues have submitted. There is a little caution about the environment that we need to look at. 

Madam Chairperson, you come from Busoga region; in the past, Jinja was zero-rated in terms of tariffs to encourage industrialisation. Recently, I visited Nile Aluminium Company and I found out that for them to mould the saucepans, they must fell trees (mango and avocado) in order to cut costs. It is because the electricity tariffs are extremely high compared to those days of 1986 when we had little power voltage. At that time, there was a deliberate policy by Government not only to have these different houses- senior and junior quarters- for civil servants but they would use power at almost zero cost. The cost of cooking with electricity those days was so low, but right now people cannot afford it, so they destroy the trees. 

Where do these trees for charcoal come from? They definitely come from Nebbi, Arua, Gulu and all those places where they make charcoal. Therefore, I support the move to exempt tax on all stoves, including the type that we make in Nebbi. 

In Uganda, we have always started programmes without policies. You first gamble and then when it fails, you stop the programmes. In the same way, you can study this by trying to see what happens when we exempt these stoves. If we make a lot of losses on stoves, then you can come back and restore the tax. For now, the general rule should be to exempt tax on all stoves. 

As caution to the Government, however, is that there is no way we can protect the environment if the plant generating electricity is not even ours. If I am the owner, for example, I would request to get paid Shs 300 per tariff and the person generating power would ask for Shs 400. He would want to get Shs 100 over and above the Shs 300. You then go to the person who is now transmitting. We are going to finish all the fees. 

There is a place where I originally come from where natural trees formed the cover. Last week when I visited the place, I shed tears. Our people did not even learn how to burn charcoal and yet it is being burnt everywhere. We should get back our plants. When the President said that we should buy back our plants like Bujagali by paying Shs 30 trillion, I was so happy. However, if we do not do that, we can gamble with energy saving stoves but the environment will still get destroyed. 

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the issue of exemption is bad. It does not only involve the women who use it, but also the men who benefit from the food. I think if we put it as low as that, some of those refusing the exemption will appreciate it.

There is a high level of forest destruction, especially in places like Nakasongola. There are also trucks which bring firewood to the city. I, therefore, call upon the minister to realise that when you impose VAT on a company importing stoves, it is this company that will benefit. When this company exports to Uganda and claims the VAT, the last person in my village will not benefit. That refund will go back to the importer or the exporter. 

We beg you not to take so long to carry out your research. We can even familiarise you with the effects of deforestation especially on the rural women, so that you accept to transfer that VAT to another field and leave those stoves out. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the last time I went to Pader and Padyere, I came back here and told you that I was very alarmed at the number of charcoal sacks I saw along the roadside; it was worrying. I also want the minister to remember that if the stoves are very expensive, the women will continue using firewood and they will also carry their children along. The women and the children are going to be in that kitchen and will be susceptible to non-communicable diseases. That is how they get asthma and other diseases. Therefore, the matter is very serious, honourable minister.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I fully associate with your argument. I represent a rural constituency. Rubanda is rural and our women go around looking for firewood. However, I have also read a lot on taxation and financial related matters. It is not true that tax will always be the determinant of the final price. There are other factors that determine prices of goods and services. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with the honourable minister; before a tax policy is introduced, many tax studies must first be conducted and comparisons must be made. It is true, when the committee sat to consider exemption of this type of stove, we did not do a lot of research; we largely based on the information- (Interruption) 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I am aware that hon. Musasizi is a member of the committee. When this business was referred to the committee, we sent them to do serious business. He is now rising to tell this august House that when we gave them the work as Parliament, they did not do serious business and yet we are here considering business from the same committee. Is he procedurally right? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you signed this report; you are No. 3 on this list, so you are bound by the contents of the report. You are stopped from continuing to discuss that matter as well as anyone else from that committee. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with exemption. This is an imported product from the USA. When you are dealing with import excise, there are some laws within the East African Community that are affected. How will you deal with that import when it comes to VAT? It must go through that process. 

The minister needs to clarify this because it might affect the protocols of the East African Community and other laws. If you do it here, you must be in conformity with other states. This is a product which is imported and it cannot be distinctive to only one company which exports to Uganda and does not appear in other countries in the community. 

I have no problem with exemption. However, on the other side of the coin, you cannot make a discriminative law in taxation. The major canon of taxation is equity. When you remove one and leave others, then you become unfair. The chairperson has said that you should remove one and leave the others but this becomes a discriminatory law that is unfair in taxation. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can commit himself to finish the research in six months and then next year, we will study it including all those locals who are paying VAT, so that they can be exempted. We can then know the projection instead of removing only one particular part. That is my submission and observation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing that we deal with 7 (a) and we do not touch 7 (b)?

MS NTABAZI: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. The way we were proceeding was good until we were intercepted by a member of the committee. 

Sincerely speaking, there is no way you can impose a tax on an imported good and it does not affect the locally made items in the country. Once you put impose a tax on an item, whether locally made or imported, it will suffer in the same way. Therefore, if you are putting a tax on imported stoves from the US, remember the ones coming from Pader at one point will also be affected. This is because an issue will rise of why the imported ones are exempted and not the locally made ones. 

The issue of integration is something to consider as well. We integrate on matters where we agree, where there is harmony. You cannot say that what is done in Kenya must also be done in Uganda because we have integrated. No, there are matters where we integrate and matters where we disagree. If there is something, which is happening in Rwanda and is not benefitting us as Ugandans, we cannot integrate on that.

Therefore, as women of this country – (Interjection) - I am not willing to take information because I am informed. Madam Chairperson, the good thing is that hon. Kakooza is a beneficiary of the products of – For purposes of time we have agreed that taxes be exempted on this matter. We have agreed, unless there is a –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is whether we proceed with one exemption or we allow the minister to come and bring the full list, which means that we defer clause 7(b) and proceed with clause 7(a). The second one would also go because your amendment was in clause 7(b). Is there clause 8? There is no clause 8.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we inserted a new clause between clause 6 and clause 7. We will pass clause 7 afterwards.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are at clause 7. We need to agree on whether we are only handling the wheat and not the stoves. Should we defer the stoves?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the confession from the committee requires that we should do more research so that we can handle this matter comprehensively. The beauty about the current law is that in a few months, we will be back. In November, we will back to this House with our study.

Certainly, it should be put on record that we support the cause for women. We support these cooking stoves but the way we are going to tax them should be fair and comprehensive in order not to disadvantage local production. We can, therefore, move on only with the wheat, where we agree with the amendment of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We, therefore, task the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development of the Tenth Parliament to handle this issue of the stoves when the Budget Call Circular comes. 

Honourable members, the question is that clause 7(a) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you say that you have something new?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, you can proceed with clause 7, which has the second schedule of the principal Act amended as in the Bill itself, not the amendments here.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, under clause 7(b), the committee inserted a new clause. Therefore, in the original clause 7(b), we are inserting the words, “biogas” and “wind energy” after geothermal power. The justification is: to ensure that the amendment covers all forms of energy and electrical power.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that to make it more comprehensive?

MR BAHATI: Yes, to make it more comprehensive, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the original clause 7 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE VALUE ADDED TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read a third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Value Added Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2016

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Finance Bill, 2016” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded. What is your justification and the gist of your amendment?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Finance Bill, 2016 is to provide for the alteration of certain taxes and duties; to vary the rate of the environmental levy charged on used clothing, used shoes and other used articles; to provide for the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) to issue certificates of origin; to waive arrears of tax accruing from SACCOs; to revise the non-tax revenue relating to services and documents under the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998; and to repeal fees in respect to the Mining Act, 2003 under the Finance Act, 2013, Act No. 18 of 2013 and the Finance Act, 2014, Act No. 10 of 2014 and for other related matters.

As I said, Madam Speaker, this Bill was considered by the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they are now ready to make their report to the House.

5.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me use this opportunity to lay on the Table the minutes generated by the committee both for the VAT Bill and the Finance Bill. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to read the report from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I hope that this time honourable members will not say that we have not done comprehensive research as they are debating. I will not read the introduction, the object of the Bill and the methodology. I will go straight to the observations.

Observations

1. 	The committee observed that member states in COMESA region are allowed to derogate from the tariffs set under the protocol if the full application of the tariffs will negatively affect their economies. In order to protect our industries from an upsurge of imports of lubricants, un-denatured alcohol, steel and steel products, electronics, paper and paper products, and diapers, a six per cent duty should be imposed on these products, which actually existed before Uganda joined the COMESA Free Trade Area.

2. 	The Bill proposes to increase the rate of the environmental levy imposed on used clothing, used shoes and other related used articles form 15 per cent to 20 per cent of the CIF value. According to the Parliamentary Budget Office analysis, indirect taxes from this initiative increased by 0.9 per cent, despite a marginal decline in aggregate employment by 0.02 per cent in the short run, relative to the current levels. 

	This measure will send a signal to the market that Uganda is promoting its textile industry and will reduce on the use of second hand clothes. However, more incentives should be given to increase local textile manufacturing to provide market for cotton and provide employment in the textile sector. This emanates from the EAC protocols.

3. 	The current period of notifying a licensing officer to change the ownership of a motor vehicle is 14 days. This has caused operational challenges and has made compliance difficult. It has also discouraged people from transferring ownership of those vehicles. The proposed amendment of three months will ensure that URA database is up to date in regard to ownership of vehicles, and penalties for the delay will help raise revenue and improve accountability and decision making.

4. 	The SACCOs, like all other entities that derive income from business and investment understandings, must comply with their tax obligations. Many SACCOs have not complied with their obligations largely because of ignorance of tax laws and institutional weaknesses. 

	As a result, they have incurred tax arrears, which they are unable to pay. The proposed waiver of taxes will promote SACCOs as a vehicle through which more Ugandans can participate in the mainstream financial sector and for provisions of affordable credit. It removes the arrears, which may impede them from offering affordable financial services. This is a one-time waiver of arrears as up to 31 December 2015.

5. 	Under the Mining Act, 2003, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development is authorised to issue regulations to revise fees. The revision of fees will be done by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. However, it was observed that several fees are still being provided for under the Finance Act, despite the fact that there are other responsible ministers who should be issuing and revising these fees under their own laws. In future, all the fees should be issued by the relevant ministries that implement those Acts.

6. 	Clause 5 seeks to amend Section 42 of the Traffic and Road Safety Act to introduce a five-year permit. However, the committee notes that section 42(4) provides thus: “Where a driving permit has, for any reason not to have been renewed within a period of five years or more from the date of issue or renewal of the permit, it shall lapse, but the holder of the permit shall be eligible, on application, to be issued with a learners’ driving permit in accordance to section 29”. 

The effect of this proposed five-year permit is that the holder shall have to undergo a fresh process of acquiring a new driving permit unless they renew their permit before the lapse of the five years. Similarly, several substantive provisions in the Act need consequential amendment to accommodate the provision of a five-year permit and yet this cannot be done under the Finance Bill.

It is also important note that the Attorney-General has opined against such a matter where substantive provisions of an Act of Parliament are amended under the Finance Bill. It is on the strength of this opinion that Government has proposed, under clauses 9 and 10, to repeal the provisions of the Finance Act, 2013 and 2014 in as much as they relate to the Mining Act, 2003.

The committee, therefore, recommends that clause 5 be deleted because the introduction of a five-year permit necessitates consequential and substantive amendments throughout the other provisions of the Traffic and Road Safety Act. The committee further recommends that the on-going process of amending the Traffic and Road Safety Act should be completed before the end of the financial year to enable the introduction of the five-year permit in the subsequent financial year.

7. 	Clause 6 seeks to revise fees payable under the Traffic and Road Safety Act to, among others, increase charges for driving permits from Shs 66,000 to Shs 150,000 for a three-year permit. It is important to note that the production cost is charged separately at Face Technologies and it is currently at Shs 60,000. 

The committee conducted a study within and outside the region and found out the following: In Uganda, a three-year permit costs a total of $36 and the new rate will take it to $59. In Botswana, it costs $7 to get a three-year permit; in South Africa $15; in Namibia $10; and in Sri-Lanka $17. 

The committee notes that:
    a) The proposed fees are the highest within the region compared to other countries studied.
    b) The cost of production charged is based on a PPP build, operate and transfer arrangement.
    c) The current fees are already high and encourage non-compliance thereby compromising road safety. Since 2005, only 73,000 persons have valid driving permits.
    d) A driving permit is legally accepted evidence as valid identification of a person. Government should encourage more people to apply for driving permits, not only for driving persons but also for capturing data on its citizens.

The committee recommends that the current fees be maintained.

8. 	In 2014, Parliament imposed a withholding tax on the gross amount of any payments for winnings of sports betting or pool betting. However, research has shown that this measure is counterproductive and did not generate the anticipated revenue. Rather, it has encouraged agents to avoid regulations. It is now proposed that the measure should be redirected so that the incidence of tax falls on the operator of a casino, gaming or betting activity. 

The committee seeks to move an amendment to the Lotteries and Gaming Act, 2015 to increase the rate of gaming tax paid from 20 per cent to 30 per cent of the total amount of money staked less the pay-outs (winnings) for the period of filing returns.

It is also important to note that these companies will pay a gaming tax in addition to other taxes prescribed by law like corporation tax.

The committee recommends that the Finance Bill be passed into law, subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your team. Before I invite comments, I would like to know from the honourable chairperson whether there are local factories, which manufacture diapers for small babies mainly. I recall that the Seventh Parliament removed this item from taxation; I do not know whether it is being smuggled in. If there are factories here that you are protecting, we want to know because you noted that you are protecting the local industry. Honourable members, your comments are welcome.

5.13
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the committee what the increase of the current 15 per cent on used clothes and other used materials has generated and what losses we have incurred. 
You talked about a 0.02 per cent loss of employment but over the years, even with the 15 per cent tax- The rationale is to discourage importation of used clothes but over the years, a majority of Ugandans wear used clothes, including some Members of Parliament –(Interjection)- Yes, I am telling you the truth. 

Why is there market for used clothes and shoes? It is because you have not put in place enough mechanisms within which quality new clothes and shoes are brought into this country. You will go downtown and buy new shoes from China, use them for two days and they will have to be written off. However, a person who has bought used shoes from UK, Japan or the US will wear them for years.

We are fortunate that as Members of Parliament, we can travel and buy strong shoes from Turkey, US and elsewhere but are we really doing a service? What is the root cause? Increasing taxes for a majority of Ugandans when you are not doing your work of ensuring that new imported goods are of good quality - If you go to other countries, they maintain certain standards. When you go to Kenya, you will buy things from China, which are of a standard quality. 

In Guangzhou, you will find first class items as well as other classes. There are markets for Europeans, a US market and an African market. Ugandans will go to the African market, buy a product and take it to Yiwu to be reproduced in class FFF and then bring it here for sale.

I would like to oppose the increase on taxes on used clothes from 15 per cent to 20 per cent unless as a Government we come up with a better way of serving Ugandans. You also have to assure us and bring before this Parliament information on how many textile industries you have promoted. We have been talking about this for a long time. I oppose the increase.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Ntabazi comes up, I do not know whether the minister has addressed how many Ugandans are engaged in that industry and are not stealing but are selling an old shoe or shirt. I would like you to consider that.

5.16
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am going to start exactly where you -(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry.

MS NTABAZI: You have really guided because the problem of this country is unemployment. The youth who are engaged in selling second-hand shoes and clothes have reduced the number of unemployed youth in Uganda. This business has reduced the number of redundant young people. It has even reduced on the number of thieves who would be engaged in stealing but now have something to do.

I would like guidance from the minister or the chairman on how many shoemaking factories we have in Uganda. I want the names. Even if you went to Jinja where there is a textile factory, where will you find a shoe factory? This would be the only area where we would say, let us improve our own shoe factories and improve on the quality, but the factories are not there.

We having been encouraging children to wear shoes in schools but the only shoes which go to the villages, including my area in Bundibugyo, are second hand. People go up to Congo because there are no nearby factories. Why do you want people in this country to move barefooted? We are trying to upgrade from a third world country to another level and you want us to go back on foot.

Regarding the issue of second-hand clothes, the Chairperson of UWOPA has brought it out very well. Whenever a woman is pregnant, she will immediately look for second-hand baby’s wear, blankets and little things that the baby will use. We get quality from there. She told you that even Members of Parliament get quality from there - (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform my colleagues that I had university graduates from my constituency who were redundant and I supported them with a little capital. Right now, if you go to Owino Market, there are so many youth who graduated from university, they have no jobs but they are now selling second-hand clothes and shoes.

MS NTABAZI: That is very good information – (Interruption) - I am finalising.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, honourable member. I have listened to the Members and I also have my views, which may be in agreement with what the Members are saying. Considering what everybody is saying in this House, including those who are yet to speak, in the interest of time I am wondering whether it would not be procedurally right to ask the minister to concede and we move on. (Applause)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, hon. Sarah Opendi is the Minister of State for Health and she actively participated in this debate in Cabinet and her views were carried. That is why we have the Bill here.

Madam Speaker, we can go to the committee stage and continue with the debate there because we have not reached any area of amendment. People are just making general comments.

5.22
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My comrade, the honourable minister, looks very smart in that wonderful tie; I do not know whether it is second hand - (Laughter) - but I am very sure that it is a very nice tie.

Madam Speaker, when this news was heard by our people in the city and the entire country, they got worried. In these biting and tough times coupled with meagre incomes, this industry employs over 200,000 people directly or indirectly- from the importers to those that carry the bales, retailers, and those who do after sales services, including hawkers and vendors that you see upcountry. 

We are not discouraging the manufacture of clothes or textiles within the East African Community as it is good and healthy. However, you cannot come up and increase taxes because people have committed sums of money, for example importers, through loans. These loans go down to the owner of a boutique and to a hawker. The moment you increase the taxes, definitely the price will increase and the cost of operation of such businesses will also increase. Therefore, in the short and long run, people will be driven out of employment. Remember that these are people that live on meagre capital, not big capital like other players. As we strive to revive the cotton industry and others, we should go slowly on increasing taxes because we have not seen the effect.

The other reason is the importation of new counterfeit goods as well as the production of substandard goods. Even those that are produced within are substandard. Look at a new T-shirt produced within East Africa and compare it with a used T-shirt from UK, Canada or those other countries, you will realise that the latter is longer lasting. 

Given the situation that people are living in, with meagre incomes- Imagine a mother that is earning Shs 50,000 or a teacher earning Shs 300,000 and he or she has to clothe about six children in a home and they want to buy shirts or dresses for those children to last for a year, which one would they go for? These T-shirts that are manufactured by these -(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we need to put this debate into context. The increment of this tax from 15 per cent to 20 per cent does not substantially increase the price. We have done research – (Interjections) - Friends, let me give you facts. We have done research and the increment on the old goods –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to find out whether it is in order for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to fool this House that an increase of five per cent will not eventually lead to an increase in prices. I suppose that he took a course in economics and is well aware that in this country, whenever a tax is imposed on a commodity, especially before the end of the financial year, traders begin shifting the prices for the consumer. With this background, is he in order?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, according to our study, which is scientific, the increase from 15 per cent to 20 per cent will increase the price by two per cent. What does it mean? If you are importing items worth Shs 1 million, you will have an increase of Shs 40.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to appeal to you and move this House to remember the hundreds of women who are now in the tailoring business producing clothes for our children. These are local women manufacturing clothes for people to wear. We are at a crossroads. Do you want to grow your industries locally or do you want to continue importing used clothes? The choice you are making today of continuing to import used clothes will affect the local industries. The choice is yours.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like to know; where do those ladies get the materials they use for tailoring? If they are imported, then we are promoting the other side and not the local industry. If they were buying from Picfare, MULCO and Phenix, I would understand. Is that where they are buying the raw materials?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the mood in the House – (Laughter) - is suggesting that we go to third reading.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. My brother can read that the mood here is the mood from our countrymen. That is why we are here to effectively represent them. 

You first said that the price would not rise according to your scientific research. However, that substantiality test that you are bringing here does not work in any way. You are talking about two per cent, depending on what you earn. That two per cent might impact someone who is very poor in a way that you may not believe. Assuming you have 10 children and you have a two per cent increase for the clothes on each and every child, cumulatively it will become a big sum. You might not feel it because you earn a lot but as the pyramid goes down to the bottom, you will find that our people will feel it more. 

I would like to move and persuade my brother, the minister, to take the plea of all Ugandans and the Members of the House so that you withdraw that clause immediately and we give you a smooth ride on other matters. Thank you very much.

5.30
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hear Members talking about the mood, so maybe I should also read the mood. However, I would like to defend the minister who is trying to discourage the use of second-hand clothes. 

It is not a ban. Maybe we could reduce the percentage from 20 per cent to about 17 per cent. We must begin to tell our people that it is more beneficial for us to have local industries. Even if they are producing poor quality shoes from Uganda, put them on and we graduate slowly.

Madam Speaker, when I hear Members using examples of Members of Parliament wearing second-hand clothes, I feel so sad –(Interruption)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for the hon. Kamateeka, who is an aspiring candidate for –(Laughter)- Deputy Speaker, not to read the mood of the House correctly and come to the conclusion that in the second-hand economy, you have to protect second-hand clothes, shoes and motor vehicles? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you go to West Africa, they use a lot of their local materials but they are made in their countries from their factories, but the clothes tailored here are imported from Congo, Rwanda and West Africa. Honourable members, let us understand what is happening in this economy. Where are the factories manufacturing bitengi? I would like to know so that I can start buying tomorrow. I will take this off and start wearing bitengi made in Uganda.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, this would be the beginning, to encourage us to have our own industries, however painful it is. We could start –(Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, hon. Kamateeka, for giving way. Madam Speaker, while I was seated here, I looked at the increment of five per cent and remembered that at one time, a proposal was brought here for people to earn one per cent of Uganda’s budget and it was a big issue. If one per cent could be so big, any percentage in economics has a serious effect. Thank you. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. I would like to add that some of these diseases that we suffer from come through these second-hand clothes –(Interjections)- We should try to focus on our people having indigenous industries. They may continue with the second-hand clothes but we should work towards phasing them out. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what to say about the second-hand cars that are being driven by Members of Parliament.

5.35
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am really surprised by the view of my sister and neighbour, hon. Kamateeka. She knows very well that in that region, almost 90 per cent of the population put on second-hand clothes. For us to sit here and increase tax on diapers, second-hand shoes and clothes, aware that this will increase the burden on the poor people would be wrong economics and I oppose it.

I would also like to agree with the committee that increasing charges on driving permits, given the figures they have given us, would be hard to defend. Uganda is charging $36 whereas Botswana charges $7, and Namibia $10 and we now want to increase it to almost $60! This is not acceptable.

We already know that our drivers are complaining, including all of us, that the charges for driving permits are very high. I think that the committee has done well on this and I back what they have proposed – (Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. The new rate for a driving permit is $60 because it was $43 plus the cost of production of $17, which totals to $60. So you should correct that figure to $60.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable colleague. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the minister to explain the proposal to give a blanket waiver of all tax arrears for the SACCOs. I do not understand this. Are you promoting impunity? Are you not mindful of those who have been paying taxes? What message are we sending and what is the rationale of this kind of proposal in a tax Bill? I would like to get an explanation.

5.37
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with my colleagues who have read the mood in the House. I hope that the honourable member will allow the minister to listen. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about driving permits. Those who were here during the Seventh Parliament will recall that a matter was brought here regarding Face Technologies, which is a South African company. A contract was signed on the “build, own and transfer” arrangement and it was meant to be for two years but it was renewed for three years. However, it is surprising that today they have renewed the contract up to 2020. After five years, they were supposed to have transferred and passed this to the Ministry of Works or Uganda Revenue Authority but somebody is being bribed by Face Technologies.

Last week, we were in a Committee of Works meeting and this matter was brought up. That is when we got to know that the contract had been renewed again yet this was supposed to have been passed on to Ugandans.

First, this is a South African company and you know how much they charge. The committee has told us how much they charge for a driving permit in South Africa. Why should it be four times higher in Uganda yet South Africa, where Face Technologies headquarters is based, charges lower? They came here to cheat us. In fact, the committee should have recommended that we reduce from the current charges of $60. This is because if you include all the other costs that you pay in order to get a driving permit, including the medical and eye tests, you will end up paying Shs 300,000 in order to acquire a driving permit. 

I do not understand why the Government and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have continued to allow Face Technologies to fleece Ugandans. The minister should tell us why this has continued. We are investigating at committee level to find out why Face Technologies is continuing. Why have we not passed this back? They were supposed to have recouped their money in five years’ time when they reach 500,000 driving permits. However, we were told in the committee that there are 730,000 driving permits; so, what are they still waiting for? Pass this thing back to Ugandans. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.40
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am forced to imagine that the ministry took advantage of the campaign period hoping that the committee would not spend much time scrutinising these matters. I would suggest that we subject some of the decisions, which we are yet to make at this point, to further study so that we have proper facts. This is because we cannot get answers to some of the questions, which are being asked here on the Floor; for instance, how many factories are manufacturing Ugandan clothes and shoes? These are questions that need real answers. 

In terms of planning, Madam Speaker, I do not know what happens. We have the National Planning Authority but I have come to learn that there are very few Government sectors and departments that comply with the national plan. So, how do people make their decisions and what do they base on? 

We should have had statistics on the implications of the tax that you are going to impose. Within our constituencies, we are suffering with boda boda riders and this could be everywhere. These riders cannot afford to pay for the permits. What happens is that they resort to hiding and forging and this has exacerbated corruption. 

I have been asking myself why, as a country, we have not taken care of every strata of our population so that they can also earn a decent living. It is as if some Ugandans know that they must bribe in order to survive. This emanates from failure to properly plan within our country, including having policies for the private sector which do not match private sector growth with the tax policies that we are putting in place. 

Madam Speaker, I am of the view that we must empower these committees to do thorough research, and we have researchers. I will give the example of URA, which is very efficient in collecting taxes. They have even improved their system – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, when we were going to get clearance for our nominations, URA was thorough. Why can’t URA be in position to process driving permits? Why should we donate money to these foreigners who are collaborating with some of our own? This is a major crisis. We have middlemen in this country who keep selling our country. They collaborate with these external people and continue fleecing us. At the end of the day, we live in perpetual suffering. 

I think that to reverse this, we should empower our own Government institutions to do the job, like we have seen with the national identity card project, which had gone to the dogs for a very long time. Now we are seeing things happen. Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that we do not go ahead with these proposals until thorough studies are done and we make decisions from an informed point of view.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before we move on, the other day, the President published the list of the top 100 taxpayers. I am interested in knowing how much tax Face Technologies is paying to Uganda. Yes, we want to know how much they contribute to our economy.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, as you know, Face Technologies is under the Ministry of Works and Transport. However, I agree with the Members that if their contract has expired, they should not continue – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: The contract has been renewed against what we agreed to in 2003 in this House. It has now been renewed to 2020. How can a contract of a company that was supposed to recoup its money within five years be extended for 17 years?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we will ask the Minister of Works and Transport to come and make a statement on why he did not take Parliament’s advice seriously. (Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information that I would like to give to the minister is that the situation is even worse. Face Technologies pays Shs 951 million every year in rent and that money is part of the costs that are supposed to be recovered at the end of the project. Therefore, the ordinary Ugandan pays Shs 951 million every year in rent. That is what Face Technologies is paying to Meera Investments yearly for that place. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the Chief Whip will direct the Minister of Works and Transport to come and make a statement on the contract of Face Technologies, which expired and was renewed against the advice of Parliament. Why is the Minister of Works and Transport not respecting Parliament’s advice? I think they will make a statement on that.

On SACCOs, Madam Speaker, this is based on our strategy to prepare SACCOs to be ready to run as businesses. The proposal of exemption is in that direction.

Madam Speaker, I said that the mood was actually taking us to the committee stage to make some decisions. However, I just want to remind Members, because you asked me, that there are four factories that manufacture shoes, namely Rhino Footwear Ltd, Amob Italian Shop, Alam Group of Companies and Bata Shoe Company Ltd. 

Finally, the proposed tax revenue, which is going to accrue from the five per cent increment on this item, is Shs 20 billion. As we take a decision at the committee stage, we have to bear this in mind. Madam Speaker, I request that we move the process forward and go to the committee stage. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we would be interested in knowing what the capacity of Bata is yearly. How many shoes do they manufacture in a year? 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to provide information to this House. I have ever visited Bata and what I have always found on their shelves are shoes made and imported from India. I do not know whether India is Uganda. (Laughter) The minister has to tell us whether “manufactured in India” is “manufactured in Uganda”.

MR OKUPA: Bata Shoe Company is not a Ugandan company; it is a foreign company.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is wise that when you already have something in your hands, you do not risk losing it as you go to look for something extra. We already have 15 per cent, I would propose that we move to the committee stage and see what we can do there. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCE BILL, 2016

5.50
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Clause 2 is on amendment of the Finance Act, 2014. Insert new items after (10) as follows: “textiles, pharmaceuticals, dairy products and confectionaries.” The committee proposed the addition of those items and the justification is, to protect local manufacturers.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the purpose of this clause is meant to protect our local industries but what the committee is proposing is actually the reverse. If you take the example of dairy products, which are imported, we already imposed a duty of 65 per cent because these are items that are identified as sensitive on a list that we passed last year. What the committee is trying to do is to say that on dairy products, we impose a tax of six per cent and yet we have already imposed 65 per cent. Therefore, the six per cent will not do anything. 

I do not know whether the chairperson and members of the committee really understood the purpose of this amendment. (Interjection) Are you conceding? [Mr Kasule: “Yes.”] Okay, thank you.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we concede on that matter. We may remove textiles, pharmaceuticals, dairy products and confectionaries.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I asked you whether there is a company in this country manufacturing diapers, which we are protecting.


MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I have been informed by the technical bench that we have two manufacturers and that also, there is dumping of diapers from Egypt – [Mr Okupa: “Who are those? Can you give us the names of the manufacturers?] I have heard of Prof. Musaazi. [Mr Okupa: “That is a name of a person.”] I do not know the factory but that is the information that I have been given. For the diapers, I can only confirm two manufacturers - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if we are going to protect the industry, we should know the quantities. How many diapers is each of those factories manufacturing?

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarification from hon. Kasule. We are not here to speculate that a one Musaazi produces diapers, because we are legislating for the nation. Let us clearly know the company and the quantity that they produce and whether this can easily sustain the market, so that we can go ahead to increase and levy these taxes on the people. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think that the Committee of the whole House can propose to leave out diapers and we proceed with the others, because I cannot confirm the names of the manufacturers that I have been told about. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. This item was removed as far back as the Seventh Parliament. If in the next financial year you produce evidence about these factories, the quantities they are manufacturing and whether they are enough for Uganda, we shall support you. However, for now, we shall not allow you to tax children. 

I now put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed. We have abandoned clause 2 of the committee chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: This is what we have been arguing about - used clothing, used shoes and other used articles.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee had proposed that the words, “other used articles” be removed. However, the Committee of the whole House should pronounce itself on the entire clause before we can propose an amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What we can say is that the original clause 3 remains at 15 per cent. Is that the existing one? This one was seeking to enhance. Should we delete?

MR BAHATI: This would mean that clause 3 is deleted. I beg to move an amendment that clause 3 be deleted in line with the debate that has ensued in the House. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 3 be deleted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, deleted.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR KASULE: The committee proposed the deletion of clause 5, which was intended to introduce a permit for five years. This is because we were informed that changing a permit from three to five years would involve substantial amendments within the Act and yet this Act is intended to only change fees and nothing else.

Secondly, the committee also noted that there are related costs with Face Technologies concerning changing the systems or calibrating the machines to accept a five-year permit. That is the information that we received and that is why we proposed a deletion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 5 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, deleted.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR KASULE: Substitute clause 7 with the following: “(7) The Uganda Revenue Authority shall, in consultation with the Uganda Manufacturers Association, be responsible for issuing certificates of origin required by section 111(2) of the East African Customs Management Act, 2004.” The justification is that the Uganda Manufacturers Association is a competent authority on the matter.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the proposal of the committee to include the Uganda Manufacturers Association as one of the competent authorities contravenes the protocol that was established under the EAC, since the partner states’ revenue authorities are named as the competent authority to issue a certificate of origin.

The Uganda Revenue Authority is mandated by law passed by this Parliament, to look into matters of revenue administration, among others. The Uganda Manufacturers Association handles other issues. I think that we should not burden the Uganda Manufacturers’ Association to go into issues of certificate of origin. Let us leave this to an institution that is competent by law to do this.   

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, the minister’s view is right. You cannot ask a non-state agency to do the function of Government. There would also be a conflict of interest because most of these manufacturers have interests in some of these things.

MR KASULE: I thank you. May we save time and concede on the matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR KASULE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Insert a new clause 8 as follows: 
“Amendment of the Lotteries and Gaming Act, 2015 
The Lotteries and Gaming Act, 2015 is amended in Schedule 4 by substituting for Schedule 4 the following: 
‘Rate of tax  
Thirty per cent of the total amount of money staked less the pay-outs (winnings) for the period of filing returns.’”

The justification is that since Government has faced compliance challenges around withholding tax under income tax, the rate of gaming tax for the companies should be increased. Gaming tax is easily administered and collected. I beg to move.

MR KWIZERA: I would propose an amendment that instead of 30 per cent, we put it at 50 per cent because those who gamble are very rich. So this will make up for where we have failed to put tax on clothes. I move that we make it 50 per cent. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support that proposed amendment by hon. Kwizera because we have seen our youth get spoilt. This must be made very expensive because our youth are being derailed. The honourable Minister for Ethics and Integrity can agree with me. I propose that we make it very punitive. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, earlier on I had wanted to submit on gaming and I am happy that the opportunity has come.

I entirely support the amendment proposed by hon. Kwizera. You just need to get out of this House and go to any town, however small the trading centre is you will find young people glued to gaming machines from morning to evening. Young people have abandoned work, children are out of school and there seems to be nobody capable of restraining the gaming and lottery sector in this country.

The Auditor-General in 2012/2013 also complained about the difficulty they face in controlling and getting licence compliance. I think the way to go is to increase tax on the actual proceeds and then that will probably get a few of our children out of those halls where they game day and night. 

The beauty about this tax, unlike the earlier one on used clothes and shoes for the poor, is that this is about the rich people who have the money to throw around. Therefore, we will achieve two things: we will stop the poor who want to get involved; and two, we will pick the money from the rich people. I support the amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, sometime back I told you about my shock when I saw these machines which are in all your towns. Those people just come every 5 O’clock to collect the money; they do not pay the Uganda Revenue Authority and they do not pay the local authority. They just collect money and go. Honourable minister, who is enforcing this? The machines are still in our towns.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I was also considering hon. Kwizera’s client who is not necessarily the gambler. The challenge we are faced with here is that Government keeps on allowing the importation of these machines but when our people buy them, they are arrested. I do not know whether we should go for a total ban because of the unsuspecting members of the public. 

This seems to be like one of the programmes brought by the Government. Wherever you go, it seems to be very profitable. Even when the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is talking, he shows you that this is one source of revenue and it lures business people. I know these people are licensed and they have running contracts. I do not know what the minister thinks about the other type of the so called investors other than the population. I remember I was very firm in suggesting a total ban but we also need to strike a balance between the so called investors whom the NRM Government has brought in place and the actual population.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson - [Hon. Members: “He is a member of the committee”] - You have all been talking; I have not talked since I came here. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are a member of the committee.

MR LUGOLOOBI: I have something substantial to add, if I am allowed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Through your chairperson, if you are improving the – 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, you know the proposal is to increase the rate from 20 per cent to 30 percent. That is already a drastic increment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you signed this report.
 
MR LUGOLOOBI: No, I did not because of that very reason. This 50 percent he is proposing has the effect of eroding investor confidence in this country. If people are going to invest money here - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, if you objected to what they agreed, you should have written a minority report.

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I had not wanted to speak but I have stood to support hon. Kwizera’s position of the increment to 50 per cent. 

In addition to what others have said, if we want to encourage Ugandans to invest, are we telling them to invest in such activities like gambling? Look at the owners of those machines; do they care about our children? If we want reduce such a lifestyle in our country, support this. I would support 50 per cent to compensate for the second-hand clothes if Government wants revenue. This would promote growth in our country and make our people productive.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, I find myself in a very precarious situation. I studied taxation and the effects of increasing tax. We must understand the effect the increment is going to have on tax collection. If we are to increase to 50 per cent, it may not be affordable and, therefore, people will abandon it. 

Your issue is not about raising tax. There are two issues. We make laws in two ways; if you are making laws to raise tax, then it is different. If you are making laws so that this becomes a deterrent, then that is also a different thing. If you are going for deterrent action, I agree with you, but if you are going for the option of raising revenue for our country, we must know the effect of that increase to tax collection.

Therefore, I would like propose that this is studied by the committee. However, by raising it from 20 per cent to 30 per cent, we are going to get – (Interruption)

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, this proposal was brought to us by the industry itself. There was withholding tax on winnings, which was not practical because after these people have won, there is no way you could withhold money from them. Therefore, the industry said that rather than them losing money and seeing these people walk away with the winnings and no tax is paid, we institute the tax on them so that they tax the winners. 

This proposal was brought to us by the industry in good faith. However, it would be punitive again for us to go ahead and say, even though we have moved from 20 per cent to 30 per cent we do not want the whole industry to exist. For the sake of collecting revenue, since they have come to us in good faith, let us increase it from 20 per cent to 30 per cent and we wait for the next financial year. 

MR OKOT OGONG: I agree with my brother and I would like to appeal to Members; we are here to make laws, which are good for our country, laws that will promote development. This Bill that we are handling is basically to raise tax. It is a finance Bill. It is basically to raise tax. 

However, if you are talking about the behaviour of our youth, you must know that there are many issues that make them go to bet. There are inherent issues that the country needs to address. We need a separate debate to see how to help our youth so that they do not go for betting.

However, if we are to raise tax, I think the appropriate way to move is to focus on the revenue collection- make sure that whatever we are going to increase will generate revenue and that revenue will be applied in our expenditure as Government.
Therefore, I would like to appeal to Members that we support the 10 per cent increment. If there are other issues that we may decide on later, we can push them to the next financial year after a clear analysis of the industry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we have to agree whether to go for a sharp increase or a gradual one.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This tax has a dual effect- collecting taxes and checking the behaviour of our youth. However, as they say, you can kill two birds with one stone. Let us kill two birds with one stone but also keep the stone.

Having said that, we can agree to an increment of 10 per cent so that it is 40 per cent, other than the 50 per cent; we also want to protect our children. Let us not only look at revenue because moral decadence will definitely affect the future tax collection in this country. That is why I am proposing that we handle it that way, so that we protect the young people and at the same time raise money for revenue. 

We have just refused an increment on second-hand clothes here. If it was just about collection of taxes, why did you, hon. Okot Ogong, agree to that? Let us have something that has a dual effect- we raise the money but we also check the behaviour of our young people.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As said by most of the Members, the issue of gambling is big. It is not only for the urban people now. If you go to the villages, at the smallest trading centres, you will find people gambling. Men no longer dig or do their work in the gardens but they go gambling, and children are doing the same. There was even an outcry in my own district because civil servants would leave their offices to go and gamble. 

I understand those who are saying that we cannot have such a sharp increase. However, I think it is also not right for those in the industry to come and say, “Please, charge us 30 per cent” and we go by that. That is also not proper. I did not know that that was the position. If this came from them, then we should have a middle ground of 35 per cent and we move on for now. A 15 per cent increase would not be bad. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a new law, which we made in 2015 and it has not even lasted a year. I would, therefore, advise a bit of caution in making the adjustment. Why don’t we see what happens at the end of the first year? It has not yet ended. Can we observe for a year and see how the 30 per cent works. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with your proposal that we can for now take 30 per cent and then allow the board –(Interjections)- You know, we approved a board last year for gambling and we are appointing the members. (Interruption)

MS EGUNYU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I did not clearly hear what the chairperson of the committee was submitting. However, the Minister of Health reminded me about something. I have never seen a situation where Government proposes a tax on maybe a company and then the owners come and plead to pay a certain percentage. I have just heard from him that they even had an interface and they agreed to 30 per cent. This is really abnormal. I would wish to suggest that we go with the 50 per cent as proposed by hon. Kwizera.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the chairperson said that Government had failed to collect withholding tax from that industry. In the discussions, they said that because that tax is hard to collect, they would rather enhance this one and abandon withholding tax. That is how I understand it.

MR KWIZERA: I rise on a point of order.

THE CHAIRPERSON: To the Speaker?

MR KWIZERA: To the chairman of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no one on the Floor. Maybe procedure-

MR KWIZERA: Madam Chairperson, a motion was moved on the Floor of the House and it was seconded but no decision was taken. We have listened to Members and I think we should legislate for good governance.

Tax is for control and for revenue collection. We know what we did for tobacco and for other commodities. The notion that a taxpayer can come and say, “I want to pay this much” is new to me. Madam Chairperson, is it procedurally right to move on when there is already a substantive motion moved without disposing it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but the motion must be debated. People must give their views.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. First of all, tax policy is not only for raising revenue; it can be used to prohibit what we think is not desirable within our community. I think the earlier intention of 50 per cent was to prohibit as much as possible.

Madam Chairperson, I will give you two of my own findings. Kawempe Kamwokya, I have observed that the rate at which gaming establishments are taking over rental premises and evicting people who use those premises for survival is worrying. Just go there, you will see the rate at which gaming is taking over places where some people where earning a living, and this is scary.

Secondly, I did not expect gaming to come to my villages. I am very surprised - (Interruption) 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Chairperson, as Members of Parliament, we need to recollect our memory. We passed a Bill here on gaming and betting and that means Members of Parliament recognised it legally as a game here in Uganda. I am wondering why a Member of Parliament who participated in enacting this law now seems totally against it. He is against his members, the youth, and against his conscience and yet he was a Member of Parliament when this law was enacted. 

Is it in order, therefore, for a Member who participated in passing the Gaming and Lotteries Act, 2015 to come here and deny it and say that gamming should be totally banned in the country?

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is talking about regulation not banning.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I started by saying that a tax policy is either for raising revenue or prohibiting, and prohibiting is part of regulation. As Parliament, even if tomorrow we passed a law allowing homosexuality, we are not going to collect tax from those who want to engage in homosexuality. 

As a country, we have values we have to protect. We have young people to protect. You cannot just say because we passed a law, you can go and involve the people in my village who instead of being in their gardens are gaming. That will not be leadership, and I am talking about leadership. I am a leader and not a manager of the law you passed. As leaders, we are within the ambit of the law when we bring in a tax policy that prohibits. I am for prohibition. 

This is a tax regime that prohibits these games from going to our villages and taking away the time of our people and evicting those single mothers who are trying to earn a living in Kamwokya and are losing premises because a gaming tenant pays five times more. That is what I am speaking for. However, it is wrong for us to only talk about tax. I am for the 50 per cent but I would also urge other arms of Government that are doing licensing to go slow on gaming. It is not only about taxes but we should regulate this gaming.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The fact that there is an increase in the number of young people in this activity means that there are certain social factors, which need to be looked at seriously.

Hon. Mukitale has said that Government needs to go slow on this activity. If Government needs to go slow, then we cannot move from 20 per cent to 50 per cent. Surely, even in terms of whether we want to raise tax or regulate the activity, caution requires that we move gradually. 

Madam Chairperson, we do not lose much, and we do not have any evidence to show that if you increase tax on alcohol by 50 per cent, then 50 per cent of the people will stop taking alcohol. I do not think we have already reached that stage. Government had a problem raising this money. Our committee sat with the stakeholders and they agreed on a rate, which was acceptable. Why don’t we go with this rate of 30 per cent for this year as we study this phenomenon and see whether to increase it or not in future? 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have listened to the debate that is on the Floor on this matter. These gaming and betting associations are definitely also some of the security threats that the country faces. These people who stay there the whole day and night also engage themselves in other activities. Taking into account the fact that the people who are engaged in gaming have paid licences to run these businesses and the fact that we have a board that is in charge of these associations, I would like to propose, as a compromise, that instead of 30 per cent we go for 35 per cent. 

We should also task the minister to work hand in hand with the gaming and lotteries board to give us an analysis of what really takes place in these gaming and lotteries businesses. What is their exact impact? Of course, we know some of our children waste their money there. Instead of going to school, they use the money for these activities. 

Thirty-five per cent would also be a deterrent, but let us give it one year. After the analysis is given by the board responsible, the minister should come and table it before this Parliament. It will prepare this Parliament and the people involved in this business for the next financial year. That is when this Parliament should actually determine whether to abolish it completely or put a deterrent tax to restrict it to a few who can afford it. That is the position I am proposing to Members. Let us go for a compromise position of 35 per cent and we wait for this report.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, why did we pass the law on gambling? It was to regulate these gambling machines and people involved in the same thing. Why didn’t we go for banning? We do not want to go back where we came from. We can now regulate them and that is the position we would want to continue with. 

However, we cannot continue with that position if you increase and make the tax very high because they will start hiding and we shall go back to where we are coming from. Now that we have brought them out of hiding and we are controlling them, I agree with the Minister of Internal Affairs that as a compromise, we go for the 35 per cent and we move forward on this matter. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In addition, as I said earlier, this law is not yet one year old; let us give it time to work. Parliament will not close. We can continue examining it. Let us agree on 35 per cent; it is a compromise.

Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed with the rate of 35 per cent.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

The Schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there a change to the schedule?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the reason I hesitated to stand is because we had passed clause 6, which was substantially amending the schedule. Since we only removed five years, there is no further amendment to the schedule.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, if the schedule is remaining the way it is in the Bill, I agree with the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What he did was to remove the five years. That was the only change.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Finance Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I do not know at what point I can come in. There is something I would like us to recommit. We have made some technical mistake regarding the schedules and what is in the committee’s report. What is in the Bill is the new proposed rate but the report keeps the status quo. Therefore, I need to recommit this so that it is the status quo which remains and not what is -

THE SPEAKER: The schedule remains.

MR OKUPA: If we are keeping the old schedule, which is in the report and not the one in the Bill, it is okay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, he says there is a difference between the report and the Bill.

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, when we voted to stay the schedule, we were mindful that it was a consequential amendment because we amended to delete the five years and replace them with three years. The rest remains as it is.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my clerk is telling me that the figures, which are in the Bill, are the proposed new ones and we have said we do not want them. So, we need to go back to the status quo. 

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, this is give and take. In the committee, we said we remove the five years. The committee had proposed to stay the licence fee but now that you have eroded the revenue of many other things, this would become a compromised position.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, thank you. I am an active member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In the committee, we agreed to maintain the status quo in the old Finance Act, 2015. Therefore, this business of saying “give and take” is just coming up. (Laughter) We would like the status quo to stay as it is. This is what I wanted to say. Thank you, hon. Okupa, for bringing it up.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Okupa, when we come to the third reading, you can move for re-committal.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, before we move there, one thing that we have deleted from this schedule is 2(c) - the five years. We are maintaining the rates on the new schedule –

THE SPEAKER: That is the issue. Let us have a re-committal and then we shall discuss. 

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2016

6.36
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I would like to move that we recommit the schedule.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the schedule be recommitted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCE BILL, 2016

The Schedule

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you move the amendment, hon. Okupa?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment to the Bill that we reinstate the 2015/2016 rate in the schedule other than what was proposed here, because we disagreed on the permit.

The schedule as stated in the committee’s report is the one that should be taken but not what we have in the Bill. The Bill was proposing an increment but as we debated, we did not agree on the increment. The issue we had with Face Technologies regarding the permit is that they charge us the highest in the Africa region. Even in South Africa where Face Technologies comes from, they charge $15; how can they come to Uganda and charge $60? Therefore, we debated and agreed -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the chairperson had proposed that the schedule should be replaced by what is in the report and then he abandoned it.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we have a strong objection to that. What the chairperson is proposing, which was in the old law, is that you charge somebody Shs 56,000 for one year and Shs 66,000 for three years for a permit. Can you imagine? It does not make sense. 

In the new proposal, the ministry is suggesting charges of Shs 55,000 for one year and Shs 150,000 for three years. It makes more sense. How can you charge somebody Shs 56,000 for one year and then for three years, you charge them Shs 66,000? Do you see what I mean?

MR OKUPA: Honourable minister, if this money was only coming to Ugandans, we would agree. In the case where this private investor –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, the Shs 150,000 is paid to URA not to Face Technologies. (Interjections) It does not include the cost of Ministry of Works and Transport. What they are saying is that Shs 150,000 is paid directly for revenue collection after which, you go to Face Technologies and pay the cost there. However, the one they are proposing in the schedule of the Finance Act is to be used by revenue collection.

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, it is unfortunate that I did not come with a copy of the contract they signed with Face Technologies up to 2020; they are also increasing their fees. As you increase the tax here, Face Technologies will also increase. Therefore, the Ugandans who are going to apply for these permits are going to pay almost Shs 500,000, if you add the tax, what they will pay for the permit and what they are going to pay to Face Technologies. It is based on this that we are saying that we cannot move.

MS ATIM: Madam Chairperson, they are saying for one year you pay Shs 56,000 and for three years, Shs 66,000. We are seeing this in figures but we do not know what our people experience. Driving permits are processed at regional level and our people who would like to get driving permits are the boda boda riders and taxi drivers. The reason many of them are not registered is because the cost is high. 

People in Lira, for example, travel up to Gulu and they do not get the permit immediately. They have to travel, pay and then come back to Lira. They can travel about three times in one week. So, you can see the cost. You are seeing it as Shs 56,000 but it is beyond that. Can we maintain the original? Actually, we instead wanted it reduced so that our people can afford these permits.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to clear the issue hon. Okupa raised. This money we are legislating for is Government money. We cannot legislate for a company here. This money will be collected and put in the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, it is different from issues of Face Technologies. We have agreed that the Minister of Works and Transport will come here and make a statement to that effect. 

Honourable colleagues, all we are talking about is the issue of revenue; we need revenue to run the budget - (Interruption)

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I thought hon. Okupa was moving recommital on a schedule, which is consequential to the clause. We have already agreed not to increase; I am surprised that we are even delving into discussion on this matter. We should simply agree with hon. Okupa and go forward. The schedule is consequential to the main clause. 

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we passed clause 6. It reads, “The fees payable under this principal Act specified in the Schedule are revised by the corresponding fees specified in the Schedule.” We passed clause 6 as is. That is why I did not stand when the schedule was called, because the other one is consequential. The schedule has already been amended, unless hon. Okupa stands to amend clause 6. 

MR OKUPA: Before I got up, we had to pass the schedule. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What was amended was the issue of the five years but we did not touch the sums. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I think it is very unfortunate, from the way we are proceeding, that this Government seems to have failed to widen the tax base. A driving permit is a permit; there is an intent as to why it is issued. My brother, hon. Bahati, says if a one-year permit costs Shs 56,000 then a three-year one should cost even more money. 

The intention of the permit is different. It is to ensure that people on the road meet the test of protecting the lives of others. If we are to make it very expensive for our people, they will not come for it. I have even taken the Minister of Works and Transport to my constituency to ensure that people get permits for one reason- boda bodas are supposed to have riding permits but if they knocked down someone, they are required to pay Shs 800,000. That is why when you go to very many police stations, you find very many motorcycles at those police stations because they ask them for the riding permits and they do not have them. 

I say that there is no justification to increase this amount. Government must understand that a permit, just like stamp duty, is not a tax. Do not look at it as an opportunity to get money. These elements must be understood. Otherwise, we are going to cause a problem in this country. Many people will ride and drive without permits. Thank you. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information that this schedule is practically the same as the old schedule in the previous Act. The only change is in item one - the registration fees for personalised number plates on motor vehicles- which has been increased from Shs 5 million to Shs 20 million. (Interruption)

MR MUSASIZI: A driving permit for three years is changing from Shs 66,000 to Shs 150,000. (Interjections) It is not okay. Driving permits are supposed to be free. People should be encouraged to have driving permits -(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: My information is that if we adopt this schedule presented in the report, the only change we need to make is on the Shs 20 million for personalised number plates on motor vehicles. Otherwise, all the rates that follow are the same as they were in the original schedule. 

I would like to agree with the Members suggesting that we should not make these rates punitive. We should encourage as many people as possible to acquire driving permits. That should be the spirit. There are very many people looking for driving permits but they are running away from Face Technologies simply because the rates are very punitive. We should not be seen to be raising these rates at this stage. Increasing fees for personalised number plates from Shs 5 million to Shs 20 million is a very unfair tax. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I have been on the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for quite a long time. Let us not forget what the objective of the Finance Bill is. This Parliament decided to revisit the Finance Bill each year for the purpose of revenue collection as a tax measure. (Interjections) Yes! I have been in this House for some time. A Finance Act, which is revisited and amended every year, is for the purposes of revenue collection. 

I cannot imagine you buying a car at Shs 20 million or Shs 30 million and then failing to pay a driving permit of Shs 150,000 for three years. We went to Face Technologies and most of the people - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The taxes are taken care of by a legal regime and these other fees that we are talking about are also taken care of by a different regime. 

However, I have listened to my brother, hon. Kakooza, insist that when we deal with some of these situations like the one we are talking about, the intention is to raise revenue per se. Is he in order to continue misleading this House knowing that this is not a tax? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we should just move on. Honourable members, if you look at the original charges in the schedule, a one-year driving permit costs Shs 55,000 and a three-year permit costs Shs 150,000. I think this is less than the Shs 55,000 times three, which they would pay every year. Five years costs Shs 250,000; it is also less than Shs 55,000 per year. 

For renewal, one year costs Shs 50,000. If they were to pay this every year for three years, it would come to Shs 150,000 but now it is Shs 130,000. Five years costs Shs 200,000 and this actually translates to Shs 40,000 a year. I think the rates are not much of a problem. 

I put the question that the schedule stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR HOUSE TO RESUME

6.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.
  
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FRFOM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Finance Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCE BILL, 2016

6.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Finance Bill, 2016” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE FINANCE ACT, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) Can we go to item 10 or are you tired? Let us proceed with item 10.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

6.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded. Go ahead and justify.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is confirmed that we are one people; I have got a secondment from the other side. 

The objective of the Bill is to amend the Income Tax Act, Cap. 340, to provide for a carry-forward of losses in respect of mergers and acquisitions. The Bill also addresses a number of gaps that we looked at in the existing law. The committee has considered this Bill and is ready to report, Madam Speaker.

6.45
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Anthony Okello): Madam Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016. It was read for the first time on 10 March 2016 and referred to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in accordance with rule 118 of the Rules of Procedures of Parliament. The object of the Bill is stated in the report. We also have the methodology that the committee used. Madam Speaker, I would like to request that you allow me go to the committee observations. 

Observations 

The committee observed that: 
1. 	The Bill seeks to allow carry forward of losses where a taxpayer’s income during a year is less than the deductions, which is referred to as a loss. The taxpayer will be allowed to carry forward the loss and deduct it from his income for the following year.  

2. 	In clause 3, the Government seeks to amend section 85 of the principal Act to include the term “rent”. There has been ambiguity when determining the rate of tax applicable to non-resident persons who derive income in form of rent from Uganda. 

3. 	Section 88 of the Income Tax Act recognises double taxation agreements entered into between Uganda and another country. The agreements have effect as if they were contained in the Income Tax Act. The Bill seeks to amend section 88 (5) to prevent abuse by restricting the benefits to a resident of a country with which Uganda has a treaty. The resident must be undertaking substantive economic activity in that country to benefit from the agreement. 

	Also, where the taxpayer is a publically listed company, the requirement of 50 per cent ownership by persons in the country Uganda has entered into a contract with should not apply. This is because the public listed company can have shareholders in many countries but its place of effective management remains one. 

	This proposal will restructure the currently restrictive general anti abuse rule in section 88 (5) of the Income Tax Act, which denies treaty benefits unless the underlying owners are resident individuals of the country with which Uganda has entered into a double taxation agreement, who own at least a 50 per cent of the person who is resident in that state.          

4. 	Allowable deductions for a licensee granted a petroleum exploration licence after 31 December 2015 are being subjected to the limitations on deductions specified in the Production Sharing Agreements (PSAs) in this Bill. A licensee who undertakes an operation in a contract area in a year of income shall be allowed a deduction only against gross income derived by the licensee from the operations in the contract area for that year. 

	The amendment is intended to streamline taxation with other sectors. The oil industry is, however, unique with lots of uncertainty on future cash flows. Therefore, doing away with a limit on deductions implies pushing into the unknown future Government income from corporation tax. It is, therefore, important that the annual deductions are capped in line with the limits provided in the PSAs.    

5. (a) In 2014, Parliament imposed a withholding tax on the gross amount of any payments for winnings of sports betting or pool betting.  However, research has shown that this measure is counterproductive and did not generate the anticipated revenue; rather it has encouraged the agents to avoid regulation. It is now proposed that the measures should be re-directed so that the incidence of tax falls on the operator of a casino, gaming or betting activity. 

(b) 	The committee will move an amendment in the Finance Bill, 2016 to amend the Lotteries and Gaming Act, 2015 to increase the rate of gaming tax paid from 20 per cent to 35 per cent - this has already been done - of the total amount of money staked less the pay-outs (winnings) for the period of filing returns. 

(c) 	It is also important to note that these companies will pay a gaming tax in addition to other taxes prescribed by law like corporation tax.

(d) 	This will make compliance easy, reduce on the tax administration costs and raise more revenue for Government.

6. 	Diplomatic missions employ Ugandans but do not withhold Pay As You Earn (PAYE) from the salaries they pay them. This is because under the Diplomatic Privileges Act, they are not obliged to withhold tax. The proposed amendment will provide a mechanism for Ugandans who work in diplomatic missions and listed institutions to pay taxes due on their salaries.  

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the original copy of this report, the minutes of the committee meetings which sat on 22, 23 and 30 March 2016 to consider this Bill, and also the stakeholder’s opinion. We have attached the Pesa opinion on gambling income tax and the civil society organisations’ position paper on tax revenue and proposed measures. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your members. Are there any comments? It seems Members are satisfied with the report. The question is that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose the insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 1 to read as follows: 
“Amendment of the Income Tax Act 
The Income Tax Act, in this Act referred to as the principal Act, is amended in section 21 by inserting after subsection (1)(q) the following: ‘(q)(a) The employment income of a person employed as a Member of Parliament except salary.’”

The justification is, this is facilitation for Members of Parliament in execution of their work. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that a new clause be inserted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, insert a new clause immediately after clause 8 as follows: 
“Repeal of section 118C of the principal Act 
Section 118C of the Principal Act is repealed.”

The justification is: 
1. 	In 2014, Parliament imposed a withholding tax on the gross amount of any payments for winning of sports betting or pool betting. However, research has shown that this measure is counterproductive and did not generate the anticipated revenue; rather, it has encouraged the agents to avoid regulation. It is now proposed that the measure should be redirected so that the incidence of tax falls on the operator of the casino, gaming or betting activities.

2. 	The committee has already moved an amendment in the Finance Bill, 2016 to amend the Lotteries and Gaming Act, 2015 to increase the rate of gaming tax paid from 20 per cent to 35 per cent of the total amounts of money staked less pay-out (winnings) for the period of filing returns.

3. 	It is also important to note that these companies will pay a gaming tax, which is paid in addition to other taxes prescribed by the law like corporation tax.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that section 118C of the principal Act be repealed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11 agreed to.

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE
OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I know we have passed most of the clauses but there was a particular clause that was inserted and I do not have a copy of it. I think it was clause 3, which is about our emoluments. If I can borrow the words of hon. Kakooza, I know it is painful for us to be paying taxes because most of the money we receive is demanded by Members of - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to mention my name when I am not the one who has moved the amendment? If she was not attentive, she should be brought to order.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza, it is not you but someone else. Honourable members, I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Income Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE INCOME TAX (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2016”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) Can we do the Excise Duty Bill or we shall handle it on Tuesday? Okay, let us handle the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded. Honourable minister, why are you amending the Excise Duty Bill? What are your objectives?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is, among others, to amend schedule 2 of the Excise Duty Act 2014 to enhance excise duty in respect of certain excisable goods including soft cap cigarettes, hinge lid cigarettes, cigars and cigarillos containing tobacco, smoking tobacco whether or not containing tobacco, substitutes in any proportion. The committee has considered this and it is ready to report.

7.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Speaker, this is the Committee of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s report on the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016. 

I beg to lay on the Table minutes from the committee meetings as I proceed to read the report. I will skip the introduction, the object of the Bill and the methodology and start with the observations of the committee.

The committee observed that:
1. 	The amendment to the Act will allow manufacturers of disinfectants, healthcare products, which are non-excisable, to seek a refund on excisable raw materials like alcohol, which are used to make the products. This will promote competitiveness by providing equal tax treatment similar to the imported products.

2. 	The excise duty on cement is going to increase from Shs 500 to Shs 1,000, if this proposed amendment is passed into law.  This will be charged on every 50 kilogrammes of cement and will capture the actual tax like it would have been paid if the rate of tax was ad valorem into account depreciation of the shilling and inflation. Therefore, it will not negatively affect the construction industry.

3. 	The excise duty increment on gas oil, spirits, cane, beet sugar and pure sucrose is meant to capture the actual tax that would have been paid if the rate of tax was ad valorem into account depreciation of the shilling and inflation.

4. 	The removal of tax on international incoming calls will promote competitiveness of Uganda mobile network operators as Kenya, Rwanda and South Sudan, who are in the one area network, do not have tax on them. The situation has been that international incoming calls into Uganda have been terminating in other partner states in the one network area and routed to Uganda as local calls thereby evading tax. That is why, honourable members, you may have been receiving calls from nearby and yet they are talking about other countries.

5. 	Excise duty continues to be charged on creams used by albinos to protect their skins from the direct effect of sunlight. This is not proper as it increases the cost of creams yet they are necessary to protect their skin. Excise duty charged on creams used by albinos should be scrapped.

6. 	Excise duty on cigarettes has two tiers under the current law. This has caused a problem of illicit trade among the industry. If the current two-tier specific excise is changed to a single specific excise rate for all cigarettes at Shs 65,000 per 1,000 sticks, it would represent a two-year cumulative above-inflationary increase in industry weighed average excise rates in line with past practice of cigarette excise increase across all brands every two years.

7. 	Excise duty in Uganda on soft drinks is charged at a rate of 13 per cent. The other EAC trading partners, Kenya and Tanzania, charge seven and five per cent respectively. This has made Uganda uncompetitive in the industry. 

	Analysis from the Parliamentary Budget Office indicates that the reduction in excise duty on soft drinks from 13 to 10 per cent increases aggregate household demand by 0.2 per cent, and employment will also increase by 0.1 per cent in the first two years (short run). This will cushion the economy from the negative effects of the excise duty tariffs being proposed in the financial year 2016/2017, which will lead to a slowdown in the economy by 1.8 per cent.

8. 	Clause 3 (g) of the Bill seeks to amend part one of Schedule 2 of the principal Act by inserting immediately after item 3 (c) a new item called “Ready-to-Drink (RTD) spirits”, 80 per cent. This provision is not clear as is required under the principles of taxation. It inadvertently captures two categories of adult beverages, which have to be treated differently because of their nature, the consumer targeted and the circumstances surrounding their current performance. 

The first category is defined within the industry as “ready-to-drink”. These are premixed drinks with similar alcohol content – ABV - to beer, for example, Smirnoff Ice which contains six per cent alcohol by volume (ABV) thus bringing it within the same range as beer. In other words, they are saying Smirnoff Ice is the same as Bell beer. 

Ready-to-drink spirits, because of their ABV, need to be classified within the same category as beer. Government stands to gain approximately Shs 4,000,000,000 with an assumed increase of 20 per cent consumption if the excise rate is reduced on RTDs from 70 per cent to 60 per cent, to bring it in line with imported beer with similar alcohol content. Inversely, Government stands to lose the same amount if the rate is increased on RTDs from 70 per cent to 80 per cent because this increase will drive prices up in a price sensitive market and make the category less attractive to invest in. 

Rationalisation of RTDs with beer in other jurisdictions has resulted in significantly higher tax collections. The committee proposes that the projected revenue can be achieved by increasing the rate under item 3 (c) from 70 per cent to 80 per cent.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairman and the members of the committee. Are there any comments?

7.20
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on about three issues. One is about increasing tax on cement, which I think is very unfair. The country has done research and established that there is a tremendous gap in the housing industry in this country of up to 700,000 houses. When you go to the villages, most of our voters have grass-thatched houses or semi-permanent houses because they cannot afford cement. 

I thought Government was going to be considerate and reduce the tax on cement to make it affordable for our people so that they can construct their houses and hence improve on their accommodation. We should not be oblivious of the fact that Uganda is a third world country. The conditions of our people are very bad. They are living in squalid houses. I would like to, therefore, propose to Members of Parliament that we should think about our poor people. We would like to see a reduction of VAT on cement. I thought they were going to just remove taxes so that it becomes affordable but now they are increasing VAT, putting excise duty and other taxes!

Madam Speaker, we should not accept this. That is not good at all. We are not thinking wisely about our own people. We are only thinking about raising money yet our people are wallowing in poverty and sleeping in squalid houses. We drive around and see them living in very bad conditions while we are in comfortable ones. 

I would like to now propose that the Shs 500 increment should not be accepted. We should only remain at Shs 500 as before. The other increment of 100 per cent - (Interjection)- Yes, you are increasing from Shs 500 to Shs 1,000; that means the increment is 100 per cent and we cannot accept that.

Madam Speaker, we have always discussed the issue of tax on gas. This is about our environment, it is about our country and it is about where we live. We cannot increase tax on gas people use it for domestic purposes. Is it domestic gas? If it is gas we use for cooking – (Interjections) - I know they hide those things, honourable members; we have to be very careful –(Laughter)- Yes, they hide but I know it is this gas we use for cooking. The minister is saying it is not the gas for cooking but if it is for cooking, it should be deleted. 

We should not allow a tax in the kitchen because we are now destroying our environment by encouraging the use of charcoal. Most people use charcoal yet we can use alternative means like gas, which is very available at our fuel stations. Therefore, in this case, I would like to appeal to the minister to consider my proposal and accept no tax on gas. Thank you.

7.25
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the removal of excise duty from the creams used by albinos. 

He talked about it being a cosmetic, which I totally disagree with because it is medicine for the skin of the albinos. Instead of removing the excise duty, we should provide the creams for free to the albinos so that it is affordable and accessible at all health centres. Thank you.

7.26
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment about the same. 

Yes, they have removed excise duty from those creams but they have not specified which creams, so the importers may use this as a conduit and evade tax. Since such creams are known, they should be specified so that traders do not use that route to evade taxes. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want them specified in the Excise Duty Bill? 

MR SSEMUGABA: I meant the types of creams because they are many. Importers of different creams may specify them as creams for albinos and yet they are not. Therefore, we would like to have them specified. Which creams are these? That is important in order to avoid tax evasion.

7.27
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with hon. Ssemugaba that these creams need to be categorically specified. I hope in the Harmonised Standard (HS) Code, it is clear. However, if it is not clear and left that way, it is bound to be abused. Maybe that is what the minister –(Interjection) - I hope hon. Kwizera is not diverting your attention together with the Woman Member of Parliament for Bundibugyo.

I was saying that I support what hon. Ssemugaba is stating, that we need to categorically specify the creams, which are used by albinos, because this can be abused by the cosmetics importers. I hope it is specified in the HS Code, which the customs officers use for specifying creams. If it is not, please go ahead and specify it.

After all, how many albinos do we have in Uganda and how much money shall we lose. It is a very minimal loss. So I support the exemption.

7.28
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to emphasise that I stand to oppose any additional tax on cement. I sit on the committee of housing and we know very well that this country faces a housing shortage. As a committee, we have been benchmarking in countries where we can find affordable housing models for our people. Even what we call affordable housing technologies in a number of those countries has not been affordable here.

For many of the buildings that are collapsing in this country, the biggest missing ingredient, in terms of mixture, is cement. Unfortunately, cement does not have a direct substitute. For bricks, you can use concrete, burnt, unburnt bricks or other alternatives. There are so many alternatives. However, for cement, you cannot use cow dung, and mud is not anywhere near in comparison to cement. 

Therefore, to boost the housing sector and to reduce on the shortage – In the ministerial policy statement for Ministry of Lands and Housing, you see that there is a housing shortage of four million housing units. Government has not been able to intervene in this area. Therefore, the only way we can help our communities is to bring down the cost of cement. Maybe we could even lower it, but if we cannot, then we should maintain the status quo. 

The most expensive items when it comes to construction are cement and iron bars and those are the items, which are normally compromised. That is one of the reasons why most buildings are collapsing. Let us not support any increment on cement. It can be for any other item but not cement. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

7.30
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I would like to look at cement in another way. The Ministry of Finance looks at cement as a finished product but I look at it as a raw material or an input which is used in building. The moment we start increasing taxes on the materials we use in construction, the cost of construction is going to rise and thus the cost of investments.

If you go to the market, you will find Kenyan cement in the market. What does that mean? It means that our products cost higher than the Kenyan products. Therefore, our people are likely to close their factories and go to manufacture in Kenya. Mark you, our production and investment costs are still very high compared to those in the region. Therefore, when you say that we increase taxes on cement, we are not encouraging many people to build. We would rather remove taxes like VAT on cement so that many people can now build. 

I have travelled almost throughout the whole country. We talk about fighting poverty and decent housing, but the minister just wants to make it complicated for people who have not yet built and yet the ministers have already built. Therefore, I appeal to honourable members that we remove VAT from cement.  I come from the border and there is what we call “imported for re-export”. Most of these people you see building use cement that is imported for re-export because they know we ask for a lot of taxes on cement and yet in other countries that is not the case. We are actually killing our building industry. 

I am now informing you, honourable minister, that you are failing the voters who voted for you. You are saying that since you are paying them, they should go and pay taxes but not build. I would think that since they have already voted for you, at least in appreciation do not over tax most of these inputs so that they also be like you. Thank you.

7.32 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, according to the Public Finance Management Act, in three months from now Government is required to lay on the Table the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. This means that the manifesto, which we pledged to the Ugandans, will be costed and Parliament will approve it and we commit to offer services to Ugandans for the next five years.

While on one hand you want services for Ugandans, on the other hand, you do not want anything that will bring in revenue for us to offer services. As we draw up this tax policy, we do it consciously. Look at the cement that we are talking about; a bag of cement is about Shs 32,000 and what we have suggested is an increment of only Shs 500 - not Shs 1,000 or Shs 2,000 but Shs 500 - on a 50-kilogramme bag. Look at the revenue that will come - Shs 18 billion! It is a small increment but – (Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. If I can recollect, the minister said that we do not want to support any provisions which can bring in revenue and he has mentioned the tax increment on cement and so on. However, a little while ago, when we proposed additional revenue on gaming, the minister opposed it. Is the minister now in order to implicate Parliament as if we are against increasing taxes yet he is also part of those who are against increasing taxes?

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister had forgotten that. (Laughter) 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the minister that in 2014 he proposed VAT on wheat. As Parliament, we resisted that because it was not prudent revenue management. We also informed you that by imposing VAT on wheat, you would reduce consumption of wheat in the country and the volume of imports.

I would like to inform you that from the report that I have, in 2014 we were importing 250,000 tonnes of wheat - that was the consumption - but in 2015, the consumption reduced to 146,000 tonnes. Was that prudent revenue management or you missed a point and mismanaged because of an unresearched way of doing things?

What we are doing now, honourable minister, is real prudent revenue management. When you reduce the cost of cement, many people will purchase it, the tonnage of consumption will increase and, therefore, the volume on the aggregate tax will increase. This is simple economics, which has been practised. So, I would like to inform you that reducing tax does not mean you are reducing revenue.

MR BAHATI: The issue of increasing the price for cement can be handled using other ways. That is why, as Government, we are encouraging investment. If we can handle the industry in Karamoja and Tororo and the production of cement increases, the price will reduce.

Honourable colleagues, we have made – (Interruption)

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I understand my minister is standing in for the Ministry of Finance and he is very informed. It is clear that doing business in Uganda is very expensive. Running an industry in Uganda is very expensive and many of our investors are running away. First, the power rate in Uganda is very high; it is 12 cents per kilowatt but in other countries it is six cents. This makes it high. When it comes to other taxes, they are also very high. 

My minister knows that transacting business in Uganda is expensive and not conducive. Therefore, it is real misinformation when the Minister of State for Planning tells Parliament that when other issues are handled, the cost of cement will reduce. That is totally wrong. If you do not address those other things, it will never reduce. Is he, therefore, in order to misinform Parliament? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: The minister is just telling us the plans from his ministry.

MR BAHATI: On the issue of gas oil, we are not referring to gas for cooking; it is actually diesel. 

We have made so many compromises in this House this afternoon yet there are a number of things that we must achieve in the next 12 months and to achieve these, we need money. However, to get money we must be fair and we have done this in a fair way – (Interruption) 

MR KWIZERA: I would like to inform the honourable minister that not taxing cement does not mean that we do not earn revenue from cement. The people who operate in cement industry pay taxes through fuel and the companies also pay corporation tax. 

We should not tax each and every component in the supply chain. It is better to tax the profits, which are made by these companies. For your own information, the price of cement you have talked about is inclusive of that tax, which is already paid. So, Shs 32,000 includes tax but if you add on Shs 1,000, in areas like Kisoro we shall buy cement at Shs 38,000.

MR LOGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the minister is that a bag of cement in Ethiopia is sold at the equivalent of about Shs 19,000 and it is much lower in China. 

Cement is one of the key inputs in production. If you would like to invest in a factory and housing, cement becomes a key input. So we should not tax investments and our statements and intentions must be very clear through our tax measures. We should not impose a tax measure that is anti-productive. On this, I discourage taxes and we should not move in that direction. As a country, we are performing so poorly when it comes to the cost of transacting business. In East Africa, we are only protected by the common external tariff, which is prohibitive, otherwise, cement would be flooding Uganda.

7.42
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. It is good that he has explained the gasoline issue well. However, there is also a charge at the pump. Are you saying that you are substituting that charge at the pump for a round figure here? If that is not the case, what should we maintain? Is it the pump price or the one that you are currently proposing?

Lastly, still on gasoline, we always want to promote agriculture and people use diesel, especially for tractors, for transportation and so on. Are you not discouraging investment in agriculture? I thought that you should reduce it a bit because Shs 780 per litre will add up to many litres that are consumed in the agriculture sector and it might be a disadvantage and only promote those big companies, which are already established. I would like you to clarify on that. Are we going for double tax - at the pump and here? Thank you.

7.44
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has said that the income that will come from cement will be about Shs 18 billion. Can’t we have some other item, which we should be able to tax to get that income so that we can leave the cement untaxed? 

THE SPEAKER: What are those? Give him an idea so that we know how to move.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Well, right now I do not have one but I am giving this as an idea. Thank you.

7.45
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to add my voice to the arguments by my colleagues, who are against the increment in the charges for cement. 

Four days ago, there was a very big storm in my constituency that swept roofs off all the mud houses. Because of the level of poverty in my areas, they had used mud and bricks to build houses. I do not know whether the minister is aware of the level of poverty in the villages; maybe he comes from the city. I would like to inform him that there are jiggers in many places across Uganda because our people cannot afford cement for their floors and walls. So if you increase the price, I do not know whether that will help decrease the prevalence of jiggers or we shall just worsen the situation. Thank you.

7.46
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, sincerely when Members plead, you must know those are areas of great importance. When we talk about fuel, especially wood fuel or alternative sources of energy for our people, it is a very crucial matter for our people. When we talk about building, especially those of us who come from very poor areas, we know what we are talking about. 

It is true that without taxes, service delivery becomes a problem but we have not said that we are turning down all the tax proposals. Even then, that big basket has a lot of holes. We need to seal those holes through which our taxes leak and we do not get proper service delivery to the people. The basket actually leaks a lot and leaves a lot to be desired. 

That is why we also need to cut down on some of our expenditure. Some of us here suffered during the elections. We wondered where monies came from because our opponents would give out Shs 25 million in one day in five different places. Where does that money come from, if it is not taxpayers’ money which is being misappropriated? 

We should, therefore, reduce on some unnecessary expenditure, which is not directly providing services to our people. Our people are dying but you will hear that some people are throwing parties worth billions of shillings yet we do not have certain facilities for our people. This is the concern we are raising. 

Let us not overtax cement. Currently, cement is still too expensive for our people. Even when parents send their children to school, they are asked to provide cement – one or two bags - and our people struggle to provide in a hard way. Why can’t we sympathise with these people?

MS ONGOM: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I want to inform the minister that as much as we want to increase taxes on cement, those who are selling it will reduce the price just because they want us to afford but this will be at our own expense. What they will do is mix cement with lime, meaning that the quality will be adulterated. Yes, the cost will be low but we will not be buying the right cement. Can we review that?

MS AOL: Thank you for that information. Honourable minister, you also need to do your studies well. There are certain items that we cannot compromise on. We have already mentioned cement; leave it alone please, honourable minister. We know that you need – (Interjection) - If you are conceding, we will be very happy with you so that our people can be able to put up shelters that are good.

7.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the minister has read the mood of the Members. So, I do not think we need to labour to persuade him to abandon taxation on cement.

Madam Speaker, I just wish to emphasise the medicinal aspect of cement. If we are really to get rid of jiggers, not only in Busoga but even in Lango and other places, we have to move from mud floors to cemented floors. This is really simple knowledge, which the minister ought to have. Definitely, I believe that the Basoga would be very happy that we have supported them - (Laughter)- People know my associated interest in Busoga and I think the minister has understood that. Even the Shs 500 should be removed because we need to encourage the growth of the construction industry. 

Those of you who cared to read the barometer of growth in the region will know that Ethiopia is doing very well at the moment. Ethiopia is growing at a rate of 11 per cent because of consciously promoting growth in the construction sector.

Secondly, I want the minister to appreciate the fact that as Members of Parliament, we are not actually opposed to taxation as such. That is why we have not even bothered to challenge you on the taxation of tobacco or sugarcane. We know that we have to serve our children with tea every morning but we are not contesting that because we know that it is a luxury and we can do with less of it or even without it. However, we are very sensitive about certain items because of the economic importance of those items -(Member timed out.)

7.53
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would have had no problem with the increment of Shs 500 on cement but the problem that we have in this country is that when you increase by Shs 500, the businessman increases by Shs 5,000. That is the problem. In Kasilo County, we are buying cement at Shs 35,000 and if you now add Shs 500 as tax, it will go up to Shs 45,000. 

If you do not control this like you have failed to control the fuel prices – The price per barrel on the world market dropped from $110 to $28 in February and as of today, the price per barrel on the world market is $41.2. However, if you look at the decrease in the price of fuel here, it is less than one per cent and yet the drop is over 1,000 per cent. So, if you cannot control that, we shall not support you with that small increment that you are making. 

This is where we get our economics wrong. Can you help us sort out those matters first before we start doing this? If you did that, I would support you even if you increased by Shs 1,000 because I would know the increase in the price would be commensurate to that increment.

MR KWIZERA: Honourable members, we should know that if you are to address the revenue side, you also go to the expenditure side. However, you must be realistic when budgeting. When you give free hoes but you also want to tax cement, what economics is that? You are giving free hoes to people who can afford them but you are taxing people who would be adding onto the economy. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Just as I conclude, I would like to say that the businessmen have deceived people that it is because of the depreciation of the Uganda shilling to the dollar. However, the shilling has not depreciated by 100 per cent. The price of oil per barrel has dropped by more than 100 per cent. Can we sort out these things? (Member timed out.)

7.55
MS JOY ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just wanted to know from the minister –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the Member is addressing you. (Laughter)

MS ONGOM: I know that he is not even willing to listen. Madam Speaker, I wish to know about the motor spirit that he is calling “gasoline”, which he is putting at Shs 1,100 per litre. What was it originally and what percentage increment is that? I also wish to know something about the automotive, light amber for high speed engines of Shs 780. Please, give the percentage increment.

Finally, I would like to know the difference between motor spirit (gasoline), gas oil and another item called “motor vehicle lubricants” that shows 10 per cent. What is the difference and what is the original compared to what you are giving us now?

7.57
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): I thank you, Mr Speaker. The way that I have followed the debate – (Interjections)- I apologise, Madam Speaker. I am used to saying “Madam Speaker” but it is because I was still looking at hon. Bahati -(Laughter)- and you know he is the finance minister.

Madam Speaker, the point that I would like to advance here is that being a finance minister is one of the most difficult assignments that one can have if you looked at the budget. There are areas where we have proposed an increase in salaries for civil servants, especially teachers, by 15 per cent. I have been following this critically but I think the Minister of Finance did not plan well in terms of identifying areas where to get revenue. If they did a study on which areas are really critical and cannot be touched, these tax proposals being bogged down would not be on the Floor of this Parliament.

It is a shame because we liked this minister so much that every Bill he brought to the Floor would be passed. We still like him but the way he has moved today has not been the best. Therefore, for any other presentation here, first look down and see what the Members would really support because many of these taxes have been bogged down. The minister should go back and do his research before coming back with avenues of raising money, which Members can support -(Member timed out).

8.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Speaker, what I wanted to say has already been said. However, what I can add is that we only have a schedule; so let us go to committee stage and look at that schedule and we process it very fast since it is one schedule.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the question is that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.
Clause 3

MR KASULE: We are proposing an amendment to Schedule 2 of the principal Act to delete (g) and replace it with the phrase, “(g) by substituting item 3 (c) with the following: ‘Others, 80 per cent.’” What we are essentially doing is dealing with the ready-to-drink spirits because the industry said there is nothing like ready-to-drink spirits; they are either spirits or beers. So, we have said that in the schedule in 3 (c), we put the phrase “other”, from 70 to 80 per cent. 

Two, we are proposing to insert a new paragraph (h) and change it to 10 per cent. Insert a new paragraph (h) immediately after (g) as follows: “(h) by substituting item 5 with the following: ‘Non-alcoholic beverages, excluding natural fruit juice drinks and/or vegetable juice drinks containing not less than 10 per cent by mass of standardised fruit and/or vegetable juice.’”

The justification is that analysis from the Parliamentary Budget Office indicates that a reduction in excise duty on soft drinks increases aggregate household demand by 0.2 per cent and employment will increase by 0.1 per cent in the first two years. It will cushion the economy from the negative effects of the excise duty tariffs being proposed in the financial year 2016/2017, which lead to a slowdown in the economy.

Three, insert a new paragraph (i) immediately after paragraph (k) as follows: “by substituting item 12 with the following: ‘(12) cosmetics and perfumes except creams used by albinos in the treatment of their skin.’” We have put it at 10 per cent. That would mean that the creams used by the albinos should not attract excise duty. 

On the specifications, I think URA will give out a notice on those specific creams used by albinos in the HS Code as they said.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chairperson, I propose to delete clause 3(h), which is a proposal to increase cement by Shs 1,000.  

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, on soft drinks, the stakeholders met with the committee and expressed their concerns. The same stakeholders met with the head of state the other day and agreed that because of the situation we are in, we cannot afford to lose Shs 30 billion at this time. Therefore, we have adjusted this tax measure from 56 per cent to 13 per cent now.  We agreed with them that we will make this adjustment in the following financial year.

Therefore, I want to propose to this House that we have moved a long distance, in terms of passing these Bills today. We have conceded to measures that have actually reduced the revenue to a tune of more than Shs 100 billion this afternoon.  I know that when it comes to the revenue side, it will be difficult to adjust downwards. Therefore, I want to appeal to Members; now that the stakeholders in the industry have agreed that we make this adjustment next financial, let us maintain it at 13 per cent. 

Apart from one of the things, we have been hesitant to reduce radically on this measure. Apart from revenue reduction, as you know these soft drinks also contribute to our disease burden in one way or the other. Look at the chemical concentration they use in their mixture; that is why we have been a bit hesitant to move radically to remove the tax the way we have done for other items. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I pray that given the fact that this afternoon we have reduced the tax measures by over Shs 100 billion, we should maintain this one, which is going to cause a Shs 30 billion reduction in revenue, so that we conclude this debate in a very harmonious way. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You did not comment on the proposal by hon. Lugoloobi on the cement.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I would have loved to have this Shs 18 billion as a revenue resource but I will respect the decision of the House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question is that clause 3(h) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

8.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, we have voted on these amendments and they are very clear. On the issue of cement, we have conceded and we have maintained the soft drinks at 13 per cent. So, it is very clear, hon. Amos Lugoloobi.

I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

8.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

8.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Excise Duty (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE EXCISE DUTY (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2016

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, before you go to the next item, I just want to thank colleagues because this is the first time that we have passed four Bills in a single day. I am looking forward to this cooperation as we begin the budget process. Thank you very much, colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I really want to thank you, honourable members. It is after 8 o’clock and I want to thank you so much for doing your duty and making sure that the statutory Bills are handled.

I have been trying to check whether the committees are ready for Tuesday but I understand they are still meeting. Therefore, I will adjourn to Wednesday, just to give you an extra day. 

Honourable members, the Appointments Committee is sitting on Monday to vet the Health Service Commission members at 9.00 a.m.  

The House is adjourned to Wednesday next week at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much and have a good evening. 

(The House rose at 8.16 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 20 April 2016 at 2.00 p.m.)
