PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGFRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA12930MINISTERIAL STATEMENTFriday, 19 April 2024such walks. Next time, take it to West Nile, to Bukedi, to Lango, to Busoga. Those are places with a lot of malaria. When you take it to Kayunga, for instance, if you give Kayunga mosquito nets, they may not even understand what the nets are meant for. They will use it for fishing. When we say, take such a walk to such areas, it helps our population a lot. It will help us in the eradication of malaria and the theme will take the day. If we do it every time, every year, on the streets of Kampala and Parliament here, then we need to check what we are trying to do. All the same, I invite all of you tomorrow to join the walk. The chief walker will be the Deputy Speaker. Join the walk and support.The next one should be in Hon. Acon’s constituency. Like in Butaleja , the people who are organising this walk like Hon. Mutiwa - too much malaria in Butaleja, but you are walking in Kampala. Take the walk down there for the people to understand what the walk is about. Thank you. Hon. Mugema and Hon. Mutiwa -10.06MR PETER MUGEMA (Independent, Iganga Municipality, Iganga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker and greetings from my voters for whatever you are doing for the country. Madam Speaker, this was not in your communication, but I thought it wise that IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 28TH SITTING - THIRD MEETING Parliament met at 10.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Good morning all of you and welcome to the morning sitting. I got an apology from the Leader of the Opposition. He is going to be away; attending his graduation at the Law Development Centre. I congratulate him on his graduation.Our sitting this morning is a continuation in consideration of the RAPEX Bills. The progress so far has been very good and impressive. I thank all of you and as we continue, I urge all Members to be in the House and do what they ought to do; what they are supposed to do. If we agree we should sit, we should always be here and dedicate ourselves to fulfil our constitutional mandate. Honourable members, tomorrow, we will be having a malaria walk; a walk against malaria and it will be under the theme: “Zero Malaria starts with you”.As we strive to eradicate malaria as one of the leading causes of mortality, I implore the Ministry of Health to consider scheduling 12931THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024in the spirit of solidarity, if you so wish, our immediate neighbours in Kenya – yesterday, there was a plane crash, which killed the Commander of the Armed Forces in Kenya, Gen. Francis Ogolla. I do wish that maybe, if you so wish, we observe a moment of silence. That is my humble request.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I am really sorry, and I think my team should be blamed for that because they should have reminded me. When I come here and I am very busy, even my Commissioner forgets to remind me. Our dear condolences go to the Republic of Kenya for the loss of the Chief of Defence Forces. May we rise for a moment of silence in his memory.(The House rose and observed a moment of silence .)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Hon. Mugema. Hon. Mutiwa- MR GEOFREY MUTIWA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mugema, are you hearing what the former Leader of the Opposition is saying? He says he likes you very much. MR MUTIWA:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank you for raising the issue of malaria, which is one of those diseases that are killing Ugandans.Madam Speaker, statistics show that we are losing 70 to 100 people every year across the country and these are people that are able to go to hospitals and that is how the health facilities are able to get the data. However, there are very many Ugandans who die without getting access to health facilities.Malaria is real and as the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria, we organised this walk to create awareness amongst the population and to show the Government that there is a problem that needs everybody to get concerned and support the population.Madam Speaker, this started last year and every year, when we do it at national level, we also go down to the districts.  Like last year, I had one in Butaleja and I am organising another one immediately we finish this one at national level.Therefore, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Ministry of Health and partners that have supported the walk against malaria. I also implore and request all colleagues, members of Parliament to turn up tomorrow in big numbers and we walk and say “Zero malaria starts with us and starts with everybody.” I believe this will help in creating awareness and making sure that we reduce the deaths. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Interjections)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. You want me to say the name; first repeat your name.10.10MR NABOTH NAMANYA (FDC, Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. For record purposes, my name is Naboth Namanya and I represent Rubabo County, in Rukungiri District. THE SPEAKER:  Have you seen how Hon. Mugema is calling you “Musenero”? (Laughter)  Hon. Mugema, can you apologise.MR NAMANYA: Madam Speaker, can I get protection from Hon. Nathan, who is using a word that is not common here? He has said it. I will not repeat it because I do not want to promote that word here. Madam Speaker, thank you for your communication. This will act as a clarion call for the Government and in particular, the Ministry of Health, to intensify interventions to combat malaria in Uganda. After the walk, the Government and particularly those of us who represent people needs to get appropriate intervention to combat malaria, which is becoming one of the serious killers of people in Uganda. 12932MINISTERIAL STATEMENTI was surprised last time when the ministry was distributing mosquito nets, particularly in my area. I was surprised when I met a Village Health Team carrying only 50 nets to be distributed in a parish that has about 5,000 members because voters alone in Ndago Parish are 3,500. I do not know the number in the records because according to the Uganda Bureau of Statistics, the Government is aware of plus-minus the population in each parish in each region. It was a surprise for me to see only 50 nets being distributed in one parish.  I hope this walk will also help us mobilise all the strengths to put together a strategy that will help to eliminate malaria in Uganda. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. There is an issue with distribution. You distribute the nets, but there is also creating awareness of what those nets are meant to do. (Applause)  You are giving out nets to somebody in Maruzi, but because he is near the lake, he uses it for fishing. So, we need to make people know, not only here, that malaria is a killer disease. I do not know what happened. Originally, we used to have continuous adverts on TV that if you do not slash your neighbourhood or leave water in the compound, there will be mosquitoes and then you will die of malaria. I no longer see those adverts; I do not know what happened. Everybody has relaxed; nobody is speaking about anything.However, as legislators and leaders of the people, it is our responsibility now. Let us not wait for the ministry. Let us go and tell our people that malaria is a killer disease. They should be careful and be able to protect themselves against malaria and other diseases.10.14MR JAMES KUBEKETERYA (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The cause of malaria is nothing else apart from the mosquito. I would like to implore this House to look at the real cause of malaria. In other countries, like Cuba, malaria was done away with in 1967. How was it done? Research was carried out and these mosquitoes were made redundant. As we look for funds, let us invest in research and ensure that we benchmark from Cuba. How did they do it because the mosquitoes in Cuba bite, but malaria is not caused? Let us look at it from the point of course. Maybe, in the future, we can reduce malaria, but as long as we walk, mosquitoes are born. After seven days, more are born. So, something must be done along those lines. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  We will not take a lot of time on these issues. We need to go straight to the Bills.10.15MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to support your concern and call upon Members to join the walk against malaria tomorrow that I would also love to participate in. Africa and tropical countries that are still facing the challenge of malaria need to learn something. We should put our hands together and put up a joint fight to ensure that the vector, which is the mosquito, is eliminated. Without the elimination of the vector, this is going to be a business. There are people manufacturing nets and insecticides for treating nets. There are people with NGOs and businesses all over the world. I think they would not want to see malaria ending in Africa and tropical countries. Madam Speaker, Dichloro-Diphenyl-Trichloroethane (DDT) was banned in 1972, after Europe and America used them to fight mosquitoes. When they had done away with the mosquitoes in their countries, they then said it was harmful to human life, yet the DDT dose that one would need to take to kill him is very high. As long as we do not join our hands together in Africa to say, “Let technology and research help us so that we deal with the very source of the problem, which is the mosquito”, this [Mr Namanya] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12933THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024struggle will be for us to talk every day, yet somebody is gaining from this. This must be our point of concern from now, moving forward. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. We need to reduce business from those who are collecting our monies and a lot of money we are budgeting for what can be stopped. 10.17MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. Madam Speaker, thank you for raising awareness for the malaria walk. Mosquitos were here before any of us was born, but I wonder how we can defeat these very tiny insects. We need to work on things, which we can defeat. For instance, in my village, you cannot even stay outside in the evening; you will find insects pouring like rain. You do not have time to relax with the family. You wonder why such a thing has taken a while. If we can work on the things like HIV/AIDS that we are trying to prevent, why can’t we prevent this? THE SPEAKER: Like COVID-19?MR ACON: Yes. Let us also raise awareness because when mosquito nets are distributed, they have been abused in various ways. Some people use them for catching white ants; some people use them for catching nsenene  - the grasshoppers. (Laughter)  Others use them for catching fish. So, we need to sensitise our people, Madam Speaker. Lastly, if we do this walk against malaria, let us also do one for bad driving next time because it is the second leading cause of death, after malaria. Thank you.10.19MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I welcome the idea of the walk against malaria. However, we have been dealing with this killer disease for a long time. As my colleague was saying, we should concentrate on the research. Instead of walking in Kampala and then in Masaka another time, why don’t we nationalise the cause and say, “All Members of Parliament, during such a month or on such a day, go back to your constituencies all over different sectors, hold the walk and sensitise the majority?”. If you do it in one area –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bakkabulindi, we said we are a people-centred Parliament. If we all got into buses today and said we were going to Kiruhura to walk, everybody would be interested to see who these MPs are and people would take your message more seriously. Unlike when I go alone and walk in Bukedea, they will say, “she is looking for votes.” If we got united as Members of Parliament, and said this time we are having a walk in Kiruhura, Ruhama, Pakwach or Nyendo, the whole public will appreciate it. However, if you say that you are walking alone in Kayunga, then you are basically politicking. MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, thank you for that approach, but in future, if the mobilisation is going to state that the entire Parliament is coming to Kyotera for walking, I will welcome the idea. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  10.21MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Madam Speaker, you had given me - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to move to the Bills. That is why we are here this morning.  MR MAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. As we join the malaria walk, on top of distributing mosquito nets, I also want the Minister of Health to sensitise the masses on how to use them. Most people in the villages use them for weddings, brewing local brew “malwa” and catching white ants, thus the ministry has the responsibility to sensitise the masses. 12934MINISTERIAL STATEMENTWe request the ministry to come up with a statement on malaria and report on how it distributed the mosquito nets because most of our people did not receive them. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Member from Buhweju –  10.22MR EPHRAIM BIRAARO (NRM, Buhweju West County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really admire your approach to issues, especially when you say that the walk should not be concentrated in Kampala and such other areas, but we should take it where the issues are.In the list of your examples, I would have got happier if you mentioned Karamoja, Kassanda, Mubende and Kyamuhunga. Why those areas? Those areas have gold and after picking out the gold, the gold miners leave the ponds full of water, which are breeding grounds for mosquitoes. While we are walking against malaria here, other people are helping mosquitoes to breed and multiply. I appeal to the ministry in charge of minerals to put a law, follow up and monitor that when gold is extracted, these ponds are covered to eliminate mosquito breeding. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The gold does not benefit the people in that area and they end up dying of malaria. Yes, honourable member from Mityana - 10.24MR MUHAMAD NSEGUMIRE (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the malaria run. Recently, on Wednesday, an elderly person - THE SPEAKER: This time, we are walking, but not running. MR NSEGUMIRE: Yes, malaria walk. (Laughter)  On Wednesday, an elderly person died while queuing for the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) money in my constituency because of malaria. So, I am really in support. I urge the ministry in charge of SAGE money to find an easy way of sending this money to these senior people. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Doctor -  10.25DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for talking about the malaria walk. Uganda has a very big problem with malaria. There is one measure called the entomological inoculation rate. This is how many infected mosquitoes bite a person at any time of the day. This was found to be highest in Apac District. That shows how malaria is a very serious problem. Secondly, there is somebody who said that malaria is caused by a mosquito. Malaria is caused by protozoa called Plasmodium falciparum and other species; I want to make that clear. Finally, I want to quote –(Interruption)-  a book called “The Conquest of Malaria” from Italy from 1900 to 1962, which I read very well. Italy used all the methods we are using. In fact, at one time, they had a theory that if you do mass treatment of all the people, theoretically, they would cure malaria because the plasmodium would be cleared from the people. However, people would be given the drugs, some would hide them while others would just put them in their mouth. When the people who were enforcing it left, they would spit them; they failed. What finally eradicated malaria from Italy was the improvement of the living of the people in southern Italy. You can imagine that even if you have four nets in the house, some people do not even have where to hang the net. When you are going to do indoor residual spraying, the crevices in some houses and the way they are built naturally, this is not going to be effective. You can imagine if you want to put the nets in the ventilators and windows, it is not possible. Importantly, we have to make sure that the way of living of our people is improved, the [Mr Mayanja] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12935THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024housing, the environment and so forth. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: There is information from - MS KAAYA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are promoting the use of biological control methods and during the malaria walk, I advise that we also convey the message on the planting of neem trees; they are mosquito-repellent trees. Now that we have saved the National Forestry Authority -(Laughter)-  it should be cognisant of malaria and raise seedlings of neem trees. As we walk and distribute mosquito nets, we should be able to supply the seedlings of neem trees. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on top of the neem trees, even the lemongrass and all the plants that have lemon act as repellents. Hon. Hanifa - 10.28MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the campaign of the malaria walk. My concern is about the uneven distribution of nets. Kome Islands comprises 20 islands, but those people do not receive mosquito nets when it comes to distribution. I do not know whether when they are distributing, they stop at the landing sites and do not go ahead to traverse the Islands. I implore the Ministry of Health to look at the islands and also help them get mosquito nets. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  Honourable members, we have been pushed on this. We are on the Rationalisation of Agencies and Public Expenditure (RAPEX) Bills and we have always been reported that Parliament does not want RAPEX Bills. To my surprise, I see only four ministers and yet, we have over 16 Bills – They are three ministers -(Laughter)-  and this must go to - the person who is here every day is Hon. Bahati. We really thank you for diligently being here every day. Whether he has a Bill or not, he is always here. We thank you. Hon. Musasizi apologised that he is out of the country, but the Executive must know that whereas we are willing to sit and do what we are supposed to do, you should help us do what you want us to do. Let us work together for us to be able to finish what we are supposed to do. Next item. BILLSSECOND READINGTHE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you recall that yesterday, the House passed the Uganda Registration Service (Amendment) Bill, 2024, which transferred the functions from URSB to the National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA). The URSB transferred, NIRA is receiving - it is as simple as that. This warrants a corresponding amendment on the NIRA Act for the Registration of the Persons Act. Hence, this amendment is here. I now invite the Minister of Internal Affairs. General, please, move a motion. 10.32THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Registration of Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read for the second time. THE SPEAKER:  Is the Bill seconded? Seconded by Maj. Dr Alanyo, Hon. Tonny, Hon. Sanon, Hon. Okiror, Hon. Aol, Hon. Hanifa, by the whole House. Would you like to speak something?GEN. MUHOOZI:  Madam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to give effect to the policy of the Government, to rationalise Government agencies and public expenditure. 12936MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we passed an amendment transferring the Registration of Persons Act to NIRA, which is now on the receiving side. NIRA’s Act has to be amended to accommodate what we passed yesterday. Thank you. Chairperson- 10.34THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Kajwengye): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to present the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the Registration of Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024. I now lay on the Table the minutes of the committee as they were processing the Bill and the copy of the report. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Please, lay and give us a summary.MR KAJWENGYE:  Madam Speaker, you have already highlighted this. Yesterday, this august House passed the Bill and this is a continuation. The import is to bring the registration of natural and legal persons in one place. The report is uploaded; I will not take a lot of this august House time. The background is covered; the policy principles of the appeal are clear; the remedies are thorough. All the methodologies we were done. We did a document review. One observation is that NIRA, which is receiving this function from URSB, is housed at the Kololo ceremonial grounds and on several occasions, they have had their work curtailed, but we have handled this during the ministerial policy statement. That is both budgetary and also to say that for the registration of marriages at NIRA, the committee observes that the transfer of this function from URSB to NIRA will effectively-THE SPEAKER:  Yes, doctor –DR BAYIGGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is why you have to mention that NIRA is at Kololo. Is it going to be in the law that it should be at Kololo? THE SPEAKER:  He is just reminding you. I did not know where NIRA was and he is telling you that you need to provide money to house NIRA somewhere, he is just being polite. MR KAJWENGYE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have said it succinctly, but the function of civil marriages demands face-to-face meeting. It is important that the honourable colleagues and the world know where NIRA is found so that you can go and conduct your civil marriages. This committee observes that the Bill does not provide a definite commencement date, which could affect the smooth transition of the civil registration functions from URSB to NIRA. The committee opines that the commencement date of this Act is required to establish a time frame within which the law shall come into force to ensure smooth transition of the civil registration functions from URSB to NIRA. The committee, therefore, recommends that a provision be made to enable the Minister appoint a commencement date to enforce the law. Interpretation ClauseClause 1 of the Bill, in the Interpretation Clause, defines significant words used in the Act. However, the committee noted that the word “Minister” has been used in some provisions in the Bill, yet, it is not defined under the Interpretation Clause. RecommendationThe Committee, therefore, recommends that the Interpretation Clause be amended to include a definition of the “Minister”. In conclusion, the Committee has reviewed the Bill and made proposals deemed fit to achieve the set objectives of RAPEX. THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412937THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024Therefore, the committee recommends that the Bill be considered for second reading, subject to the proposed amendments here to be attached and any other modifications the House may propose and approve. I beg to report. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable Chairperson. You have heard the justification and the report - it is not any different from the one we had on URSB yesterday. Motion from Hon. Isaac. 10.29 MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you highlighted earlier, this is just a follow-up of what we did yesterday, we are just formalising this. I move a motion that we move to the committee stage of this item. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Seconded by Hon. Silwany, Hon. Luttamaguzi, Hon. Karim, Hon. Hanifa, Hon. Eric, Hon. Dorcas Acen, Hon. Zijjan, Hon. Nathan, Hon. Maneno, Hon. Okwalinga, Dr Ruyonga, by the whole House, by the chairperson, and the minister himself. I now put the question that the Registration of the Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read for the second time.(Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024New clause10.41THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Kajwengye):  Madam Chairperson, the Bill is amended by inserting immediately before clause 1 the following –“CommencementThis Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the Minister in consultation with the Minister responsible for Justice, by a statutory instrument.” Justification (a) To stagger the commencement of the Act to ensure that the Act comes into force when the Minister of Internal Affairs is sure that NIRA is able to deliver on the functions that have been transferred to it. (b) To coordinate the commencement of the Uganda Registration Services Bureau (Amendment) Act with the commencement date of the Registration of Persons (Amendment) Act to ensure a smooth transition of the civil registration functions from URSB to NIRA.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Minister?GEN. MUHOOZI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. With due respect to the chairperson’s comments, I would rather the recommencement date be on assent because civil registration is a daily activity. So, what happens in between? I would rather, once it is assented to by the President, it commences.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Okiror? MR OKIROR:  Madam Chairperson, there is something we need to get clearly here. These functions were being performed by URSB and there are several laws under which they have been performing those functions. Now, here is a shift of performance of those duties. First of all, what is being transferred is not just the legislation, but even the staff who have been working. That is what we discussed in the legal committee: the staff who are working in URSB are going to be transferred to NIRA. So, if you say we commence on assent, yet NIRA has not even put in place the physical space for them to commence this work, it might be a bit challenging. That is why we recommended that it could be in consultation with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, when they are ready – and they have a transitional period. 12938MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE CHAIRPERSON:  It brings in the inconsistency with the one you had yesterday, where they said the minister - because you need to give time for them to prepare and accommodate the staff and all other things.  Hon. Ekanya?MR EKANYA:  Madam Chairperson, I have engaged some of these Government departments that we have merged and rationalised. Some of the staff remain doing the work as the ministry and the Government makes the adjustment and creates space. Some of them remain in those offices where they are as they discuss their compensation or agree to leave and sign new contracts, which can take up to six months or one year. Therefore, while we do the legal framework, the ministry goes backward and people continue doing the same work. If we say that the start date should be after that entire process is complete, we are likely to bog down the entire operation of the Government. Madam Chairperson, we have enacted here several Acts where we give the minister to indicate the start-off date. Some of the Acts have not even been implemented up to today. I, therefore, agree with the Minister of Internal Affairs that the commencement date should be upon consent. This is because life is continuing. Nobody is being fired until the Government pays them anyway. They are going to continue doing their work.THE CHAIRPERSON: Former LOP? MR MPUUGA:  Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. I do appreciate the concerns of the Minister for Internal Affairs. This kind of legislation needs to have a transitory clause and I think that is what is missing. Registration and attendant obligations are daily. Perhaps, because of the requirement of the physical migration of humans and computers, we need a transitory clause. This is because assent could happen when the physical preparation is not yet in place. Normally, what we would do is to put in place a transitory clause to say that “for avoidance of doubt, the activities under or assigned shall continue until and when migrated by statutory instrument” to take care of the readiness and the transition in between. I am not a good draftsperson, but somebody could draft for us a transitory clause. THE CHAIRPERSON:  That is exactly what the committee wants. That is the position of the committee. If we could go by the committee’s position, it will be consistent with what we passed with URSB. This is because the powers will now be given to the minister. Minister, the assent can be done today and, if you are ready, you can even make the transfer the next day. I would plead that you go with your committee’s position. GEN. MUHOOZI:  Madam Chairperson, with your guidance and the submission of Members, I think we need an express provision for a transition mechanism to cater for work to continue as we get ready. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes. Thank you. I put the question that the proposed new clause stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.THE CHAIRPERSON:  (Mr Aogon rose_)  On which one? MR AOGON:  On this very one. (Laughter)  It is something very critical. Honourable colleagues, I beg that you understand me because we are making a law -(Interjections)-  It is okay. First listen to me. THE CHAIRPERSON:  He is not recommitting; he just wants to understand. MR AOGON:  I am not recommitting. I have been involved in making several of these kinds of laws. I have been here for some time. THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412939THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024(Laughter)  Normally, when we have been making what we call “the transitional clauses”, we have been putting it clearly that the assets, liabilities and obligations that have been in this organisation transit to the incoming organisation. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Exactly. MR AOGON:  So, it is very important that we use the word “obligations” because even when you talk about these activities, they carry the same area and that will help us a lot.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Aogon, it is an implied statement that when you are transferring this, the law is there. You already have an Act to that effect.MR AOGON:  Yes. Secondly, nobody should fear that if we say the Act will commence on the 1st of July, then - the rest of the things are administrative. Our work is to make the law. Nobody should drag Parliament behind and say “if we make it now, what will happen?” It does not matter at all. Let us make the law. That is our duty. THE CHAIRPERSON:  How do people in Kumi know that Hon. Aogon was in the House? (Laughter)  Thank you. Clause 1MR KAJWENGYE:  Clause 1 - InterpretationClause 1 of the Bill is amended by inserting immediately after the definition of the word “Government”, the following- “’Minister’ means the Minister responsible for Internal Affairs.” JustificationTo define the minister responsible for commencing of the Bill. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Minister?GEN. MUHOOZI:  I concur, Madam Chairperson.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.Clause 2, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4THE CHAIRPERSON:  Committee chairper -son -MR KAJWENGYE:  Madam Chairperson, clause 4 concerns the amendment of Section 5 of Act 4 of 2015. Clause 4 of the Bill is amended in the proposed subsection 1(a) by substituting for the phrase “section 54” the phrase “section 54 and 43(i). The justification for this is to transfer to National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA) the mandate to register for the guardianship orders provided for under section 43(i) of the Children’s Act. I beg to report.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Minister-GEN MUHOOZI:  I agree with that addition, Madam Chairperson.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.The Title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUMETHE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister-12940MINISTERIAL STATEMENT10.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House does resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister- 10.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Registration of Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024” and passed it with amendments.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister-10.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted by this honourable House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLS THIRD READINGTHE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister-10.54THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Registration of Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the third time and do pass.THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the Registration of Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read the third time and do pass. (Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2024”.THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) Thank you. Thank you very much honourable minister and the committee chairperson. Thank you, honourable members. Somebody has just reminded me to thank her. You are the best. Next item-BILLS SECOND READINGTHE UGANDA TRYPANOSOMIASIS CONTROL COUNCIL (REPEAL) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  You are not going away - do you want to thank us? We have a lot of business, but you can occupy that seat.10.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Government, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries informed you that he and all the ministers of state will not THE UGANDA TRYPASONOMIASIS COUNCIL CONTROL (REPEAL)BILL, 202412941THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024be available. One of the ministers of state is indisposed and another one is out of the country.The Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has made a report on behalf of the House and we are seeking your guidance whether this Bill can be moved.The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is on her way here.THE SPEAKER:  The honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries said he gave you full instructions to handle the agriculture ministry. Is that okay? MR BAHATI:  It is okay. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  He is a very competent minister. MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council (Repeal) Bill, 2024” be read the second time. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Is the Bill seconded? (Members rose_)  It is seconded by the Attorney-General, by the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives - by the whole House. Thank you.Would you want to speak to your Bill? The Member of Parliament is not a vet. (Interruption)MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to dissolve the Council and transfer functions of this Council and the Secretariat to the ministry responsible for agriculture, relieving the Government of the financial burden imposed by this Council, but also mainstreaming the functions of the Council into the ministry. By doing this, we think we will be making a substantial contribution to the agricultural sector by streamlining the function of this Council and bringing efficiency and effectiveness in the operations of the ministry. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. You have heard the objective of the repeal. Can we now hear a brief report from the chairperson of the committee? MR SSEKIKUBO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent a community that has livestock as one of its core activities and livelihood. This is a very important Bill that concerns us in as far as the tsetse fly control and the welfare of the animals is concerned. I would like to note with concern the sheer neglect of this core ministry, whereby 80 per cent of our people are in agriculture, and in some areas, they are both agriculturists and cattle keepers. Imagine that a ministry - with due respect to Hon. Bahati, whom I know already has a big burden of his own with the traders and the business community on strike - but to have a ministry of four ministers who are ordinarily the ones standing in this important docket. The cabinet minister is not present and neither is the Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (Animal Industry), Lt Col (Rtd) Rwamirama, or the honourable Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. I would pray and seek your indulgence that the business in this House is not a formality. Ministers once appointed should at least give courtesy to this House and respect Ugandans who wait and see them discharging work on their behalf.I know you had magnanimously allowed it to go on, but we do not look good when we sit here. Madam Speaker, you can evoke your powers to inquire as to where these ministers are. Being here on a Friday means that these things are very important and critical that we have been made to sit. However, they are not here and now, we are one-sided. Someone is standing in to augment and ad-hoc where the ministers are not and I can see him fumbling with a big file.THE SPEAKER: He is not fumbling.12942MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMR SSEKIKUBO:  Is it procedurally right for this House to be taken for granted knowing well that the issues we are dealing with are critical and go to the core of this country? However, there are no ministers and we continue as though it is normal. We shall end up talking to ourselves, Madam Speaker. I pray that you withhold and insist that the Cabinet ministers responsible for the docket appear to own up to what they are up to. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when it comes to the issues of – first of all, Hon. Frank Tumwebaze had the courtesy of writing to me that he was going to be away and he had given full powers to Hon. Bahati to handle UCDA, Coffee – Now, when I hear Hon. Eric making noise, do you have coffee in your place? – and all those things. Therefore, in my opinion, Hon. Bahati is one of the most experienced ministers. Let us go ahead since the reports are ready. It is the prerogative – allow me to exercise my power that we continue. We have the Attorney-General in the House, a veterinary doctor, and a former Leader of the Opposition (LOP) here. Committee chairperson -11.06THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER:  But honourable minister, can we have the technical team of Agriculture here as we continue? Yes, please, go ahead. This is basically repealing and transferring of activities.MS OKORI-MOE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to present this report. The minister also sent me a message and I thank him for delegating Hon. Bahati, although he is struggling to pronounce Trypanosomiasis. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Uganda Trypanosomiasis (Repeal) Bill, 2024.THE SPEAKER:  We are not veterinary doctors. Please, lay.MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Speaker, in the same vein, I beg to lay on Table the minutes of the committee while considering the Bill on Uganda Trypanosomiasis.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Please, lay.MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Uganda Trypanosomiasis (Repeal) Bill, 2024.Madam Speaker, the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council Act (Repeal) Bill, 2024 was read for the First Time on 9 April 2024 and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in accordance with Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee begs to report.Madam Speaker, 2.0 is about the background of the Bill, which is the same as the background of all the Bills under RAPEX; so, I would not really want to dwell on that so much.Madam Speaker, the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council Act (Repeal) Bill, 2024 aims at – (a)  Mainstreaming the functions of Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council into the Ministry responsible for Agriculture; and (b)  Abolishing the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council and transferring its functions to the ministry responsible for agriculture. Madam Speaker, the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council (UTCC) was created by the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council Act, 1992 (Ch.211). The Act legalised the Council and the Technical Committee and Coordinating THE UGANDA TRYPASONOMIASIS COUNCIL CONTROL (REPEAL)BILL, 202412943THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024Office for Control of Trypanosomiasis in Uganda (COCTU) as the Secretariat of the Council. This was in an effort to rationalise tsetse and Trypanosomiasis research and control in Uganda. The institution was established at a time when the country was experiencing sleeping sickness epidemic that isolated interventions had failed to control. The legislators then found it necessary to establish this institution that would be able to coordinate different professions so as to eliminate the epidemic. The disciplines involved in Trypanosomiasis are they are: entomologists, veterinarians, medical doctors, laboratory scientists, environmentalists, economists, agriculturists and cartographers. The secretariat closely works with the following ministries; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Lands, and the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) through the Livestock Health Research Institute. This secretariat also collaborates with international partners like International Atomic Energy Agency, the Food and Agriculture Organisation  (FAO), International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), World Health Organisation (WHO), African Union (AU), specifically, Inter-Africa Bureau for Animal Resources (IBAR) and Pan African Tsetse and Trypanosomiasis Eradication Campaign Secretariat.Like I said earlier, the object and justification of the Bill is the same as the other Bills that this House has already gone through and other Bills that are yet to be considered on Rationalisation of Agencies and Public Expenditure (RAPEX). So, I would not want to dwell a lot on that. The justification on the Bill for Uganda Trypanosomiasis Council repeal raises the following issues, which the committee interrogated:1.  Whether the mandate of the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council overlaps with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;2.  Whether Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council has served the purpose for which it was established; and3.  Whether Uganda Trypanosomiasis Council administration costs are so high that they drain the Treasury at the expense of service delivery. Madam Speaker, these were the committee findings and recommendations. 5.1 On whether the mandate of the council overlaps that of the ministry.The committee noted that the council was established by the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Act, 1992 Chapter 211, with a mandate of elimination of livestock and human trypanosomiasis in Uganda. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has intensified efforts to ensure the control of pests, vectors and diseases in both crops and animals under the Department of Animal Health. This is the same mandate as that of the council.The ministry has also put emphasis on animal vectors and diseases, especially containing and eradicating the spread of deadly Foot and Mouth Disease, Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia (CBPP) in cattle, Contagious Caprine Pleuro pneumonia (CCPP) in goats and sheep, Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR) in goats and sheep, African Swine Fever in pigs, brucellosis in all animals and humans, and rabies in dogs, cats and humans. The committee observed that the roles and functions of the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council are being performed by the Department of Animal Health under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), but focusing on a different vector-borne disease. 12944MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe committee recommends that the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council be merged and mainstreamed into the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 5.2  Whether the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council has served the purpose for which it was established The committee noted that the council was established with the mandate of elimination of livestock and human trypanosomiasis in Uganda. The council has registered the following achievements during the last five years: (a) The Gambiense sleeping sickness cases were reduced from 86 to zero cases. (b) The World Health Organisation (WHO) declared Uganda free of Gambiense sleeping sickness.(c) The Rhodesiene sleeping sickness cases reduced from 21 to zero cases. However, this financial year, one case was diagnosed in Nwoya District and managed successfully.(d) The tsetse fly density reduced from an average Flies Trapped per Day (FTD) of 17 to less than 2 FTD in the areas of Busoga, Buganda, Teso, Bukedi and Bunyoro. The prevalence of Trypanosomiasis reduced from 37 per cent to less than 5 per cent in the above areas. The challenge of sleeping sickness is still prevalent in and around conservation areas and major water bodies. The institution now is focusing on control and elimination of animal diseases after eliminating the human disease. The committee observed that the council has accomplished the purpose for which it was established to a larger extent. Uganda was declared free of Gambiense and Rhodesiense sleeping sickness, although the challenge still persists in and around conservation areas, water bodies and zoonotic diseases are on the increase. The committee recommends that the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Council be merged and mainstreamed into the ministry. 5.3  Whether Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council administration costs are so high that they drain the Treasury at the expense of service deliveryThe committee notes that the council is a subvention under MAAIF whose work plan and budgets are prepared and submitted to the department of planning for consideration and inclusion into the ministry’s vote. The committee further established that for the Financial Year 2022/2023, COCTU had 18 staff and a wage bill of Shs 850 million since they work through existing local Government structures which have frontline scientists. The committee observes that the council did not have its own budget and, therefore, the administrative costs of COCTU are part of the ministry’s budget. The committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council be merged and mainstreamed into the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 5.4 Provision for a commencement dateThe committee notes that the existing law had created a secretariat, which had obligations and contracts executed. This implies that on the day, His Excellency the President assents to the Bill, the agency will cease to exist.  Currently, some of the properties of the agency have not yet been accounted for. The committee observed that there is need for a transition period after the law has been assented to, to provide for winding up processes, taking stock, and officially handing over the obligations the secretariat was undertaking to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The committee recommends that the commencement date be provided. In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council has been [Ms Okori-Moe]THE UGANDA TRYPASONOMIASIS COUNCIL CONTROL (REPEAL)BILL, 202412945THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024able to eliminate human sleeping sickness from the country, which is now a reference point for other African countries. However, in order not to lose the achievements highlighted above and continue implementing strategies for control of animal diseases, the staff of the council should be mainstreamed to MAAIF. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable Chairperson. We are basically repealing and transferring the functions to the mainstream ministry. In the public gallery this morning, we have students and teachers of King David Junior School from Mawokota North County, that is in Mpigi. They are represented by Hon. Kiyaga Hillary and Hon. Teddy Nambooze. Thank you for coming. You are smart. Please, take your seats. Join me in welcoming the little angels. Yes, Hon. Ebwalu? A motion from the chairperson. 11.20MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Having listened to a well-explained report to this House on the National Trypanosomiasis Control Bill; Aware that the sleeping sickness disease has been put under control, the council has been receiving money through subvention from the Ministry of Agriculture and the committee has provided for the transition period; I beg to move that the question be put and we move to the Committee Stage. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Is the motion seconded? Seconded by Hon. Ecweru, honourable minister of Veteran Affairs, honourable minister of Water, Attorney-General, the acting Leader of Opposition, Hon. Anifa, by the whole House.  This report is very straight forward -  you have more serious issues Hon. Aogon. Hon. Joyce, can you take charge of your neighbour? (Laughter)Honourable members, I put the question that the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council (Repeal) Bill, 2024 be read the second time. (Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE UGANDA TRYPANOSOMIASIS CONTROL COUNCIL (REPEAL) BILL, 2024New clause11.23THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe):  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to insert a new clause, The Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council Act (Repeal) Bill, 2024 is amended by inserting a new clause before clause 1, the following:Commencement dateThis Act shall come into force on a date the minister responsible for Agriculture, by statutory instrument, appoints.JustificationThere are many actions required to be performed by both the repealed Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council and the ministry after the Act has been assented to.I beg to move.MR AOGON:  That is one of the concerns that I have. Madam Chairperson, it is usual that the House is the one that takes a decision on the commencement of the Act. Therefore, I would have expected the committee to propose, if you thought that you needed six months, we put it there. What then happens if the minister sleeps on duty?  For instance, we have asked ministers here to bring regulations - THE CHAIRPERSON:  This Bill is from Government.MR AOGON:  That is true and I understand it, but they have taken forever to bring most of the 12946MINISTERIAL STATEMENTregulations. This House has a duty to institute a commencement date. We can say commence six months after assent. We would have slept on our duty if we do not. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Attorney-General-MR KAFUUZI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If we are to agree with what my brother, Hon. Aogon Silas, says, we would most likely defeat the purpose of the repeal intended today. We are trying to save money that is going to an organisation that is redundant, but you are saying that we give it more six months, meaning that it has to be budgeted for. Remember, we are entering the next financial year.  Therefore, to the best of my knowledge, one, I have no objection to the proposal for commencement date as soon as it is assented to because it does not kill the effect of the repeal. I beg to submit.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Hon. Isaac-MR OTIMGIW:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Attorney-General has actually put it well that one of the purposes of this Bill is clearly for efficiency.  If we are going to have efficiency, we must give the ministry time to know that it is ready to effect this. If we put a timeline to them, when they are not ready, then we do not achieve the purpose of the Bill.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, the Committee Chairperson said that there are processes that are to take place. Transfer of members, transfer of - but we are also saying that as we go into the budgeting process, we are not going to budget for this. This means the minister will have to act as fast as possible. Im -mediately after the assent is done, the minister will do it. It is a very straightforward thing. I do not know why you people are wasting time on repeals when you have more serious - Honourable members, I put the question that the proposed new clause stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)New clause agreed to.Clause 1MS OKORI-MOE:  The proposal is for clause 1 to be amended by deleting the definition of the word “commission”. JustificationThe term is not used anywhere in the Bill, which makes it redundant.  I beg to move.  THE SPEAKER:  Attorney-General-  MR AOGON:  Just to find out - does it hurt to have that word defined?  Because – THE SPEAKER:  But we are repealing. Why would you define it? When you repeal, it ceases to exist. Hon. Aogon- MR KAFUUZI:  Madam Chairperson, you have to admire the tenacity of our colleague, Hon. Silas Aogon. I agree with the proposal.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.Clause 2MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 2 to be amended by substituting subclause (2) for the following -“(2) Without prejudice to the general effect of subsection (1), the specific objective of this Act shall be-(a)  To merge, mainstream and rationalise resources duplicated under the Uganda [Mr Aogon]THE UGANDA TRYPASONOMIASIS COUNCIL CONTROL (REPEAL)BILL, 202412947THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024Trypanosomiasis Control Council to the Ministry;(b) To eliminate the bloated structure and functional ambiguities in the ministry; and(c)  To provide for effective and efficient service delivery by clearly delineating multiple organs to focus on one centre under the Ministry.”The justification is that this is the specific rationalisation of Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council and, therefore, the objective is not generic in nature as stated in the Bill, but rather specific to the affected authority. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Minister?MR BAHATI:  Madam Chairperson, I concur with the committee.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Deputy Attorney-General - MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I agree in totality.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4, agreed to.Clause 5THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairper -son?MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 5 to be substituted for the following-“Dissolution of Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council On the commencement of this Act, the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council is dissolved.”JustificationThe authority shall be dissolved on the day the minister appoints, by statutory instrument, to allow the transition and efficient transfer of functions to the ministry. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister? MR BAHATI:  I concede, Madam Chairperson. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you.MR KAFUUZI: I am in agreement, Madam Chairperson. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.Clause 6, agreed to.Clause 7, agreed to.Clause 8MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 8 to be amended –(a) By deleting subclause (2), and(b) In subclause (3), by substituting for the following-“The staff of the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council shall be redeployed to serve in the Public Service in accordance with the Public Service Standing Orders.”JustificationA change in the Government policy should not disenfranchise its own citizens and should 12948MINISTERIAL STATEMENTsecure the plight of its citizens who have offered a service; The staff of the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council should be deployed in the ministry, in accordance with the Public Service Standing Orders. I beg to move.MR OKIROR:  Madam Chairperson, we will have a challenge with that proposal by the committee. THE CHAIRPERSON:  The administrative proposal?MR OKIROR: Yes. There are two parties here: the employer and the employee. We cannot make a law that gags the employer. So, the use of the word “shall” will be very counterproductive. Let us use “may”. Thank you. THE CHAIRPERSON:  If you have not been a performer, why should it be “shall”? MR KAFUUZI:  Madam Chairperson, I agree and applaud Hon. Okiror’s proposal. The subclause they are seeking to delete talks about compensation of employees.Public service has presented a structure and said technical staff will be absorbed. However, some who are administrative may not necessarily be absorbed. So, when you use “shall”, you will have locked them. Let us be flexible and adopt the proposal.THE CHAIRPERSON:  So, redraft. MR KAFUUZI: Yes, we shall draft to use the word “may” instead of “shall”.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Please, redraft and replace where they say “shall” with “may”.  MR KAFUUZI:  The staff of the Uganda Trypanosomiasis – I know someone wants to hear me struggle with this word. (Laughter)  “The staff of the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council may be redeployed to serve in the Public Service in accordance with Public Service Standing Orders.”I beg to submit. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed by the Deputy Attorney-General.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.The title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME 11.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (IN -DUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):   Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE11.38THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I seek the indulgence of the House. I am a proud old student of Kakomo Primary School. So, you will forgive me, just in case of anything. Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Uganda Trypanosomiasis (Repeal) Bill, 2024” and passed it with amendments.[Ms Okori-Moe]THE UGANDA TRYPASONOMIASIS COUNCIL CONTROL (REPEAL)BILL, 202412949THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER : I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted by this honourable House.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE UGANDA TRYPANOSOMIASIS (REPEAL) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister?11.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. THE SPEAKER: Which report? We are in Third Reading. 11.39 THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council (Repeal) Bill, 2024” be read for the third time and do pass. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question that the Uganda Trypanosomiasis Control Council (Repeal) Bill, 2024, be read the third time and do pass.(Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA TRYPANOSOMIASIS CONTROL COUNCIL (REPEAL) ACT, 2024”THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) Thank you. Next?BILLSSECOND READINGTHE AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS (CONTROL) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister?11.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the bill entitled, “The Agricultural Chemicals (Control) (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the second time. THE SPEAKER: Is the Bill seconded? Okay, it is seconded by the whole House. Would you like to speak to the Bill?MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the amendment of the Agricultural Chemicals (Control) Act, 2007, is intended:1. To enable the mainstreaming and rationalisation of the functions of the Agricultural Chemicals Board into the ministry responsible for agriculture; and2. To facilitate and effectively deliver services by mainstreaming the mandates of the Board that we think now is a bit redundant. We, therefore, would like to recommend to the House to do this amendment to enable the Government to function effectively.THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you have heard the justification. Could you give us a summary because this is something direct? 11.42THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the opportunity 12950MINISTERIAL STATEMENTagain. I beg to lay, on the Table, the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Felix Okot-Ogong, leave our wife. (Laughter)  Hon. Linda Auma, sit near Hon. Tebandeke.  MS OKORI-MOE: … on the Agricultural Chemicals (Control) (Amendment) Bill, 2024. In the same vein, I would like to lay the minutes of the meeting while the committee was considering the Agricultural Chemicals (Control) (Amendment), Bill 2024. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Please lay.MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you again for this opportunity to present this report. I notice that we are also very key persons and we are struggling with the word “Trypanosomiasis”. Members, please I request that if you want to manage that word, break it into two, “Trypano” and “Somiasis”. (Laughter)Thank you, Madam Speaker, I am going to give a summary. The Agricultural Chemicals (Control) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 raises these questions:(i) Whether the mandate of the Agricultural Chemicals Board overlaps with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; and (ii) Whether the Agricultural Chemicals Board has served the purpose for which it was created.The committee interacted with those ministries, but the Board did not appear before the committee, much as we extended several invitations. Committee observationsThe Agricultural Chemicals Board was established by the Agricultural Chemicals (Control) Act, 2007, Act 1 of 2007, to control and regulate the manufacture, storage, distribution and trade in, use, importation and exportation of agricultural chemicals and other related matters. The Board is responsible for providing for the regulations of information used in packaging, labelling or advertising of agricultural chemicals, and to prevent illegal activities related to mislabelling and mispackaging.The committee observed that the mandate of the Board is not so unique that it cannot be performed by the ministry. The committee recommends that the Agricultural Chemicals Board be mainstreamed into the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. On whether the Agricultural Chemicals Board has served the purpose for which it was established, the Board has been responsible for providing the policy framework for control and regulation, including registration of agricultural chemicals such as pesticides, fertilisers, growth regulators, wood preservatives, bio pesticides, bio fertilisers or any other chemicals used for promoting and protecting the health of plants. The committee notes that the market is flooded with counterfeit agrochemicals, which the entity has failed to reduce or eliminate. The Board’s presence in the field to inspect and deal with unauthorised dealers in agro-inputs could not be established by the committee. The committee recommends that the Agricultural Chemicals Board be mainstreamed into the ministry. (Applause)Observations Provision for the commencement dateThe Agricultural Chemicals (Control) Act, of 2007 created a Secretariat, which had obligations and executed some contracts. It will be detrimental to the operations of the sector if the law is assented to and the agency ceases to exist immediately. Some of the properties of the entity have not yet been accounted for. There is a need for a transition period after assent to provide for a winding up process. [Ms Okori-Moe]THE AGRICULTURE CHEMICALS CONTROL (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412951THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024The committee, therefore, recommends that a commencement date be provided for in the Bill and should not exceed three months. Madam Speaker and honourable members, in conclusion, thank you again for your attention. I beg to move. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have heard that mainstreaming is what is going to be done and it is a direct thing. Yes, Hon. Ssekikubo.11.47MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo is bringing a motion – (Laughter) - to go to the Committee Stage, after your submission.MR SSEKIKUBO: This is a slight observation, Madam Speaker, where the committee failed to interact with the Board, which we are trying to mainstream. The chairperson is on record, telling us that they extended several invitations. In the absence even of the responsible ministers, it further complicates the matter. For us who are involved in agriculture, it is terrible down there. You get agricultural chemicals, which destroy the entire farmland, and strange and very dangerous weeds have emerged in our fields and gardens as the aftereffect of applying some of the acaricides. I think this is happening throughout the country. So, this is not a small matter. I do not know, but we are treating it as if it is a small matter.Madam Speaker, 90 per cent of our livelihood depends on agriculture yet again, it is saddening that those who are responsible for the docket choose to skip this important scrutiny when Members are holding the rationalisation. THE SPEAKER: By the way, the council members are not technical people. The council is appointed just to oversee. Committee chairperson, what do you have to say? MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we inquired why the Agricultural Chemicals Board could not appear, the information we got was that they had been operating under the ministry and, therefore, the ministry was final. It is like when they invite you, the parent -  like they invite Hon. Ssekikubo, you make your position and again you want your son to come and comment. This is a board that has been operating within the ministry; I see no problem. DR BWANIKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We indeed have so many issues with agricultural chemicals in this country, but what is going to cure that problem is for the Government to come on the Floor with a Bill that is going to bring into place the regulation of veterinary drugs and agricultural chemicals. That is what we are waiting for.We ask the Government to expedite that Bill. I understand the problems that Hon. Ssekikubo is talking about; they are real problems, but it is not this board that is going to cure them. The board has been there yet there have been those problems. We should expedite the regulation that is going to put in place an authority that is going to bring in veterinary drugs and agricultural chemicals together so that they are regulated for us to cure the problem in this country. THE SPEAKER: Are you in agreement with the committee? DR BWANIKA: I agree with the committee that we move –(Interruption)- yes, I am giving information. THE SPEAKER: He is giving you information as a veterinary doctor. DR BWANIKA: And professional information. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER: Yes.12952MINISTERIAL STATEMENT11.51MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday as we were going through the National Forestry and Tree Planting (Amendment) Bill, 2024, the committee chairperson gave us statistical figures as to how much we are going to save or how much it would cost us to streamline the agency. Could the committee chairperson tell us how much we are going to save, as a nation, as a result of mainstreaming that board? It is important that by the time we walk out of here, we can tell the public that the purpose and the rationale of this is saving the Government with these figures; it is very paramount. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: By the way, we are not only saving because of cost saving, but looking at efficiency as well. This is not on the cost because the people have already been working there. Now, we want efficiency. There are some things you cannot quantify. There is a motion from Hon. Yona. 11.53MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I am going to move the motion, but I first want some clarification from the committee chairperson. The chairperson has said that we need to streamline this board because they are underperforming and they have left counterfeit chemicals and acaricides into the market. I want to know whether when we transfer the board, they will not face the same challenge after hearing from a technocrat doctor, my friend, Hon. Abed Bwanika, that the issue was not the board, it was the lacuna in the law because there were no regulations to regulate these acaricides in this country. I water down the reasoning of the committee chairperson - THE SPEAKER: The committee chairperson - MR MUSINGUZI: -and the committee that the problem was not these people, but the lacuna in the law. After hearing from the two sides, we all know that these chemicals, the herbicides, are not only affecting our plants. As a scientist, I know when it affects the plant, it ends up in your body. THE SPEAKER: True. MR MUSINGUZI: It is a dangerous issue. We may streamline; we may not - but that is not the end of the story. Let us work as the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; work hand in hand with your ministry to make sure that you bridge the gap on the lack of the law to regulate those chemicals. We are all - cancerous issues have emerged so much. Every day, I may ask all of you, we know what we have back home. Issues of cancer- and not only coming up because of climate change, but also because of these issues we have created. Every food we eat is mostly carcinogenic. The doctors are here; they can tell us what the word carcinogen means. I now move the motion as requested by the speaker - THE SPEAKER:  I have not requested you. (Laughter) MR MUSINGUZI: I withdraw and submit. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Motion - this Hon. Yona –(Laughter) 11.55MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, based on the fact that we are going to look at clause by clause, I move a motion that we go to the second reading so that we can look at the Bill, clause by clause.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Yona –(Laughter)- the veterans, Hajat, Hon. Okiror, Afande - why are you not standing up? I have seen the [Ms Okori-Moe]THE AGRICULTURE CHEMICALS CONTROL (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412953THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024whole behind –(Laughter)-  bench; The whole behind bench is seconding. The Member from Bushenyi, Hon. Patrick, Dr Ruyonga, the Member from Sheema, Hon. Ochwa, Workers’ Representative-  Honourable members, it has been seconded by the whole House. I now put the question that the Agricultural Chemical (Control) (Amendment) Bill, 2024, be read for the second time. (Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL (CONTROL) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024Clause 1THE CHAIRPERSON:  Clause 1, yes, committee chairperson. MR SSEKIKUBO:  Procedure, Madam Chairperson. I do not know and wonder whether the Clerk at Table has guided the Chairperson well.Usually, once you reach this committee stage - THE CHAIRPERSON: Do not worry. MR SSEKIKUBO:  The Speaker leaves the Chair - THE CHAIRPERSON: Do not worry. What matters is - (Laughter) . Committee chairperson, can we have - New clauseTHE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to insert a new clause.The Agricultural Chemicals (Control) (Amendment) Bill,2024 is amended by inserting a new clause before clause 1, the following: Commencement date The Act shall come into force on a date the minister responsible for agriculture by statutory instrument appoints. Justification There are many actions required to be performed by both the repealed Agricultural Chemicals Board and the ministry after the Act has been assented to mainstream the functions and mandates performed by the agency into the ministry responsible for agriculture. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Yes, minister.  MR BAHATI:  Madam Chairperson, I concur with the committee. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Attorney-General. MR KAFUUZI: I am fully in agreement. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the proposed new clause stands part of the Bill.  (Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable mem -bers, we sit here for so long, but at least when I am here I have where to put my legs. Do not make me lame; I am still so young. I am look -ing for triplets now –(Laughter)-  now that the “Tenywas” are six months. Clause 1MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is that clause 1 be amended by deleting the definition of the word “commission.” 12954MINISTERIAL STATEMENTJustification The term is not used in the Bill and is thus, redundant. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, minister.MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the committee. It is the same as the one we passed a few minutes ago.THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Attorney-General.MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I concur. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.Clause 2 MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 2 to be amended by substituting subclause (2), with the following –“(2) without prejudice to the general effect of subsection (1), the specific objective of this Act shall be –(a) To merge, mainstream and rationalise the resources duplicated under the Agricultural Chemicals Board to the ministry;(b) To eliminate bloated structure and functional ambiguities in the ministry; and(c) To provide for effective and efficient service delivery by clearly delineating multiple organs under the ministry.”JustificationThis is the specific justification for the rationalisation of the Agricultural Chemicals Board, and, therefore, the objective is not generic in nature as stated in the Bill, but rather specific to only the affected authority. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, minister.MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I concur with the committee. THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Attorney-General.MR KAFUUZI:  Madam Chairperson, I am in agreement. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the committee. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Chairperson, the proposal is for clause 4 to be substituted with the following-“Dissolution of the Agricultural Chemicals Board On the commencement of this Act, the Agricultural Chemicals Board is dissolved.” Justification The authority shall be dissolved on the day the minister appoints by statutory instrument to allow the transition and efficient transfer of functions to the ministry. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, minister.MR BAHATI:  Madam Chairperson, I agree with the committee’s proposal.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Attorney-General.[Ms Okori-Moe]THE AGRICULTURE CHEMICALS CONTROL (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412955THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024MR KAFUUZI:  I am in agree with the committee’s proposal.THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.Clause 5, agreed to.Clause 6, agreed to.Clause 7, agreed to.Clause 8, agreed to.Clause 9, agreed to.Clause 10, agreed to.Clause 11, agreed to.Clause 12MR OKIROR:  Madam Chairperson, I would to make an observation regarding clause 12. When you look at clause 12, you realise that it provides for the commencement of this Act that all property –THE CHAIRPERSON:  Which was already provided for.MR OKIROR:  Yes, that all property, assets, rights and obligations, and liabilities of the board shall vest in the ministry. However, I find a challenge with subclause (4). If you read it, you will notice that it suggests that compensation is not payable to any member of the board of the Agricultural Chemicals Board for loss of office resulting from the abolition of the board by this Act. This is self-defeating, we cannot make legislation in this context because - I seek to be guided by my senior colleagues. - compensation is a common law remedy that can be available if you have a right that has been violated and you go to court, you can be given compensation in respect of a default, or failure by the Government to perform certain obligations. Therefore, we cannot curtail it from that level and say that one cannot be compensated. My suggestion is that we delete subclause (4) and the first, second and third can stay. MR OTIM GIW:  Further clarification, we noticed this in most of these Bills, even in the previous one that we passed, it is clearly states that there is no compensation for any board member for a number of them. THE CHAIRPERSON:  You cannot tie your own neck. MR OTIM GIW:  To be honest, some of these board members have served these entities for a very long time. To rubbish them off like this, may not be fair. THE CHAIRPERSON:  No, they will seek remedy, once they feel that their rights have been infringed. Let us delete subclause (4). MR OKIROR:  We can delete subclause (4), but to show you that subclause (4) is redundant and when you read subclause (2), it gives you a right. It says, “Any proceedings commenced by or against the Agricultural Chemicals Board may be continued by or against the Attorney-General.” It allows you even to go to court. So, why do you go to court and say you cannot achieve certain remedies? Thank you. MR KAFUUZI:  Madam Chairperson, I agree with the proposal that subclause (4) is redundant because subclause (2) and subclause (3) cater for it. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Are you deleting? MR KAFUUZI:  I move that we delete subclause (4) of clause 12.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed by the Attorney-General by deleting subclause (4).(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 12, amended, agreed to.12956MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe Title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME12.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Industry) Mr David Bahati):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question at the House does resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE12.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to  report that the Committee of the Whole House, has considered the Bill entitled; “The Agricultural Chemicals Control (Amendment) Bill, 2024” and passed it with amendments. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable minister.12.10THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Industry) Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412.11THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Agricultural Chemicals Control (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the third time and do pass. THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the Agricultural Chemical Control (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read the third time and do pass.(Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED “THE AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS CONTROL (AMENDMENT)ACT,2024”THE SPEAKER:  Title settled and Bill passes. Congratulations! Next –BILLSSECOND READINGTHE DAIRY INDUSTRY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, before we go to that, in the public gallery this morning we students and teachers from Munta Royal College, Katikamu South, Luwero. Represented by Hon. Hassan Kirumira and Hon. Brenda Nabukenya. you are most welcome and you are very smart. Thank you, for coming, please come again.Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this morning, we have a delegation from the British High Commission and Westminster Foundation for Democracy, they include:  1. Mr Simon Harris, the Second Secretary, British High Commission; 2. Mr Isam Norris, Uganda Desk Officer, Foreign and Common Development Officer in London;  [Ms Okori-Moe] THE DAIRY INDUSTRY (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412957THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 20243. Mr Joseph Westminster Foundation for Democracy, Country Director, Uganda; and 4. Mr Keith Mutebi, the Political Officer, British High Commission. You are all most welcome to the Parliament of Uganda and as you know, we are one of the Commonwealth parliaments. Therefore, while here, feel at home. This is your Parliament. Next-12.14THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Industry) (Mr David Bahati):   Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Dairy Industry (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the second time. THE SPEAKER:  The Bill is seconded by the Whole House; all the cattle keepers are here. Can you justify your Bill? MR BAHATI:  The object of the Bill is in line with the policy of rationalisation of Government departments to save resources, improve on efficiency and effectiveness in the manner that we provide services to the people of Uganda. We believe that by mainstreaming and rationalising the Dairy Cooperation within the ministry, we will provide that opportunity for the ministry to offer even better services to the people of Uganda. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we need better services for the diary –(Laughter) – and that is the justification that is being given by the minister. We are talking about the Dairy Corporation, the Milkers. Yes, honourable chairperson?12.16THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES (Mr Janet Okori-Moe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  We need a summary.MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Speaker, you may have to protect me from the minister who has been delegated. THE SPEAKER:  What is –?MS OKORI-MOE:  He is telling me to over-summarise. ( Laughter ) I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Dairy Industry (Amendment) Bill, 2024. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Please lay. MS OKORI-MOE:  In the same vein, I beg to lay the minutes of the Committee meetings held while considering the Bill on the animal industry. THE SPEAKER:  Please lay.MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Committee on Agriculture on the Dairy Industry (Amendment) Bill, 2024. The Dairy Development Authority is a semi-autonomous agency which was established by the Dairy Industry Act, 1998 and operationalised by the Dairy Marketing and Processing of Milk and Milk Products Regulations, 2003. The mandate of the authority is to develop and regulate the Dairy Industry in Uganda through the provision of development and regulatory services that will ensure increased production and consumption of milk, sustainable and profitable dairy industry that will contribute to economic development and the nutritional standards in Uganda. The authority implements its mandate through the regional approach, model approach covering south-western, eastern, north-eastern, central, northern and mid-western regions. The Diary Development Authority has its presence at some of the main diary entry and exit border points include Malaba, Busia, Mutukula and Entebbe International Airport, with access to Uganda Revenue Authority’s Automated 12958MINISTERIAL STATEMENTSystems for Customs Data (ASYCUDA) system to clear dairy consignments. The objective and justification for the Bill has already been said by the minister; it is the same for the rest of the RAPEX Bills.Madam Speaker, there are questions that this Bill raises, namely:1. Whether there are mandate overlaps between the Dairy Development Authority (DDA) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;2. Whether the Dairy Development Authority has served the purpose for which it was established; and3. Whether Dairy Development Authority’s cost of administration drain the Treasury at the expense of service delivery. Committee’s findings and recommendations According to the Dairy Industry Act, the authority is mandated to develop and regulate the dairy industry in Uganda by providing development and regulatory services that will ensure increased production and consumption of milk as well as ensure a sustainable and profitable dairy sector that will contribute to economic development and nutritional standards – I had already said this. Section 5 of the Dairy Industry Act mandates the authority to register and license milk processors, traders and dairy farmers’ groups and to support farmers’ marketing organisations. The authority also advises and enforces milk standards, according to established standards by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. The committee notes that the authority has fulfilled the above mandate by carrying out the activities as outlined;(a) Registration;(b) Inspection;(c) Sampling and analysis of milk and milk products for chemical and microbiological analysis for adulterants and contaminants in accordance with international standards; (d) The authority also carries out a sensory evaluation of milk and milk products, and has set up a national analytical laboratory at Lugogo in Kampala; the agency has on-spot milk testing mobile laboratory vans; (e) It also does rehabilitation of milk cold chain infrastructure in those areas that have been mentioned. For purposes of time, Members can read those districts; (f) Value addition training and skilling at Entebbe Dairy Training School;(g) Establishment of milk and milk products traceability system. The system starts from the milk collection and bulking centres through the value chain to the processing lines and, eventually, to the final product; and (h) Market access through the promotion of domestic milk consumption and market access to regional and international markets. The committee notes that while DDA has restored the dairy sector, which had collapsed following the dissolution of dairy cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has, at the same time, maintained a dairy division over the years. However, the committee has not been able to establish the performance of this division under the ministry. Increased production and market potential for the dairy sector The committee notes that at the inception of DDA, the dairy industry had collapsed. The cold chain infrastructure had collapsed. By 1986, milk collection was 3,043,000 litres annually.With the interventions of DDA since 2000, milk production has increased from 2.7 billion litres, in 2019 to 3.9 billion litres by 2023. The milk collection centres have increased from about 15 in 1986 to 547 in 2023. Milk processing companies have increased from just one – Dairy Corporation Limited – with a processing capacity of 60,000 litres per day in 1986, to 160 processing companies today with a processing capacity of 3.9 million litres per day. [Ms Okori-Moe] THE DAIRY INDUSTRY (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412959THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024Madam Speaker, the country has 87 high-volume milk-producing districts, mainly in the Cattle Corridor, which have cattle keeping as a source of livelihood. The dairy industry employs about 12 million people, majorly in rural areas. The dairy value chain is driven by smallholder farmers, whom we represent in this House, input and service providers, milk collectors, milk bulkers, transporters, traders and processors, among others.In addition, the industry provides food and income for more than 40 per cent of the population of the country. Under the DDA, dairy exports have more than tripled from Shs 287.4 billion to Shs 976.4 billion, from 2019 to 2023. Uganda is now poised to enter the Algerian market, estimated at $500 million annually, negotiated by His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda. The export markets require that exporting countries be routinely inspected by competent and autonomous regulatory authorities to ensure the safety and quality of the dairy products. This requires efficient milk production, regulation and maintenance of strict quality standards that this rationalisation risks jeopardising. The table below shows the trend of milk production in the country from 2018 to 2023 – and it is clear. Honourable colleagues can analyse for themselves.Madam Speaker, Table 2 shows the installed capacity of milk processing factories from 2019 to 2023. Table 3 shows the value of dairy exports from 2019 to 2023, which I have already talked about. International accreditationMadam Speaker, National Dairy Analytical Laboratory, under DDA, is in its final stages of attaining full accreditation, having been awarded recognition certification under ISO 17025, which certifies all dairy products’ test results for the export market. The accreditation facilitates trade in dairy products and reduces the cost of doing business, to make the country’s dairy products competitive. The committee concludes that the rationalisation of DDA will affect the regulatory gains already achieved and may adversely affect the markets, both secure and prospective. Mainstreaming DDA will jeopardise the ongoing process of recognition and accreditation that are critical for market access. Rationalisation will negatively affect the planned infrastructure development of the milk value chain. Whether the Dairy Development Authority’s cost of administration drains the Treasury at the expense of service deliveryWage Bill of DDAMadam Speaker, DDA has an approved staff establishment of 140 positions, but 91 positions are filled. All the staff are on contract. Sixty-three per cent of DDA staff are scientists, earning less than the approved Government science scale. The certificate of financial implications provides that only 10 staff (11 per cent) will be laid off, although it is not clear whether the remaining 81 staff, which constitute 89 per cent will be moved with the agency’s functions to the ministry. The certificate of financial implications puts the total cost in terminal benefits for the laid-off staff at Shs 0.53 billion. The certificate of financial implications has estimated net savings amounting to Shs 11.02 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025 and Shs 11.5 billion in the subsequent financial years, as a result of rationalisation. Madam Speaker, compared to the projected budget for the Financial Year 2024/2025, which stands at Shs 18.16 billion, Shs 6.16 billion will be required to facilitate functions of the Dairy Development Authority under the ministry. The savings on the rationalisation are unrealistic because, for instance, the entire 12960MINISTERIAL STATEMENTwage is considered as a saving, yet 89 per cent of the staff will be retained and, thus, must be paid. Furthermore, other savings such as physical assets that will be relieved, have not been reported on.The committee notes that rationalising the Dairy Development Authority (DDA) will not lead to the anticipated savings as stated in the Certificate of Financial Implications. Furthermore, noting that 63 per cent of the DDA staff are scientists who will be put on a high science salary scale upon joining the ministry. This will instead increase the wage bill rather than savings.On the value of dairy products, Uganda processes several dairy products which are exported to various countries. In the Financial Year 2022/2023, milk powder was the most exported product, accounting for about 54.2 per cent of the total exports, followed by UHT milk at 33.1 per cent. The Table below shows the distribution of dairy exports by product and value during the Financial Year 2022/2023. It is displayed there for Members to see.Madam Speaker, Table 2 shows the distribution of dairy exports by destination countries in the Financial Year 2022/2023. It has the Country, the Value in Uganda Shillings and the Products we export to those countries.The committee notes that with the intervention of DDA, the dairy industry was able to access international markets as a result of quality assurance and certified dairy products.5.4 Privatisation of the dairy industry The committee noted that when the Government divested the Dairy Corporation, the private sector was given full responsibility to collect, transport, market and process milk. This requires a robust, efficient and effective regulatory framework which has been created on the premise of the Dairy Industry Act, 1998 which is being implemented by DDA.The dairy industry has attracted many investors, both local and foreign who receive timely responses to the challenges they may be experiencing. The committee observed that rationalisation of DDA would compromise quality assurance and safety. The private sector is largely profit-oriented and puts less attention to consumer protection of quality and safety. Without a specialised agency, the quality of dairy products will be compromised. The committee further observed that over the years, the country has witnessed the rejection of other food exports directly under the ministry. However, due to the hands-on interventions by the DDA that built a robust regulatory framework, this country has never experienced rejections of dairy products on the international market and this is attributed to the hard work and commitment of the DDA.Madam Speaker, the DDA staff work 24 hours to ensure that the final consumer enjoys safe and quality dairy products. This will be impossible when DDA is mainstreamed.Madam Speaker, on the Agency Model for the dairy industry, the committee noted that the world over, the dairy subsector is regulated by autonomous entities as illustrated in the table below. Kenya, Tanzania, and Israel have it. These are the countries that are the main buyers of milk and milk products from Uganda based on the fact that there is a specific regulatory body to ensure compliance with dairy standards and regulations along the value chain, including milk production, collection, transportation, marketing, processing, and milk consumption advocacy, among others. Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee opines that the export of milk and milk products requires observance of safety and quality standards, and regulations along the dairy value chain. It is also important to note that milk is a perishable product and it is [Ms Okori-Moe] THE DAIRY INDUSTRY (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412961THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024mainly driven by smallholder farmers, input and service providers, milk collectors, milk bulkers, transporters, traders, and processors, among others. DDA carries out activities which are geared towards achieving middle-income status as envisioned in Vision 2024 where dairy was prioritised as a strategic commodity to realise the country’s agro-industrialisation programme.Therefore, rationalising DDA will erode the above achievements and lead to a loss of livelihoods for the people. Because the justification for rationalisation of Government agencies does not apply to DDA. The committee recommends that the Dairy Industry (Amendment) Bill, 2024 is not passed by this House. (Applause)Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  I can see all the milk-takers. The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) is next. Honourable members, the items we are looking at are all related. Let us go to NAADS now. Move a motion on NAADS, honourable minister.Honourable members, we will come back Bill by Bill and if you want to debate, you will mention what you are debating on whether it is on milk, tea, cotton, coffee or NAADS.BILLSSECOND READINGTHE COTTON DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Yes, honourable minister.12.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the second time.THE SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded? Okay, it is seconded by Hon. Acon, Hon. Linda, Hon. Alanyo, Hon. Naboth, Hon. Felix, Hon. Derrick, Hon. Frank, Hon. Kivumbi, Hon. Christine, Hon. Xavier, Hon. Jenipher, Hon. Nathan, Hon. Ojok, Hon. Cissy Namujju, Hon. Wilson, Hon. Yona, Hon. Emmanuel, honourable member of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, Hon. “Ssabakurisito ” and the Members of Parliament from Hoima, Sheema, Karamoja, Moroto, Arua, Kakumiro, Nakawa and Masaka.Would you like to speak to your Bill – Hon. Alanyo, I was told your uniform is made out of cotton.12.37THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, the cotton industry now contributes more than $900 million to our economy. We are importing goods and products made out of cotton worth $1 billion. This sector needs to be strengthened and the Government is of the view that the Cotton Development Authority be mainstreamed into the ministry to bring that efficiency and effectiveness that all of us desire. This is the purpose of this Bill, and this is the move that we think the honourable colleagues should support so that we strengthen the sector. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:   Honourable members, I am told some Members of Parliament are up in the canteen please come down. Honourable Commissioner, I need MPs. Chairperson, can you - do not over-summarise the way the Minister was telling you. You read it.11.07THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 2024. I beg to lay. 12962MINISTERIAL STATEMENTMadam Speaker, in the same vein, I beg to lay the minutes of the committee meetings while considering the Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 2024. I beg to lay. THE SPEAKER:  Please lay.MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Speaker, the Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill was read for the first time on 4 April 2024 and referred to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in accordance with Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure and the committee now reports.The background to the Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill is the same as for the other Bills of the Rationalisation of Government Agencies and public Expenditure (RAPEX), some of which we have already gone through, and I would not want to go through the background to rationalisation.The Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) was established by the Cotton Development Act, CAP 30. It is a statutory body responsible for the promotion of cotton, as well as the monitoring of the production, marketing, and processing of cotton in Uganda. The CDO carries out generic inspections and certifications and gives guidance to farmers and ginners on seed cotton and lint quality, as well as on packaging requirements, as provided for by the Cotton Development Act, CAP 30. Cotton is the third most important cash crop for Uganda, after coffee and tea. It is grown in 72 districts of the country. It is a raw material from which several products are derived, including uniforms for the Uganda Wildlife Authority, Uganda People’s Defence Forces, police, prisons, and other security agencies. In Uganda, the key products are: textiles and garments, edible oil, seed cake for livestock feed, soap and cotton wool for medical purposes, and masks. Cotton, therefore, contributes to the industrialisation of the country through factories such as ginneries, textile mills, edible oil mills, soap factories, and cotton wool manufacturing factories, among others. It is estimated that the cotton sub-sector, directly and indirectly, employs 2.5 million people as farmers and farm workers, cotton seed buyers, transporters, ginnery workers, cotton exporters, textile and garment manufacturers, and oil millers. The CDO is mandated to promote the production, monitoring, marketing, and processing of cotton and represent all aspects of the cotton subsector. The CDO’s activities contribute to four of the six agro-industrialisation objectives, which are: increasing agricultural production and productivity, improving post-service handling, improving agro-processing and value addition, and strengthening institutional coordination. The cotton sub-sector has major segments - production, research, ginning, marketing, quality and standards, and value addition. Cotton, having one of the longest agricultural commodity value chains, was identified as one of the strategic commodities under NDP III’s agro-industrialisation program among the 18 priority commodities for the country. The justification for this Bill raises three questions, namely: 1. Whether there are mandate overlaps between the Uganda Cotton Development Organisation and the Ministry of Agriculture; 2. Whether the Uganda Cotton Development Organisation has served the purpose for which it was established; and 3. Whether the Uganda Cotton Development Organisation’s cost of administration drained the Treasury at the expense of service delivery. Committee observations 5.1  Whether there are mandate overlaps between the CDO and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAIF) [Ms Okori-Moe] THE COTTON DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412963THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024The Cotton Development Organisation was established in 1994 by an Act of Parliament to monitor the production, processing and marketing of cotton so as to enhance the quality of lint exported and locally sold, and to promote the distribution of high-quality cotton seeds, and generally to facilitate the development of the cotton industry. The CDO is mandated to set standards for Uganda’s seed cotton and lint against international standards, as provided for under section 5 of the Act. CDO is also a member of the International Cotton Association, Liverpool, and the Bremen Cotton Exchange, to set quality standards for Uganda’s cotton, without which the cotton would not be traded in. Every two years, CDO presents its standards to these bodies for approval and accreditation. The approved standards are used for trading Ugandan cotton on the international market. CDO is also responsible for determining the farm gate prices at the commencement of the cotton market season based on the market price analysis. This function of setting the standards requires a specialised body accredited internationally - there is no gabbling here - to monitor the production, processing, and marketing of cotton and the development of the cotton industry. Madam Speaker, the Committee notes that in countries such as Kenya, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Malawi, which liberalised their cotton industry without setting up a regulator like CDO, the subsector has collapsed, and cotton is no more in those countries. (Applause)The committee observes that regulating on-farm and off-farm cotton activities is a function that requires full-time attention and presence by a specialised agency that is internationally accredited. Such a role is not duplicated anywhere in the mandates of MAIF or any other government agency. Accreditation can only be done by a body corporate, thus, the need to maintain CDO. 5.2 Whether CDO has served the purpose for which it was established CDO is charged with monitoring the production, processing and marketing of cotton in Uganda. It is also responsible for developing cotton planting seeds, and cotton planting seeds, which are the most difficult among the crops to process. It is not like maize where you get just a cob and you plant those seeds. This one is a process.  (Laughter)  It is also responsible for developing cotton planting seeds and maintaining the quality of the seed through strict regulations.  The entity has also put in place third party ginnery monitoring systems to ensure that the quality of seed cotton entering the ginnery meets the requisite standards. In order to ensure that the ginneries comply with the standards, CDO has put in place a cotton classing laboratory at Cotton House in Kampala, which is equipped with two High V olume Instrument (HVI) testing machines for the computerised fibre testing to carry out manual classing of cotton lint, prepare Fair Average Quality (FAQ) standards of cotton seed to guide ginners during the marketing period and to provide technical advice on cotton quality issues for the cotton stakeholders. Madam Speaker, CDO is currently carrying out cotton seed development under the value addition component from which seeds are supplied to 13 oil millers. Cotton seeds are so unique, like I said earlier, and are not easy to get on the market and are developed by specialised teams, not gamblers. (Laughter)  This is a continuous activity, season after season. The table below shows the contribution of cotton to the household incomes of farmers and foreign exchange earnings. Cotton contributes 14 per cent to agricultural exports as displayed in the table. The committee observes thus: (a) Monitoring cotton production, processing and marketing plus quality control, requires swiftness and high levels of 12964MINISTERIAL STATEMENTefficiency which can only be provided by a specialised and accredited agency like CDO;(b) With the overwhelming demand for textile products in Uganda and abroad, the task ahead is so enormous that it requires empowering and supporting CDO to mobilise farmers to grow more cotton, quality assurance, consolidate and build on its achievements. Mainstreaming CDO into MAAIF will, therefore, lead to failure to promote quality cotton and loss of market. Now that we are discouraging second-hand clothes, it is better that we emphasise this. (Applause)  5.3 Whether the cotton – (Ms Auma rose_) - thank you, my deputy chairperson, for doing a service to a sister. The other question is whether CDO’s costs of administration drain the treasury at the expense of service delivery. Cotton remains an important cash crop in Uganda, ranked third after coffee and tea. It is the main source of income for about 250,000 households, who cultivate cotton under rain-fed conditions with minimal use of inputs such as fertilisers and chemicals. CDO over the years has painstakingly built the cotton quality system through rigorous training of staff and investment in cotton laboratories. CDO runs a modern cotton classing laboratory with internationally accredited cotton classers, which has resulted in the recognition of Ugandan cotton in the international market where it fetches a premium price. Cotton being a seasonal crop requires the timely supply of viable planting seed. CDO has maintained the quality of cotton planting seeds through the strict regulation of ginning and management of cotton seed. When you go to the recently constructed processing facility in Pader District, you will see what we are talking about. CDO staff have built expertise over time and currently, a Ugandan who is a cotton classifier now serves on the International Cotton Association/Bremen Cotton Exchange (ICA Bremen) Cotton Testing Laboratory Certification Committee. Despite the above achievements, the Government of Uganda during the Financial Year 2023/2024, allocated only Shs 5.37 billion to the CDO. Sometimes allocation is Shs 2 billion. The CDO has been an underfunded entity, yet over 250,000 households in Uganda survive on cotton. Besides the allocated funds and being a marginalised sub-sector, CDO was able to contribute Shs 4.1 billion as NTR to the Consolidated Fund. The agency is mainly supported by the private sector. I do not know how the private sector can accept to be merged under a government entity. The committee knows that the Certificate of Financial Implications provided by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development only focuses on the savings calculated based on non-taxable revenues contributed by the sector without valuing the technical advice and quality assurance provided by CDO. In conclusion, the committee is alive to the Government’s intentions to revive the cotton production value chain, investment in apparel for export and garment production in the country.The committee further appreciates the role played by CDO in promoting quality cotton production and market access. CDO is a member of international cotton standard bodies; the International Cotton Advisory Committee, the International Cotton Association - Liverpool and Bremen Cotton Exchange. To be a member of these cotton standard bodies, it is a requirement for a country to have a cotton regulatory body for purposes of standards enforcement. Without a cotton regulatory body, it will be difficult to sell Ugandan cotton on the international market at a premium price.  The committee, therefore, notes that justification to rationalise the Cotton [Ms Okori-Moe] THE COTTON DEVELOPMENT (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412965THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024Development Organisation is not tenable and not good for the economy, and recommends that the Bill entitled, “The Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 2024” should not be passed. This is also in line with the committee report. I beg to report. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, committee chairperson. Next item.BILLSECOND READINGTHE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, can you move a motion? 12.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Agricultural Advisory Services – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen. If you want to achieve what you want, first listen. We are now on food security.  MR BAHATI:  I am moving that the Bill entitled, “The National Agricultural Advisory Services (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read for the second time. THE SPEAKER:  Is the motion seconded? Member for Rukungiri, is the motion seconded? Hon. Emigu, Hon. Mbwatekamwa, is the motion seconded? Okay, it has been seconded by the whole House. Would you want to speak to your motion?MR DA VID BAHATI :  Madam Speaker, as we have stated in the Bills to rationalise and mainstream, this particular Bill is aimed at streamlining the services of the National Agricultural Advisory Services Program (NAADS) into the ministry. Colleagues, it is important to note that we are not taking away the roles and responsibilities of giving advice to our farmers. We are only trying to combine and merge administration costs so that we can provide services in a more effective and efficient manner; it is important that we listen to this argument. We already have extension services under the Ministry of Agriculture. So, our extension staff are already in every Sub county. We have a research department under the ministry. Therefore, bringing NAADS into the ministry, working together –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, please continue, do not allow disruption.MR BAHATI:  Working together with the extension services department, the research and development department and the advisory services will actually offer better services to the country. I know that your secondment of this motion was actually in support of mainstreaming these services. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Minister, since you were even given full powers, you were supposed to have given us our seeds during this session. (Laughter)1.00THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRIES AND FISHERIES (Mr Janet Okori-Moe):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries of the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) Amendment Bill, 2024. THE SPEAKER:  Please lay. MS OKORI-MOE:  In the same vein, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee meetings while considering the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) Amendment Bill 2024. 12966MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE CHAIRPERSON:  Please lay.MS OKORI-MOE:  Madam Speaker, I now beg to present the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) (Amendment) Bill, 2024. This Bill was also read for the first time on the 4th of April and referred to the committee and the committee now wishes to report. The National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADs) was established by the National Agricultural Advisory Services Act, 2001. The mandate of NAADS, focuses on the following strategic objectives to contribute to the agro-industrialisation program, to increase access to critical:1. To increase -THE CHAIRPERSON: There is a procedural matter.MR OTIMGIW:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is one of the Bills we are truly interested in and we have read it very well. If the chairperson could just give us the observation and recommendation because we have really read this report. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Please summarise. MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, honourable colleagues, for that positive gesture. I now go straight to the committee findings and observations. Like I had earlier said with the other Bills, the justification for this Bill also raises questions and those are the questions that the committee made observations on and now makes recommendations. Madam Speaker, NAADS was established by the National Agricultural Advisory Services(NAADS) Act. Sections 5 and 6 of the Act empower the organisation to promote food security, nutrition, household income, provide agricultural advisory services, and support technical development and linkages with farmers, among other duties. Distribution of inputs for major food crops like maize, beans, bananas and all the rest that are lined up, has been the role of NAADs and this has led to increased agricultural production and productivity and promoted food security. The committee notes that cash crops like tea and cocoa, which have no regulatory agency, are being promoted by NAADS. As a result of NAADS’ interventions, production in the tea sector has steadily increased, with the country producing 81,675 metric tons of tea in 2022, worth $88.36 million, in comparison to 50,055 tons produced in 2017. Since Members are very fast readers and have read all those figures, I want to go straight to the observations. The committee observes that NAADS has critical ongoing projects which are aligned with Government priorities, like increasing household incomes, import substitution, poverty eradication and market access. NAADS has contributed to the transformation of households from the subsistence economy from 68 per cent to 39 per cent and these are figures from UBOS, statistical abstract 2022 and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries studies statistical abstract, 2023. The rationalisation of NAADs will lead to a reversal of the achievements attained so far.Madam Speaker, the committee also notes that Uganda has achieved relative food security and has become the food basket for the East African Region, and this is through the efforts of NAADs. About 40.1 per cent of households have achieved a balanced diet and 45 per cent consume three meals per day, an increase from 40 per cent, in 2015. The rationalisation of NAADs will further lead to a reversal of the food security gains and it is the only entity that has been managing food security interventions. On whether NAADS has served the purpose for which it was established, the committee noted THE NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL ADVISORY SERVICES (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412967THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024that increased production of high-value crops has stimulated the establishment of processing facilities. For instance, five foreign investors have established Hass Avocado processing factories in Namanve, Buikwe, Nakaseke, Kasese and Kyenjojo districts. The handling of the avocado produced has improved through these investors who can utilise and add value to all the Avocado produced in Uganda and generate more export earnings under the guidance of NAADS.Madam Speaker, ensuring food security is a key constitutional responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries that NAADS is better placed to deliver as a frontline agency of the Ministry.Secondly, this is an ongoing and not a term responsibility that needs to be maintained. NAADS has become the face of the ministry with farmers throughout the country, and a household name in most of families. The committee does not believe that the ministry can substitute NAADS on food security and perform in this endeavour.On whether the NAADs administration costs are so high that they drain the Treasury at the expense of service delivery, the committee notes that the claimed savings are more than the projected budget for the Financial Year 2024/2025 by Shs 67.88 billion. This is unbelievable, as NAADS has been allocated only Shs 35.5 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025. This is the analysis of the certificate of financial implication for NAADS. The committee also notes that although NAADS does not collect non-tax revenue, it is an important player in the agricultural value chain, which is the mainstay of Uganda’s economy. The current level of GDP export growth and employment creation is majorly based on agricultural production that NAADS has helped to grow and sustain. It would be reckless to mainstream NAADS into the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and risk this gain. Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the pivotal role played by NAADS in filling the gaps in the agricultural sector and providing demand-driven services, in line with modern agricultural trends and global market demands, cannot be overemphasised. This calls for strengthening of the institution, rather than mainstreaming it into the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The committee, therefore, recommends that the National Agricultural Advisory Services (Amendment) Bill, 2024, for purposes of food security and value addition, should not be passed. (Applause)Madam Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Let us go to the last one.BILLSSECOND READINGTHE NATIONAL COFFEE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister.1.12THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee (Amendment) Bill, 2024,” be read the second time. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the motion seconded? Honourable members, we are seconding the motion for the Bill to be read for the second time. (Members rose_) Okay, it is seconded by the whole House. Honourable minister, can you substantiate?MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in 1986 –THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you come in, I have some youngsters up there in the public gallery. They are 12968MINISTERIAL STATEMENTstudents and teachers from Kings’ Norton International School, located in Wakiso. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Medard Lubega-Sseggona and Hon. Ethel Naluyima. (Applause)  Stand up and we see you. You are most welcome. Thank you for coming. (Applause)  Please, have a seat.Yes, honourable minister - is the chairperson of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development here? Where? Deputy? Okay. Please, come.MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, in justifying this Bill, in 1986, our country was exporting 4.5 million bags of coffee. As we speak, because of the good programmes and support that we have given to this sector, we are producing more than 20 million bags of coffee. (Applause)The same Government that has been able to put in place this support and effort supporting the coffee sector is the same Government that has realised some gaps in this sector. We think that the gaps that we have in the sector, mainly to do with research and development and close supervision, can be cured by mainstreaming the Uganda Coffee Development Authority into the ministry.I can appreciate the mood in the House and I pray that you allow this important Bill to reach the third stage so that you can appreciate the amendments that we are bringing forth. If we put the Uganda Coffee Development Authority under the ministry, it would be supported more, in terms of research and development. We will support the vision of growing the exports of our country. Therefore, in my opinion, and in the opinion of the Government, this will actually not affect the roles and responsibilities of the Uganda Coffee Development Authority; it will only look at the administration. So, Madam Speaker, I recommend that this Bill be given an opportunity to reach the third stage. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. (Members rose_) We have not started a debate. Committee chairperson, give us a summary. 1.16THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the National Coffee (Amendment) Bill, 2024. In the same vein, I beg to lay the minutes of the meetings of the committee while we considered the National Coffee (Amendment Bill), 2024. Madam Speaker, I now beg to present the report of the Committee on Agricultural, Animal Industry and Fisheries the National Coffee (Amendment) Bill, 2024. This Bill was also read for the first time on the 4th of April and referred to the committee.The Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) is a statutory body established in 1991 by the Uganda Coffee Development Authority Act, Cap. 325, which was repealed and replaced by the National Coffee Act, No. 17 of 2021. It was formed following the coffee sub-sector reforms and market liberalisation programme in 1990 which resulted into the separation of the regulatory and trading functions and the monopoly in the export of coffee that existed then. Madam Speaker, the minister has already given the object and justification for the Bill. The justification raises some questions on:1. Whether there are mandate overlaps between the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF);2. Whether UCDA has served the purpose for which it was established; and3.    Whether Uganda Coffee Development Authority’s costs of administration drained the Treasury at the expense of service delivery. [The Speaker] THE NATIONAL COFFEE (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412969THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024In consideration of this Bill, the committee met those ministries, did a documentary review of those documents, and the committee received a long list of 28 written submissions from those entities. Buganda Cultural and Development Foundation -Honourable colleagues, you can read them; they include Obukama  bwa Bunyoro-Kitara and others. All these wrote their written submissions to make a case for UCDA not to be merged and all these are value-chain actors in the coffee sub-sector. (Applause) Committee findings and observationsThe committee established that UCDA derives its mandate from the National Coffee Act, 2021. Under sections 4 and 5, the functions of UCDA are to regulate all on-farm and off-farm activities in the coffee value chain, promote and oversee the quality of coffee along the value chain, support research and development, promote production and improve the marketing of coffee to optimise earnings for coffee stakeholders in the country. The committee notes that UCDA plays a pivotal role in overseeing coffee quality to ensure compliance with export contracts and international food safety standards. The committee notes that in order to sustain the European markets that constitute 65 per cent of Ugandan coffee sales - THE SPEAKER: Procedure. MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have read the Bill and are well-versed - THE SPEAKER: You have read the report? MR MUZAALE: Yes. We are well-versed with what is in the report. We only request that, for purposes of saving time, we go to observations and conclusions. (Interruption)  Madam Speaker, you read the mood of the House? THE SPEAKER: No, I have not read anything. (Laughter)MR MUZAALE: Okay, Madam Speaker - THE SPEAKER: I am ready to put the question.MR MUZAALE: That is very good. Madam Speaker, my procedural matter is basically to - THE SPEAKER: Summarise. MR MUZAALE: Yes. Thank you, Madam Speaker. MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Speaker, now I can over-summarise, judging from the mood of the House. The committee concluded that there is no duplication of UCDA’s mandate with MAAIF or any Government agency. The committee observes that the coffee sector is an important export earner that should be independently regulated to meet the demands of the export market. The civil service mode of operation and service delivery cannot efficiently undertake and deliver this mandate. It is important to note that UCDA has increased the production volumes of coffee from 3.5 million 60-kgs bags in 2014/15 to 8.06 million 60-kgs bags currently with a medium-term target of 20 million bags by 2029/2030. Merging the mandate and abolishing UCDA risks derailing this very critical target.5.2 Whether UCDA has served the purpose for which it was establishedThe committee notes that the Government of Uganda is committed to achieving a target of producing 20 million 60-kg bags of coffee by 2030 as per the Coffee Roadmap launched by H.E President of the Republic of Uganda, on 13 April 2017 and it has been coordinated by Dr Ezra Suruma, the former Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 12970MINISTERIAL STATEMENTUCDA has distributed seedlings and this is likely to increase production as the country looks towards achieving the coffee roadmap. Madam Speaker, Vietnam learned about coffee from us, but because of their robust arrangements of not moving forward and backward, they achieved what we intend to achieve in 2030 and 2015. Figure 1 shows the trend of coffee export volumes and value from 2003-2004 to 2022-2023 in million dollars. Quality assurance and research The committee observes that coffee quality control requires swiftness; there is no postponement, and high levels of efficiency, which is best provided under the agency model. Despite the commendable achievements by UCDA, the task ahead is enormous and requires empowering and supporting UCDA to sustain, consolidate and build on its achievements. Mainstreaming UCDA into MAAIF risks failure to promote quality coffee, affects research efforts and may lead to market information asymmetry. It will also jeopardise critical functions leading to adverse effects on Uganda’s coffee exports and global competitiveness. According to the organogram provided by the Ministry of Public Service, coffee is supposed to go under a division under the Department for Agricultural Production. Madam Speaker, the committee concludes that the mandate of UCDA is never ending. Areas like Karamoja have just been brought on board and other parts of the country. (Applause) It promotes one of our key export earners that has a multiplier effect throughout the economy, creating jobs, supporting livelihoods and resulting in economic growth and development. This mandate is better served by the agency model of coffee development in line with other coffee exporting countries. The committee notes that the experience of Kenya and Ethiopia on rationalisation resulted in reduced coffee production on exports and these countries have now adopted the agency model such as UCDA.Uganda is the seventh largest coffee producer globally and is ranked third in terms of quality coffee. In Africa, Uganda stands second in coffee production and the first in exports. With the proposed rationalisation of UCDA, Uganda risks losing these gains due to red tape and bureaucracies.On whether UCDA cost of administration drains the Treasury at the expense of service delivery, Table 1 shows the Non-Tax Revenue collections by UCDA for the last five years. The budget estimates for the Financial Year 2024 put the UCDA budget at Shs 44.76 billion. The certificate of financial implication indicates the net saving as a result of rationalisation will amount to Shs 82.19 billion in the Financial Year 2024/2025, which will be Shs 38.54 billion more than the projected budget. The committee, therefore, notes that the CFI on coffee is inaccurate. The savings claimed will not be realised as indicated in the Certificate of Financial Implication.I have already talked about the coffee roadmap. It was next, where we intend to achieve 20 million bags of 60-kilogram of coffee by 2030 and the country is not about to retract from the coffee roadmap unless maybe the House will be informed about any new developments concerning that.5.5 Comparative analysis with other top coffee-producing countriesThe committee observed that in all successful coffee-producing countries, coffee is regulated by specialised agencies. The agency model has proven to be efficient in most coffee-producing countries in the world. [Ms Okori-Moe] THE NATIONAL COFFEE (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412971THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024When you go to table two, it shows countries with a specialised agent model for coffee, including the number one coffee exporting country and producer which is Brazil, and even Vietnam, which is now number two globally. Those are the statistics of the success of the agency model in the countries that are coffee growing. The committee, therefore, notes that to achieve increased coffee production, promote quality assurance, and exploit market opportunities, the Government needs to empower UCDA to remain a semi-autonomous agency to promote coffee production and marketing. Recently the AU declared coffee a crop for the continent and we are the pearl of Africa. ConclusionThe committee is alive to the need for a comprehensive and responsive law that addresses the production, processing, storage, and sale of all cash crops in the country. The committee further appreciates the role UCDA has played in promoting good quality coffee and opening up markets that have helped farmers get better prices. Mainstreaming UCDA into the Civil Service will negatively affect the achievements Uganda has attained in quality coffee production and export and access to the international market, thus stunting economic growth and development. UCDA has invested heavily in coffee quality assurance, the reason Uganda has displaced other countries in the global markets. Coffee quality control requires swiftness. Uganda’s coffee processing engineers are currently deployed to monitor quality compliance of 560 primary processors, 22 washing stations, 23 roasters, 704 buying stores, and 37 export grading stores on a day-to-day basis. Any delays in the enforcement of quality standards with any of the value chain actors will negatively affect the quality of coffee and Uganda’s competitiveness in the global market. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill entitled, “The National Coffee (Amendment) Bill, 2024” should not be passed by this House. I beg to report.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable chairperson, for the reports. I want to hear something from the minister who was in charge of the Rationalisation of Agencies and Public Expenditure (RAPEX). What was the basis for rationalising those four entities? Let us hear from him because this did not come from the President. It came from the minister responsible who advised the President and that was the basis and that is how it went to Cabinet. I want to hear from the RAPEX minister.MR KABANDA:  Madam Speaker, I do not want to debate –THE SPEAKER:  He is a secretary-general.MR KABANDA:  I am the Secretary-General of the Patriotic League of Uganda. Madam Speaker, I do not want to debate now, but I want you to forgive the minister, on my behalf and on behalf of all the patriots. I implore and also request the minister because yesterday, I heard him say that some Members have been bribed by some entities - that they have been mobilised. I request you, honourable minister - In some cases, you go with a win-win situation. There are some areas where you have won, and in other areas where you lose, you accept to lose. Like this one, you can read the mood. Do not go to the President and blackmail Parliament, the Speaker, or fellow ministers that they have failed to defend this. You can see by yourself that it is not easy to defend this. Accept the loss, as we have also accepted that you win in some areas because we have mainstreamed some agencies. Accept that UCDA, Cotton, Dairy Corporation and NAADS should stay; accept losing this one. I beg to submit. (Applause)  1.36THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker –12972MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE SPEAKER:  The worst thing is when you lead a House where Members are predictable, like what Hon. Kabanda has said. You are leading the House, advise us. MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Speaker, indeed I have been in the House and I have read, heard, and seen. But, I think that in line with our democratic process and the right ushered in, of course, by the NRM Government; the right to be heard, and also to put the other alternative, I think it is in order that I say something. I am a person of very few words and I am not going to take a lot of time such that –THE SPEAKER:  By the way, honourable minister, I am not saying you withdraw the Bill.MR MURULI MUKASA: That is right, you have not said it. To make my stand quite clear, I am not in, in spite of the plea that has been given, to say, let us withdraw or not. However, let us briefly listen to the other alternative and then it is your prerogative to make a decision. Madam Speaker, one thing that is clear is that there has been a policy shift regarding these agencies, which has been codenamed RAPEX. This policy shift has been championed by the Government, arising from a long history of service delivery, which was recommended by the Public Service Review Commission, way back even before I came on the scene. Many changes have taken place until we have reached this moment, where I came in championing a fresh look at agencies. For it to go full cycle, there will be other changes coming. So, it is a policy shift. Indeed, we have had very good reports from the committee. However, we should not lose focus on all these activities, functions and measures; international and local. They are not going to be lost but will be preserved and improved and everything will be okay. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let the minister finish.MR MURULI MUKASA:  I am summarising. I have sat here, listened and I have been very disciplined because I have not heckled. This august House, most of the time, is not known for heckling and it is a very balanced House. THE SPEAKER:  Do not divert the Members; talk about your Bills. I am the one to rule on how the Members heckle or shout - (Applause)  Make your point. MR MURULI:  I have made my point; that the functions are not going to be lost. The other point is that under RAPEX, there are going to be substantial savings and these savings will be ploughed back into a more robust service delivery. Madam Speaker, the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADs) Programme is an example of a situation that has been overtaken by events. First of all, there are a number of policies that we have adopted, for instance, the Parish Development Model (PDM), which is the main shift going to do what NAADs has been doing. Secondly, some of the achievements attributed to NAADs – Looking at the history of NAADs, let us not forget that there have been other players as well. There is a player that I did not hear in the committee report known as Operation Wealth Creation - (Interjection) - Yes, which to the main, has assisted NAADS. The same is true in some of the accomplishments which have been attributed to the Coffee Development Authority. Let us not forget the significant role that was played by the Operation Wealth Creation actors. Finally, there seems to be some negative feeling that when there is mainstreaming, all the good skills and learning that we have achieved, which forms a big repertoire and a strong foundation of our development, is going to disappear just because maybe a name like Coffee Development Authority or NAADS has gone. However, I would like to ask, “What is in a name?” That is a question in one of the Shakespearean texts; what is in a name? THE NATIONAL COFFEE (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412973THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024Finally, I would like to implore the House to support and pass these Bills. History will judge us. (Laughter) THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. Indeed, history will judge us. MR DA VID KABANDA:  Madam Speaker, I have not heard from the minister, especially where he blackmailed this institution, including you, Madam Speaker and fellow ministers and he was on record. I would like to request the honourable minister to come here and be on record, not to substantiate, but to withdraw that statement because we are here on behalf of our people. I beg to submit.MR MURULI MUKASA:  Madam  Speaker, the word “blackmail” is very strong – THE SPEAKER:  He can only substantiate by not withdrawing what is not on the official record, but you can substantiate. MR MURULI MUKASA:  I am not a blackmailer and I have never been one. I take offence to be accused here in the House that I am a blackmailer. Therefore, there is nothing to substantiate or withdraw. I have not blackmailed anybody. I do not take it lightly that a colleague would stand up here and say that I am a blackmailer. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Everybody’s conscience is clear. Nobody has been bribed. Whatever you do here, you do it for and on behalf of your people. (Applause) Whether people go blackmailing saying that somebody has been bribed, that is their business. Let us do what we ought to do. The debate is open. There is a procedural matter.MR MPUUGA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sympathise with my very senior brother and friend, the honourable minister. To have the Bills you brought in good faith, finding themselves in that unfortunate situation in which they are right now, you have my sympathies. I appreciate the shift in government policy through RAPEX. Government has had lots of shifts in policy, but again, it has had reversals, just like we run a private sector-led economy and then end up giving contracts in blue letters. We appreciate those challenges. In the circumstances -THE SPEAKER:  These Bills were not formed on blue letters. They were by Acts of this Parliament and that is why they have come back to Parliament, either for repeal or an amendment. So, remove the word “blue letters”.MR MPUUGA:  I appreciate it, Madam Speaker. I was just trying to make juxtaposition for the honourable minister to understand my misgivings about government policy and the policy reversals we have suffered over the years. However, would it be okay to save time and save the honourable minister the pain of seeing the demise of these Bills at infancy –(Laughter) – by asking the Rt Hon. Speaker to call Bill by Bill and a vote is taken so that we do not have to waste so much time? However, if we agree to proceed then we proceed and save this House time to go to the next business. I beg to indulge that we move like that.THE SPEAKER:  Is that supported? It has already been supported. We are going Bill by Bill. So, sit because all of you have seconded. Hon. Abdu, we are happy to have you back and sorry for what happened to you. We continue standing by you, our good friend.In the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Ac-Planta, Japan. They are led by the Ambassador of Uganda to Japan, Hon. Kaahwa Tophace, our very own. We miss you. (Applause)In the delegation, we have Dr Kim the CEO of Ac-Planta - you are in good hands with our very own - Mr Ian, the Chief Legal Officer, Ms Hiromi and Ms Masako. You are most welcome. 12974MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThey are here to observe the proceedings this afternoon. This is Parliament of Uganda, the people-centred Parliament.Honourable members, as you have said, I am going to put a question, Bill by Bill, for the second reading. If you want us to continue with the Bill for the second reading, you say “aye”, then we shall have defeated the committee report. But if you do not want us to continue, you say “nay”. It will stop there and we maintain the status quo.There are four motions and for clarity, if you are not in for the Bill continuing, you say, “nay” and if you are in for it to continue and be taken back to the ministry, you say “aye”. Are we together? Oh, you want to put up your hands?I put the question that, “The National Agricultural Advisory Services (Amendment) Bill, 2024, be read for the second time. (Question put and negatived.)THE SPEAKER:  I heard only one “aye”. The “nays” have it. (Applause) Honourable members, I put the question that, “The Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read a second time. (Question put and negatived.)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question that, “The National Coffee (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the second time.(Question put and negatived.)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question that the Dairy Industry (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read the second time.(Question put and negatived)1.57MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA-KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala):  Madam Speaker, I beg to thank this House. However, I would like to urge the Members of this House that the job is done, but there is a second leg. Let us ensure that in the Budget process, these agencies are well-resourced and have money allocated for them to do their mandate.We need coffee, cotton and dairy and we need to play to the highest standards. We urge all those committees where the resources are to find the resources because that is our role. We should ensure that these resources are in the Budget and fully appropriated. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Yes, Hon. Okupa?13.58MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere):  Madam Speaker, first allow me, I guess on behalf of all colleagues, to thank the committee chairperson for a very wonderful and well-written report. This is one of the best written reports I have seen in this House for a long time. THE SPEAKER:  No, we had the COSASE report – MR OKUPA:  I am saying during this time, not in the 10th Parliament, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the clerk of that committee for the way the report was written. Thank you.Madam Speaker, there is something that I picked from the report and the committee chairperson hinted on – THE SPEAKER: First wait and I tell you what I picked from the report: why was the authority formed? What hasn’t it done and what needs to be corrected? If all the reports would be like that – We formed this authority: what is it that we have not done and what do we need to do to improve on what we have failed to do? Then, we would be moving in the right direction.[The Speaker] THE NATIONAL COFFEE (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412975THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024We should not just come here omnibus – rationalisation, rationalisation. Let us have a basis for it. You may not talk about the quantitative reason or analysis, but you may need to look at what you have failed to do that you ought to have done.MR OKUPA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for elucidating further on why I was appreciating the committee. It was based on those points.The second one – I wish the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could listen to what was brought out by the committee regarding the certificate of financial implications where you said you are going to save about Shs 80 billion, yet the budget you have always provided for UCDA is Shs 48 billion. How could you make such a mistake?You have been providing Shs 48 billion every year, but you are now saying you are going to save Shs 80 billion. Would you like to elaborate and make us understand how that is possible? If not, apologise to this House for bringing the wrong document. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can we hear from the sponsor?2.00THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Ms David Bahati): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the minister and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, I would like to thank the House for passing the two Bills – the Agricultural Chemical – THE SPEAKER:  We have passed six Bills.MR BAHATI:  I was coming to that – for passing, in favour of the Government’s position, the Agricultural Chemicals (Control) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 and the other Bill. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, on the four Bills: The National Coffee (Amendment) Bill, 2024; Cotton Development (Amendment) Bill, 2024; National Agricultural Advisory Services (Amendment) Bill, 2024; and Dairy Industry (Amendment) Bill, 2024; we take note that this Parliament is a temple of democracy and you have exercised your democratic right. We have a duty, as the Government, to go and dress these Bills better and, hopefully, next time, you will look at them with a different eye. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members – Okay, Hon. Francis?2.02MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee chairperson for a good report. I also thank the Members for standing together for the good of this country. We have done this because we are the voice of our people, for food security and value addition. Now, we can go and mobilise them more. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you all. (Members rose_)  Honourable members, do you all want to talk about what has gone?  2.03MR DA VID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende):  I am not debating, Madam Speaker, but I would like Hon. Bahati to come back here because of the issue I raised about Hon. Muruli Mukasa, where some of these people – (Interjection) - No, I am not saying he should come back and answer on behalf of Hon. Muruli Mukasa. When you hear what he has said - He said, “when we come back, maybe next time you will support us”. It means that they will go and convince the President or blackmail us that we have been bribed. I would like him to come back and be on record because here, Hon. Bahati, we are defending our people, not our interests.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the Government has a right to come back if they think we have done something wrong. We also 12976MINISTERIAL STATEMENThave a right to do what we have done, again. (Applause)  MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker, Hon. David Kabanda is a first-term Member of Parliament and maybe, he has not learnt this particular one –(Interjection) – Listen. Maybe Hon. David Kabanda, as you have said, Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen. Why the excitement?MR BAHATI: As you have said, we will not and cannot blackmail Parliament. We do not have that capacity – THE SPEAKER: Let me tell you - just a minute. You are full of excitement. If I can ask any of you: who has just one coffee tree? If you have them, then keep quiet and listen to what they are saying. That will help your coffee. MR BAHATI:  I said, we cannot blackmail Parliament. However, the Executive has the right to bring any matter to the House and the House has the right to take any decision about the matter brought by the Executive. Therefore, Hon. Kabanda, there is no contradiction and I thank you for the decision that you have taken.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable members and ministers. Of course, it is give and take. Can we go to the next Bills? Let us just have those for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and then we have lunch. Honourable members, stop. Now you have started getting out. Hon. Cissy?BILLSSECOND READINGTHE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, can you move the motion?2.06THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Children (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read a second time. THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Isaac, Hon. Silwany, Honourable minister Jacob Oboth, Hon. Sanon, Hon. Dorcas, Hon. Katuntu  even when you are seated.  (Laughter)  The Bill is seconded; would you like to speak to it? MS AMONGI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Bill was enacted as an Act of Parliament in 2016. Since that time, the Board has never been appointed. We have had a technical team that has been taking care of the Authority. The proposition is to dissolve the Authority and mainstream the function in the ministry as a fully-functional department that handles issues related to children. Since it has not been functional since its enactment, and the ministry under the Department of Children has been able to manage efficiently and coordinate all the mandates, we support that it be mainstreamed in the ministry. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much. Honourable chairperson, could you give us a brief report on that? We are mainstreaming to the main ministry. 2.08 MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much,  Madam Speaker. I have been requested by my chairperson to represent her because she is attending to other duties; I think you are aware. Madam Speaker, I am here to present a report from the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Children (Amendment) Bill, 2024. Before I proceed, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes and the report. I am tabling the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the Children (Amendment) Bill, 2024. I will try to be brief, but I need to give the introduction. The Children (Amendment) Bill was read for the first time on 4 April 2024 and [The Speaker] THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412977THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024referred to our committee and we played our part. The background of the Bill is the same as other Bills that we have funded. It is about the rationalisation of Government agencies.The legal framework of the National Children’s Authority – Madam Speaker, I need to give it so that Members can know where it came from. The Constitution provides, under Article 34, for the rights of the child and provides for children’s right to health, education and protection from exploitation. The Children Act, Cap. 59, is the primary law on children’s matters that puts into effect the Constitution’s provisions, the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the African Child, other relevant laws and policies on children’s matters including the Penal Code Act (Cap. 120), the Employment Act, 2006, the Computer Misuse Act, 2011, the Anti-Pornography Act, 2014, and the Prevention of Trafficking of Persons Act, 2009. Madam Speaker, I will not go to the methodology which you have already read and the documents reviewed. Let me go to the rationale for the dissolution of the National Children’s Authority.Government has put forward the following arguments to justify the rationalisation of Government agencies, including restructuring, reorganising, the aligning of the Public Service structures, the removal of duplication of roles between the Department of Children Affairs and the ministry, and to reduce wastage of public funds. That is the Government’s side. The implication of dissolving the National Children’s Authority is important to be forwarded. During the interaction with the National Children’s Authority, the committee was informed that the proposal to dissolve the Authority would have the following negative implications for the persons represented hereby. (a) Increase in the case of children’s rights violations. Children, by virtue of their age, are vulnerable to issues like child trafficking, sexual harassment, child labour, child sacrifice, child marriages, teenage pregnancies, and etcetera. For instance, the National Labour Survey of 2020 indicated that six million children are trapped in child labour and street children are more than 10,000, according to the National Child Policy (2020). The National Children’s Authority has been put at the forefront for addressing the issues. Therefore, the issues at hand are likely to escalate due to the gap that is going to be created by the abolition of the Authority. (b) Lack of political will to protect the children. The Bill is silent about Government’s commitment to supporting children’s right affairs and protection of children from exploitation and manifest vulnerability. There is a capacity challenge already, which is a danger since the Department of Children in the ministry has failed to address the affairs and challenges faced by children sufficiently. (c) Potential effects on compliance with international instruments. The abolition of the Authority will be a setback to the efforts of Uganda in complying with its obligations as a signatory to the international instruments and yet Uganda is a leading example for other countries to benchmark on the best practices. Such international instruments include the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989) and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child (1990). For instance, Article 120 of the East African Community Child Policy tasks partner states that include Uganda to make sure that children are given maximum protection due to their vulnerability. (d) Loss of jobs and further marginalisation. Observations of the committee The Bill, in the relevant clauses, states that staff of the Councils may be redeployed 12978MINISTERIAL STATEMENTsubject to the availability of the positions. This implies that some people may lose their jobs if no positions are available hence, further marginalisation of persons of those groups currently employed. The committee notes that the transition process of the employees who may lose jobs is unclear and non-committal. Lack of an independent structure to provide checks and balances on the Ministry of State for Youth and Children Affairs. The Authority was providing research, guidance, checks and balances to ensure effectiveness in tackling the challenges faced by the children. Therefore, there would be lack of scrutiny of gaps in service delivery on matters of children. With the dissolution of the Authority, the country would lose an intermediary for marginalised and vulnerable groups of children who are being left out during the service delivery by the ministry. Committee Observations and Recommenda -tions 1. Inadequate consultation of stakeholders The councils and the National Children’s Authority, who are the key stakeholders, were not consulted on the rationalisation process although the Commissioner for Equity and Compliance represented the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the working group. Recommendations The Ministry of Public Service should, in the future, hold adequate consultations with all the relevant stakeholders, especially with implementation structures prior to formulation of the Bill.  Honourable members, we have already foreseen that. Most of the committees were complaining and that is why some ministers could not come because they failed to convince the committees. Dissolving of the National Children’s Authority Clause 4 of the Bill dissolves the National Children Authority with its Board and Secretariat as established under Section 9(A) of the Children’s Act (Cap. 59), thereby creating a gap in the specific monitoring and supervision of implementation of policies for safeguarding children as a unique special interest group. Recommendation The committee recommends strongly that there is great need to have an independent body responsible for the protection of children’s rights, notwithstanding the intended dissolution of the National Children’s Authority. In fact, it is using polite language, saying that maintain the same. So, deletion of clause 10(3), which the minister has already accepted that the Board, ever since it was created, was not appointed, neither did it function - The committee recommends that when we reach the Committee Stage, 10(3) should be deleted because it is redundant. In conclusion, notwithstanding the Government’s decision to rationalise government agencies, and that includes the National Children’s Authority, the committee strongly argues that, children being of tender age, are highly vulnerable to exploitation. The issues of children should be given urgent and special attention. The ad hoc committee that was set up by Parliament to discuss the issue of rationalisation recommended that agencies in the social development sector should not be rationalised. With the abolition of the Authority, there will be no independent government agency on children-related matters and, therefore, a big gap in the role of policy formulation, consultation, and efficient protection of children’s rights in Uganda. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Honourable members, you have heard the issues of the children. The Bill, which is before us, is “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2024.”Honourable minister, you have heard what the Chair has said; that we should maintain the Act as it is. Is that agreeable to you?  [Mr Bakkabulindi] THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412979THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024MS BETTY AMONGI:  Madam Speaker, what is in the report of the committee agrees with the position of the Government in the amendment. THE SPEAKER: What is the position of the Government?MS AMONGI: That the Authority is dissolved and the function mainstreamed. THE SPEAKER:  Is taken to the mainstream in a department of children?MS AMONGI:  Yes. The only difference with the committee is that there are certain functions like registration of children where they are moving it to national registration – THE SPEAKER:  You know, the report is in agreement with the Government position, but now, the former minister has brought in personal feelings . (Laughter) Honourable members, what the Government is saying is, let us take this sector to avoid having a lot of institutions. You are the ones who are saying we should have a lean government. In the process of having a lean one, let us take it back to the ministry. In the ministry, we shall have a department of children, a department of youth, and a department of women. What is wrong with that? We shall be reducing costs. Hon. Harriet?14.20MS HARRIET BUSINGE (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have no problem with the report of the committee. I support that they create for them a department and we streamline there. It is okay. It has no issues because it does not counter the protection of the rights of children. Thank you. 14.21MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The rights of children in every country is a mandate of the state – THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, we have a Minister of Children under gender, not so?  So what is the problem?  Why wouldn’t we take these children to the minister?  2.21MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I have got from the minister in charge of gender is that this Authority has not been working because the Board has not been getting funds. Therefore, it does not even have a Board at the moment. This means it has not been working. In the ministry, they have a department in charge of children and the minister has been supervising that department. Therefore, I think there is no problem having this or all the functions taken to the ministry. Thank you very much.2.22MR GEOFFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the committee report because the ministry already has structures. One of its mandates is to work for the welfare of the children. I, therefore, want to agree with the committee report that let the children and other sectors be taken back to the ministry so that they can streamline and work well for the children of this country. 14.23MR FRANK KABUYE (NUP, Kassanda County South, Kassanda):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the committee concludes, it puts forward that whereas there is interest in government rationalisation, the children of this country, Uganda, have to have an independent body that will keep this Government in check. The issues of the children or the generation that will come after us; our great-grandchildren, need to see that at least this Government or this Parliament stood firm for the Authority that was there to oversee Government to ensure that it does what it has to do. 12980MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe Authority informed us that they have never been given a budget to run anything. What they receive is just for the wages and a few administrative costs, meaning that it might be intended by this Government to keep the Authority redundant and later on, they come and put it – THE SPEAKER:  What is your position? MR KABUYE: Our position is that we retain the Authority as it will give advice and will keep – THE SPEAKER: So should we take the minister in charge of children to the Authority also?MR KABUYE:  Madam Speaker, the ministry or the Minister for Children and the Youth is there to see how these agencies work. He is supposed to guide on the operations, but these people have not been having the Board to do their work. THE SPEAKER:  Will it cause any harm if you took this department to the Ministry of Gender for it to be under the Minister of State for Children and the Youth? Will it cause any harm? MR KABUYE:  Madam Speaker, the reason that the Government gave for the rationalisation was to cut administrative costs. THE SPEAKER: Actually, we shall have cut it. MR KABUYE:  No, we are not cutting anything because this agency has been receiving Shs 325 million every year to cater for only the rent and other things like wages. They have not received any money to carry out any activity in line with looking out for our children or looking for how our children can be better served in the country.It is better that we just look at how we can operationalise these agencies than putting them under the ministry where they will not serve the purpose for which they were created. THE SPEAKER: I wish you people would programme your minds in the way that agriculture did. They asked, it did serve the purpose? And if it did not serve the purpose, why don’t you go back where it was? 2.26MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with the committee, that now that we have a minister in charge of children’s affairs and we are moving this to the ministry, the same issue of the children will be taken care of by the ministry. It would be prudent that we move the agency as a department under the ministry to save costs.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. There is a motion.2.27MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the report of the committee and the contributions of the Members are very clear and we have the ministry in charge of the children’s affairs, I move that we go for the second reading and you put the question.THE SPEAKER : Is it seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Okiror, Hon. Ayoo, Hon. Kabanda, youth representative and the whole House. Honourable members, I now put the question that the Children (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read for the second time.(Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024Clause 1THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, Hon. Muhammad Nsereko is here intimidating me. (Laughter)[Mr Kabuye] THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412981THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO:  Madam Chairperson, I cannot intimidate you. You are aware I cannot. I was only trying to put a point across, and you can pick it here, if you want. THE CHAIRPERSON:  It is okay. MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO:  For the youth council structures – THE CHAIRPERSON:  You are now going – MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO:  No, maybe it may help you in the future. It might affect the Electoral College that elects the youth council -lors and the youth Members of Parliament. Just put it in mind.THE CHAIRPERSON:  We have noted it.2.30Clause 1MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative):  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 1 is amendment of Section 1 of the Principal Act. Clause 1 is amended by substituting the definition of the word “ministry” for the following - “Ministry” means the ministry responsible for children’s affairs. The justification(a)  To clearly capture the relevant ministry in charge of the affairs of children.(b) To ensure clarity. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Minister –  MS AMONGI:  No objection. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Oboth, I appoint you to stand in for the Attorney-General. Please be on record that you have accepted the appointment for now and you are supporting the House.MR OBOTH:  Madam Chairperson, thank you for your wise guidance. You have guided me to come and take the right position because there should not be any vacuum in the Government, whether the Attorney-General is engaged in State house or elsewhere with the traders, the vacuum should not be created. I accept the challenge and your guidance. Thank you. Clause 2THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 2 stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 3THE CHAIRPERSON:  Committee chairper -son – MR BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 3 is amended by inserting immediately after the word “children” the word “affairs.” The justification (a) This is a consequential amendment, having rectified the definition of the ministry responsible for children.(b) To ensure clarity. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister – MS AMONGI: No objection.  THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General – MR OBOTH:  For the record, my opinion should not be binding here. I am not holding the proper fort. However, as government, we 12982MINISTERIAL STATEMENTagree with the position since the minister is here. THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.Clause 4, agreed to.Clause 5, agreed to.Clause 6, agreed to.Clause 7THE CHAIRPERSON:  Committee chairper -son –  MR BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 7 is amended by substituting it for the following – “Amendment of Section 43(i) of the Principal Act Section 43(i) of the Principal Act is amended by substituting for subsection (1)(i) the following -“(1) Every person to whom a guardianship order is granted shall, within 14 days after the grant of the order, register the order with the National Identification and Registration Authority and the ministry responsible for children.” The justification (a) To harmonise the provision with the amendments to the National Identification and Registration Authority Bill, 2024 which we have just passed wherein all matters relating to the registration of persons, including children, have been transferred from Uganda Registration Services Bureau to the National Identification and Registration Authority. (b) To avoid ambiguity in the law. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Yes, honourable – MR OKIROR:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek clarity on that because we had decentralised registration to go to NIRA. However, we are doing double registration here; there is also registration for NIRA and the Ministry of Children’s Affairs. So, are we going to run two registers? THE CHAIRPERSON:  We are moving it to NIRA; it is consistent with what we passed on the Persons Act. It is consistent with NIRA, URSB and this one. So, we are centralising. MR OKIROR: What about the period?THE CHAIRPERSON:  It is 14 days. MR OKIROR:  That is okay.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, minister - MS AMONGI: I agree with it, except for the consequential amendment. After “children”, there should be “affairs” because earlier, we had defined it.THE CHAIRPERSON: Children affairs?MS AMONGI: Yes, “responsible for children affairs”. So, let us add the word “affairs” after “children”. THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you making an amendment?MS AMONGI: Yes, to be consistent.THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, it is agreeable.THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General -  MR OBOTH: This is good exercise. (Laughter)  We concede.[Mr Oboth] THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412983THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 7 be amended, as proposed by the Minister of Gender, with an inclusion of “children affairs”. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.Clause 8THE CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson? MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 8 is amended by inserting, immediately after the word “registrar”, the words “of birth and death”. The justification is:1. To capture the title of the registrar as it is in the principle Act; and 2. To ensure clarity. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister?MS AMONGI:  I concur.THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General?MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, it makes sense and it is consequential. We concur.THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.  I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.Clause 9, agreed to.Clause 10MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 10 is amended by:a) Inserting, immediately after the word “children”, the word “affairs”;b) Deleting subsection (3);c) Deleting subsection (4);d) Inserting, immediately after subsection (4), the following:i. The staff of the Authority serving immediately before the commencement of the Act shall be deployed to serve in the Public Service.THE CHAIRPERSON: We agreed that we should not use the word “shall”. MR BAKKABULINDI: It is “may”. You are right; thank you very much. The justification:1. This is a consequential amendment, having rectified the definition of the ministry responsible for children;2. The Board of the Authority has never been operationalised since the enactment of the Children (Amendment) Act, 2016, and so, there were no directors of the Board in place;3. To ensure clarity; and4. To ensure that the staff of the former National Children Authority who have expertise in the affairs of children may be absorbed in the service for the benefit of supporting the efforts of protecting the rights of children.I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. (Hon. Opendi rose_)  Yes?MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In reading this particular clause and the certificate of financial implication, Mr Chairperson, what are you saving exactly? The Certificate of Financial Implication talks about this children authority being merged into a national Secretariat and the cost has been Shs 311 million. You are not telling us what exactly you are curing by this amendment because some of these staff are going to be employed in the Secretariat. The certificate is not clear.12984MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE CHAIRPERSON: We have passed that stage and are now at the Committee Stage. (Laughter)MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I think you have guided because Hon.  Sarah Opendi, my MP who represents the women and men from Tororo is a senior member of this House. She is smuggling a phrase which should have been brought when we were debating. I think she lost that opportunity, but -THE CHAIRPERSON: You see, “your woman” came late and wanted to smuggle in a debate when people like Hon. Macho have been here longer. MR OBOTH: Much obliged, thank you for your guidance. THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. [Hon. Opendi rose_]  Hon. Sarah Opendi, sit. Honourable minister -MS AMONGI: I concur. THE CHAIRPERSON: No, frame for me an amendment. Where there is “shall”, it will be “may”.MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that under clause 10(1), the word “shall” be replaced with the word “may”. THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 10 be amended, as proposed by the honourable Minister of Gender. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 10 as amended, agreed to.The Title, agreed to. THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Sarah Opendi, please leave my guest. Your seat is somewhere there. MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUMETHE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister - 2.44THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House resumes and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER: Honourable minister - 2.44THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill, “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2024” and passed it with amendments.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER: Honourable minister?2.45THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT)BILL, 202412985THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted by this august House.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister -2.45THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read the third time and do pass.(Question put and agreed to.) A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2024” THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passed. (Applause)  Congratulations. BILLSSECOND READINGTHE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister? 2.47THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the second time. THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Members rose_)  It is seconded by Hon. Hellen Asamo, the minister of disability, Hon. Steven, Hon. Kahonda, Hon. Atyang, Hon. Nathan, Pastor, Hon. Ojok, all the women and men, including Hon. Sarah - (Laughter)-  Hon. Luttamaguzi, the chairman of women –(Laughter)  No, Hon. Luttamaguzi. Would you love to speak to that motion? MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The National Women’s Council is elected from the village up to the national level. Constitutionally, it has the National Women’s Council, which is its democratic arm and a secretariat that serves the National Women’s Council. We have about five councils and the Government deems it fit that we have a powerful national secretariat. We are not dissolving the democratically elected structure; the councils that are elected from the village level up to the national level will remain as they are. The only thing that is being merged is to have one well-facilitated secretariat that will be serving all the councils and undertaking the mandate of ensuring that they function and are coordinated effectively. I request that this House accepts to grant this national secretariat, which will be more visible and more powerful to serve the councils. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Could you also move for the youth? BILLSSECOND READINGTHE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20242.50THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  In the same vein, I beg to move that the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read the second time. THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? (Members rose_)  Now, we are on the youth. I can see you sitting. Hon. Linda, are you tired?  Hon. Denis 12986MINISTERIAL STATEMENT- it is seconded by the whole House. Would you love to speak to it, again? MS AMONGI: Again, the National Youth Council is a council elected right from the village to the national level and they have a structure that elects the youth Members of Parliament to this House.We are not interfering with the democratically elected structure, but only merging the secretariat and making it more visible, funded, coordinated and efficient as one national secretariat. I request that you support me. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can you give us a brief report on the National Youth Council?   2.52MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to give a brief report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024. However, before I proceed, allow me to lay on the Table the minutes and the report. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MR BAKKABULINDI: I will start with the women before I proceed to the youth – and I will try to be quick. IntroductionThe National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill was read for the first time on 9 April 2024 and referred to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. The background to the Bill is already noted by the Members; they have read it. Objective of the BillThe main objective of the Bill is to give effect to the Government’s policy for rationalisation - THE SPEAKER: The minister has already spoken to the objective. Go to the observations. MR BAKKABULINDI: The methodology and rationale for the mergers are the same. I will now go straight to the implications. Implications of rationalisation in light of affirmative actionDuring the interaction with the National Women’s Council, the committee was informed that the proposed rationalisation of the social development sector will have the following negative implications: i. Negative effect on affirmative actionAffirmative action involves complex measures in favour of marginalised groups in order to redress imbalances, which may take years to impact society. The representatives of the different councils noted that Uganda had been making progress in this area, but challenges remain. They argue that the merging of the secretariats of the councils could reverse the progress - That was the idea we got from the committee of the council. Moreover, Uganda’s notable progress in affirmative action measures has made the country a leading example for other countries to benchmark on the best practices. ii.    Generalisation of gender issuesStakeholders contend that merging secretariats will lose the unique aspects of each council, leading to some issues being neglected or forgotten. Unique funding needs could also be ignored or undermined under this arrangement, for example, the multiple types of disability with their need for unique assistive devices might be lost in the process. iii. Potential effects on compliance with international instrumentsThe Social Sector Council secretariats work towards the implementation of various human rights instruments that the Government is a signatory to, which work may be compromised by the merger. These include the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (Agenda [The Speaker]THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412987THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 20242063), the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. iv.    Loss of jobs and further marginalisationThe Bill, in the relevant clauses, states that staff of the councils may be redeployed, subject to availability of positions. This implies that some people may lose their jobs if no positions are available, hence further marginalisation of persons of these groups who are currently employed. v.      Potential loss of specialised skillsThe Parliament Ad-hoc Committee on Rationalisation in 2022 noted that the potential to lose specialised skills and labour as personnel could opt out of the merged institutions and join the private sector. So we did not want to lose that. vi. Potential lapse in social developmentThe sector exists primarily for the promotion of social development of Uganda’s people and the current structure tries to ensure inclusivity in the planning for all Ugandans. THE CHAIRPERSON : There is a procedural matter.MR KAYEMBA SSOLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since we already have that report on our iPads and have read it and understood it well, why don’t we go to the Committee Stage?MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, I beg for your indulgence. Let me go straight to the observations and recommendations.Committee Observations and Recommenda -tionsEffect on the GROW project The committee observed that Generating Growth Opportunities and Productivity for Women Enterprises (GROW) Project worth $218 million under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development (MoGLSD) has already lost one year out of the five years, and rationalisation may cause further delay by not specifying the structure for special interest groups, especially the National Council for Women that is part of the implementation structure. RecommendationThe structure for the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups should be expedited so that no more time is lost on the implementation of the GROW project. 7.0 ConclusionNotwithstanding the Government’s decision to rationalise Government agencies, and that includes the National Women’s Council, the committee strongly argues that women being a marginalised group in society and highly vulnerable to mistreatment and exploitation, it is the committee’s fear that one Secretariat to assist all Councils of special interest groups in the fulfilment of their mandate, would diminish the attention to the unique needs and challenges of women.This is also in line with the recommendation of the Parliamentary Ad hoc Committee, which was passed in this House some time back. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Just a small observation; the Clerk who wrote this report is an amateur. You cannot say “The committee report be adopted.” We do not make decisions based on committee reports; it is an informative report.  I need to know the Clerk who writes such reports. The one who wrote the report for the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry 12988MINISTERIAL STATEMENTand Fisheries needs a reward. (Applause) Yes, Hon. Tonny?  2.59MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As we process rationalisation, I think we should not forget that Government plays a central role in the operations of most of these agencies and we have looked at saving money, bringing money, duplication, and efficiency. On the Women’s Council, if the democratic process; election from village to national level is allowed, then only the Secretariat to run operations of the special interest group, what would be the problem? In any case, Parliament is here supported by the Secretariat, headed by the Clerk, and operations are running. They provide technical support and advice for operations, so the Secretariat will be providing technical support. When you argue that the GROW program is going to be delayed, I think this is very wrong and misleading. First of all, was the GROW program brought in by the Women’s Council? No, it is the Government through the ministry. I urge my colleagues that this is the same thing with the youth, the elderly and persons with disabilities, so that we save ourselves from this ping-pong of arguing on things that may not add much value and then we move faster. This is straightforward. Madam Speaker, I, therefore, wish to move that having listened to the committee and seen the value of mainstreaming or bringing these special interest groups to the ministry, I move that the question be put and we move to the second reading of the motion. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Is it seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Okwir, Hon. Margaret, Hon. Koluo - I put the question that the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read for the second time.(Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we will rationalise whatever does not bring in money. Whatever takes out money will be rationalised. If you are talking about coffee there you have some - but now this one that is a spending body, we are saying let us take it to the ministry where it is. Let us do a give-and-take. We are serving a Government. Patriotic League of Uganda (PLU), what do you think? 3.02MR DA VID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Madam Speaker, it should not be about money alone, but also morals; if there are institutions that nurture our people. THE SPEAKER:  That is the reason the committee has given. MR KABANDA: Yes, I can agree with the recommendations of the committee, but it should not be about money, but also morals. If there are institutions like youth councils, and women’s councils, that are nurturing future leaders from the village - that is why nowadays you have people who are not nurtured, but because there is a certain wave, they come and become leaders. These women’s councils have been nurturing people from the village, sub-county, parish, and district, and we end up having some here. Some of these councils can be thought about and see how they can be protected by this Parliament –THE SPEAKER:  They only house a Secretariat.MR KABANDA:  I am happy to hear about that because the Attorney-General was saying that they should create a department. We can have a Secretariat and leave the Youth Council aloneTHE SPEAKER: No, they have their Secretariat under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.  [The Speaker]THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412989THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE CHAIRPERSON:  New Clause, committee chairperson–3.04MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative):  Insertion of new clauseThe Bill is amended by inserting a new clause immediately before clause 1 as follows:Commencement “This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister, a statutory instrument”. Justification (a) To give room for the process of rationalisation to take effect.(b) To fast-track the efforts of establishing the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups and administrative functions and structures so that implementation of projects like the GROW project are not delayed further –(Interruption)MS AMONGI:  I want to put it on record that the Generating Growth Opportunities and Productivity for Women Enterprises (GROW) Project is not under the National Women’s Council. The GROW Project is a World Bank project under the ministry with two departments of Gender and Labour managing it and the Private Sector Foundation. At the moment, progress has been made which we will bring on the Floor of Parliament. So, to justify based on one project, which is not even under the council is misleading. THE CHAIRPERSON:  But are you in agreement with the new clause? CommencementMS AMONGI:  Commencement, is okay. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, Commencement is okay. We are removing the justification of GROW and leaving it to projects.I put the question that the proposed new clause stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, agreed to.Clause 2, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4, agreed to. Clause 5THE CHAIRPERSON:  The Chairperson?MR BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 5 of the Bill is amended by substituting for the proposed Section 9 of the following;“9. Secretariat- (1) There is established a secretariat to be known as “the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups”(2)  The National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups shall be the secretariat for all the councils of the special interest groups created under this Act and in any other law. (3)  The Minister shall, by statutory instrument, prescribe the functions of the secretariat. (4)  The National Secretariat for Special Interest Group shall be composed of a secretary and other staff.(5)  The other staff of the National Secretariat for Special Interest Group may be employed from among the staff of the Council. 12990MINISTERIAL STATEMENT(6)  Public officers may be seconded to the service of the National Secretariat for special interest groups or may otherwise give assistance to the Secretariat. Madam Chairperson, we are deleting No.7- we are stopping with that. I beg to submitTHE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Minister? Wherever there is “shall” will be replaced by “may”MS AMONGI:  I concur with the amendment, especially under 5 where what is contained in the report has been re-modified by the Chairperson. Thank you. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Where there is “Shall” will be replaced by “May” except in 2 and 3. Where it says the minister shall by statutory instrument prescribe the functions of the secretariat.2)  The National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups shall be the secretariat of the Councils of Special Interest Groups created under this Act and any other law. Is that okay? I put the question that Clause 5 be amended as proposed with replacement of “May” instead of “Shall ‘’ with exception of Clause 2 and 3. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.Clause 6MR BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you, Chairperson. Repeal Section 10 of the Principal Act. For clause 6, substitute for the following:Amendment Section 10 of the Principal Act- (a) by substituting for sub section (1)(i)  “The Minister shall, in consultation with the National Women’s Executive Committee, the National Youth Executive Committee, the Persons with Disabilities Council and the National Council for Older Persons appointing a secretary for the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups”(b)  In subsection 5, by substituting for the word “council”, “the words the councils of special interest groups”(c)  Inserting a new subsection immediately after subsection 7 as follows-For purposes of section 9 and 10, special interest groups mean women, youth, older persons, and persons with disability, -  “National Council for Older Persons” has the meaning under Section 5 of the National Council for Older Persons 2013,-  “National Women Executive Committee” has the meaning under Section 8 of the National Women Council Act, Cap.318,-  “National Youth Executive Committee” has a meaning under Section 9 of the National Youth Council Act, Caps.319. -  “Persons with Disabilities Council” has a meaning under Section 20 of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2020. Justification:(a) This is a consequential amendment following the merging of the secretariats of the Councils for Special Interest Groups into one Secretariat. (b) To ensure equal representation for all the Councils on the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister?MS AMONGI:  No objection, because the current practice and in the current Acts of the various councils, the executive nominates, approves and recommends to the minister, so the spirit is the same. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Honourable minister, is that okay? MR OBOTH:  The minister for gender has been ably advised and we concede. [Mr Bakkabulindi]THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412991THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that Clause 6 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.Clause 7MR BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you, Chairperson. Substitute the following-Substitution of Section 11 of the Principal Act. it is substituted the following:11. Functions of The Secretary (1)  The Secretary shall be the Chief Executive Officer and the Accounting Officer of all the Councils for Special Interest Groups; (2)  Subject to the general control of the minister, the secretary shall-(a)  Act as the secretary of all the councils of special interest groups and record the minutes at those meetings; (b) Be responsible for the implementation of the policy decisions of all the councils of special interest groups and for the day to day administration of the affairs of the council of special interest groups, and for the day-to-day administration of the affairs of the councils of special interest groups, and control of the other staff of the Secretariat. (3)  Where the office of the secretary is vacant or where the secretary is unable to perform the functions of his or her office by reason of illness, absence or any other reason, the minister may designate an Office of the National Secretariat for special interest groups qualified as required under Section 10, to perform those functions until the vacancy in the office is filled or until the secretary is able to resume the performance of those functions. The justification This is for consequential amendment following the merging.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Minister –  MS AMONGI:  I concede. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that the proposed amendment on clause 7 be approved. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.Clause 8, agreed to.Clause 9, agreed to.Clause 10MR BAKKABULINDI:  Madam Chairperson, clause 10 is amended in subsection 2 by substituting the word “may” for the word “shall” and the words “public service” for the words “National Secretariat for Special Groups.” Justification(a) To guarantee employment for staff that are already serving in the respective councils given the fact that with the merging of the secretariats of the councils into one, there will still be an opportunity for the current staff to be absorbed. (b) To harness and capitalise on the already existing expertise and experience in serving councils for special interest groups. I beg to move.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. Minister – MS AMONGI:  I concede because the principle of safeguarding rights of workers is still within our ministry, and we have no problem.12992MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE CHAIRPERSON:  It should not be “shall”, but “may”. I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.TitleTHE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the title stands part of the Bill. The Title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister –  3.19THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (MS Betty Amongi):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.(Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister – Honourable members, these interest groups will only be housed in gender. The person managing them is the secretary. The secretary will be responsible and the minister has almost nothing apart from – the Executive secretary. Who? No, it will be the executive secretary. 3.20THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  The principal law has an executive secretary and there is no amendment to the principal law. So, even if paragraph 4 remains as secretary, it will be construed as executive secretary. THE SPEAKER:  What matters is the definition of the roles. The definitions of the roles lie under that person. The minister’s work is only to house the secretariat of all the interest groups. REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister – 3.22THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024” and passed it with amendments. THE SPEAKER: Thank you.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE3.22THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted by this august House.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412993THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024BILLS THIRD READINGTHE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister – 3.23THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (MS Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the third time and do pass.THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the third time and do pass.(Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2024”THE SPEAKER:  Title settled and the Bill is passed. Thank you. (Applause)THE SPEAKER: The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024 – BILLSSECOND READINGTHE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 3.24MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative)):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to submit the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024”. Before I proceed, I beg to lay on the Table the minutes and the report.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker,  I will go straight away to the object of the Bill.The main objective of this Bill is to give effect to the Government policy through rationalisation of government agencies and public expenditure adopted by the Cabinet on 22 February 2021 and contained in Cabinet Minute No.43 (CT 2021), as others. You have already got the methodology. I will go to the rationale for the merger. The Government has put forward the following argument to justify the rationalisation of government agencies, including:(a) The rapid expansion of government agencies in Uganda has resulted in a number of problems, including unclear jurisdiction, excessive expenditure of the National Treasury at the expense of efficient service delivery, overstretching of the Government’s ability to support agencies and salary differences between agency employees and traditional civil servants. (b) These issues have also led to the wastage of resources that could have been used to fund other vital public services like health, education and infrastructure development. (c) According to the Government, the councils under the social development sector carry out similar mandates and, therefore, their administrative structures should be merged into one unit, the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups. Implications of Rationalisation, Since the members have been giving the same reports, I now go to the committee observations and recommendations. Observations:1. Loss of expertise of technical officers The country will lose out on highly experienced technical officers because the Bill does not 12994MINISTERIAL STATEMENTguarantee that they will be redeployed in the National Secretariat. Recommendation: The Government should give priority to the technical experts and the highly skilled while staffing the National Secretariat so that the Government does not lose on the return on investment. We agree with the creation of a National Secretariat, but the Government should consider those people with the technical know-how. 2. Inadequate consultation of stakeholders. The National Youth Council, the key stakeholder, was not consulted on the rationalisation process, although the Commissioner, of Equity and Compliance represented the ministry on the working group. Recommendation: The Ministry of Public Service should, in the future, carry out adequate consultation with all the relevant stakeholders, especially with the implementation of structures prior to the formulation of this Bill. We support the Bill, but in the future, they should do massive consultation. In conclusion, the committee associates itself with the findings of the Ad-Hoc Committee, which was instituted to consider the rationalisation of Government agencies, that the Secretariat of Council should not be rationalised, but be considerate while employing some manpower. The committee, therefore, prays that the country’s milestone in affirmative action and protection for the marginalised groups, including the youth, should be prioritised by the Government through strengthening the councils-remember, the councils for special interest groups still exist, increase funding and adequately staffing the National Secretariat. We are in support of special interest groups that are being created under this Act. In this conclusion, we are strengthening the councils and making sure special interest groups are created under the National Secretariat. THE SPEAKER:  However, one comfort that we get is that all the secretariats are basically being housed under each minister. The youth will be under the minister responsible for Youth, the women- It is not going to be absorbed, but they will have an Executive Secretary that will be managing the Secretariat. A “minister” is defined as a minister responsible for that docket. Honourable-MR DA VID KABANDA:  Honourable minister, are these special interest groups going to be housed under one Secretariat and under the Minister-THE SPEAKER: The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which has several ministers.MR DA VID KABANDA: So, the Minister for Youth there is not responsible for the other Secretariat? THE SPEAKER:  No.MR DA VID KABANDA:  It is the minister for gender - THE SPEAKER:  No, it is the ministry. Hon. David Kabanda, it is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. MR SILWANY:  Madam Speaker, the current status is that there has been an Executive Secretary for every Council; National Youth Council, National Women’s Council and all the other councils. and they have all been under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. What is that that the Government is changing and what are we saving? THE SPEAKER:  They are integrating them. Hon. Laura?MS KANUSHU:  Madam Speaker, Currently, all the councils have different executive secretaries and secretariats. That is what the [Mr Bakkabulindi]THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412995THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024Government is merging, so we are going to have one Executive Secretary who is going to be under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, that is what Madam Speaker is explaining. However, we also have our ministers for disability, for youth, for children, et cetera . Therefore, we shall have one Executive Secretary sitting in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. THE SPEAKER:  Yes, a one-stop centre for all the special interest groups. Honourable members – yes-MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the House that under the National Youth Act, “the Minister” means the Minister responsible for Youth Affairs. That is what is stated in the interpretation clause and, therefore, we are not amending that part. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. David Kabanda, I know that you are within that youth bracket. A minister, responsible for Youth Affairs, is the Minister of Youth, but the Secretariat is under the ministry. There is a difference between the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development vis-à-vis  a Minister responsible for Youth Affairs, responsible for Disability, responsible for Children, like Hon. David –  (Laughter) have not heard? I said that there is a minister responsible for Children, like Hon. David – (Laughter)  Honourable members, let us continue. I am hungry. MS KAAYA:  Madam Speaker, I am also affirming your submission that we are reducing costs by reducing on the by having one Yes.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I put the question that the National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read for the second time. (Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER: Even Hon. David has said, “Aye” [Hon. David Kabanda rose]  You are not the only Hon. David  -(Laughter)BILLS COMMITTEE STAGETHE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE CHAIRPERSON:  New clause. 3.35MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The Bill is amended by inserting a new clause immediately before Clause 1 as follows: “Commencement This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the Minister by statutory instrument.”Justification To give room for the process of rationalisation to take effect. THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?MS AMONGI:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the proposed new clause stands part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.Clause 1, agreed to.Clause 2, agreed to. Clause 3, agreed to. Clause 4, agreed to. Clause 5, agreed to.12996MINISTERIAL STATEMENTClause 6MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, for clause 6, there is substituted the following-Clause 6 of the Bill is amended by substituting for the proposed section 11 the following-“11. Secretariat The Secretariat of the National Youth Council shall be the  National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups created under  section 5 of “The National Women’ s Council (Amendment) Act, 2024.”Justification(a) To give effect to the process of nationalisation of Government agencies by merging the secretariats of all special interest groups into one secretariat. (b) To ensure that all the councils for special interest groups are given a fair opportunity to participate in the recruitment of the staff who are to assist the councils in fulfilling their mandates under their respective laws.THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you stopping on that?MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, the other justifications are:(a) To ensure that councils do not lose their autonomous status guaranteed under their respective laws. (b) The proposal is in line with the spirit of the ad hoc committee of Parliament.(c) To give clarity on the mandate of the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups.I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Are you done? (Mr Silwany rose_)  He wants a clarification. MR SILWANY:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for giving me the opportunity to seek clarification. Madam Chairperson, why the National Youth Council exists is because it is a unique special group.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Which clause? MR SILWANY:  This clause that we are on. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Which clause? Hon. Solomon -MR SILWANY: Madam Chairperson,  I wish I could be given the opportunity - THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Solomon, you are a whole commissioner.MR SILWANY:  Madam Chairperson, I wish I would be given the opportunity to explain the clause I am talking about, but I will sit. THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister? MS AMONGI:  No objection. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.Clause7, agreed to.Clause 8MR BAKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, we are not amending clause 8. We have decided to retain what is in the Bill.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 8 stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 8, agreed to.Clause 9, agreed to.       THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412997THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024Clause 10 MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, clause 10 is amended in subsection (2) by substituting for the word “may”, the word “shall” and the words “public service” for the word “National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups”. Justification (a) To guarantee employment for staff that are already serving the respective councils, given the fact that with the merging of the secretariats of the councils into one, there will still be an opportunity for the current staff to be absorbed.(b) To harness and capitalise on the already existing expertise and experience in serving the councils for the special interest groups, as we have done in other clauses. I thank you. THE CHAIRPERSON:  “May” not “shall”. I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed, with the replacement of “may”, not “shall”. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.The Title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME3.42THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam  Chairperson,  I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister?3.43THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024” and passed it with amendments. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister?3.44THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted by this House.(Question put and agreed to.)Report, adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister?3.44THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Youth Council 12998MINISTERIAL STATEMENT(Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read a third time and do pass.THE SPEAKER:   I put the question that “The National Youth Council (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read a third time and do pass. (Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT TITLED , “THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) ACT 2024”THE SPEAKER:  Title settled and the Bill passed. Congratulations. (Applause)  Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from the National Youth Council, led by the national chairperson, Jacob Eyeru. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please stand up. One thing we need to assure you of is that you are protected. You now directly belong to your minister of youth and children affairs. Your Secretariat will only be under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, but you are directly under your minister. Yes, Hon. Kabanda-MR DA VID KABANDA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker for that clarification because – anyway, the Bill has passed. (Laughter)  It is now collective responsibility for all of us. I just want to seek clarification from the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We want assurance. Give assurance to the country because I do not want to debate the committee observations and recommendations because they said the youth councils were not consulted. I just do not want to go back there.I just want the minister to give assurance to the country and to these youth councils whether - because now we have a minister, Hon. Balaam Barugahara, who is a member of the Patriotic League of Uganda (PLU) - we just want assurance from you whether these special interest groups are going to be funded independently, or they are going to be under one Secretariat like you said. MS AMONGI:  I did not know that PLU works like this, by touching and pushing a minister. (Laughter)MS PACUTO:  Honourable minister, given the plight of the youth, especially from fishing communities, we want to get the assurance from you, now that you are merging the Youth Council into a Secretariat, how the Secretariat will pay special attention to vulnerable youth of this country. THE SPEAKER:  It is not being merged, it is integrating the different interest groups.  MS PACUTO:  I want to know how the interest of the youth, particularly the vulnerable youth, especially from fishing communities, shall be addressed. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members - Hon. Rose, just advise your neighbour that we have youth MPs.  We have youth MPs who are here and they will ensure that their constituencies are covered. 15.49MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego):  Thank you. Madam Speaker, just a word. Honestly, we are working on the law. Without the law, there is no way we can apportion resources. I want my colleagues not to work in a lacuna; in an open space, without the law. This is a Parliament. We are not in the market. We are handling issues of the Government and youth and we are catering for everybody. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, on the issues of budgeting, on appropriation, it is still this House that does appropriation. We will appropriate money to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Under this ministry, we will have money that goes to the youth, to the persons with disabilities, to the women and to the elderly. Okay? That is what we are going to do. If it means ring-fencing, we shall ring-fence. (Applause)[Ms Amongi]THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412999THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024MS AMONGI:  Madam Speaker, you are right. I want to first – THE SPEAKER:  First leave the youth MP. You know that is his constituency. MS AMONGI:  I want to first reaffirm that the councils have not been affected. What does this mean? The structure proposed is that the Executive Secretary is the Accounting Officer of the Secretariat. Under the Executive Secretary is the department headed by a programme manager in charge of youth, women, persons with disability, and older persons. The Act permits each of these councils to approve their budget. Therefore, they will be approving their budget in their Council, giving it to their Programme Manager and the head of the Secretariat will bring the budget and they will still have a subvention. This is because at the moment, each of these has a subvention. Even when their money is appropriated, the ministry is just a conduit and sends it to their V ote. That is why under this law, we have preserved that the Executive Secretary is the Accounting Officer of the National Secretariat of the Special Interest Groups.  I want to allay your fears, not the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The subvention will remain and each of the departments, under their Council will budget for the Council activities as it is now. It will be only presented as one, not individually. Therefore, there is no worry. We commit to ensuring that this – and the supervision of the Council remains with the sector ministers. (Interjections)Patriotic League of Uganda (PLU), the Minister of State for Youth and Children Affairs is in charge of the youth and children affairs and his budget will be worked together with the National Youth Council – they are seated here – and you will be in charge. (Applause)15.53MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate you because I have finally caught your eye, but long after the Bill has been disposed of.  I have looked at the Certificate of Financial Implications. I have noticed that the saving that we are making is a saving of about Shs 742 million. The clarification that I need from the minister clearly is whether this saving will be used directly to empower the structures that still exist. We need that assurance very clearly. That the costs that you will save from the administration of Shs 742 million will certainly be used to increase the budget of the National Youth Council. Secondly – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, I want to refer you to Rule 87. When we legislate in this House, we legislate based on what is in the rules. The rules are like our Bible in this House. Next item.BILLS SECOND READINGTHE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister.3.55THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the second time.THE SPEAKER:  Seconded by the honourable Minister of Disability, Hon. Laura, by acting in Leader of the Opposition, by everybody in the House. How can you sit when you-, Is it seconded? Let everybody stand up to the second the Bill. He is the sponsor. Thank you, seconded by the whole House. Would you love to speak to it?MS AMONGI: Madam Speaker, in the same spirit, this Bill is saving the structure that is democratically elected and only merging the 13000MINISTERIAL STATEMENTCouncil. And in the Bill, at an appropriate time, there is a small error which was made under 32 that we will correct. So, the same justification is that it be merged under one National Secretariat of the special interest groups and I have already articulated the rationale. Thank you.THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you so much. Could you also move for older persons?BILLSSECOND READINGTHE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20243.57THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that Bill entitled, “The National Council for Older Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the second time.THE SPEAKER:  It is seconded by the whole House. Yes, that is for the-, would you speak to it? MS AMONGI:  Madam Speaker-THE SPEAKER: All these Bills have the same justification- MS AMONGI:  I invite the House to consider the same justification of the National Secretariat of the Special Interest Group. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Back to persons with a disability. Since we have the time, we will just finish up.MR BAKKABULINDI:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity again. Before I proceed, to give the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, with the People with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2024, allow me to lay on the Table the minutes and the report.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.MR BAKKABULINDI:  Madam Speaker, since the justification, the methodology, and the intention and introduction is the same; I go straight to the committee observations and recommendations. The Committee makes the following observations and recommendations:1) Inadequate consultation, which has been cutting across-, I think in future they have to improve. The National Council for Persons with Disabilities, who are key stakeholders, were not consulted on the rationalisation process, although the Commission of Equity and Compliance represented the ministry and the group. 2) The Ministry of Public Service should in future, carry out adequate consultation with all the relevant stakeholders, especially with the implementation structure and prior to formalise the Bill, even after more sensitisation is required. 3) Abolition of Section 30 of the PWDs Act, 2020. Clause 9 of the Bill also intends to abolish Section 30 of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2020, which establishes district councils for PWDs, and, therefore, removing the grassroots structures for monitoring and mobilising PWDs to effectively participate in the implementation of the government process. Our recommendation Madam Chair; the district council for PWDs should be reinstated since they form part of the policy making organs of the council. Loss of expertise of technical officers. The country will lose out on highly experienced technical officers because the Bill does not guarantee that they will be re-employed in the National Secretariat. Madam Speaker, the transition process on the re-deployment, transfer of assets and liabilities, and pre-recruitment/pre-engagement is unclear. The recommendation transition clause should be established in the Bill. [Ms Amongi]THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202413001THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024In conclusion, Madam Chairperson, the committee, therefore, pleads that the country’s milestone in affirmative action and protection for the marginalised groups, and which includes persons with disability, should be prioritised by the Government through strengthening the councils for special interest groups. Increasing funding and adequately staffing the National Secretariat for special interest groups that is being created under this Act. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Could you also give us a summary for the older persons before we put the question?MR BAKKABULINDI:  Madam Chair, I beg to lay on the Table, the report and the minutes of the report of the National Council for Older Persons (Amendment) Bill 2024. And straight, I go to the observations and recommendations because the implications cut across. Committee observations Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee makes the following observations and recommendations:Number one which cuts across is the loss of expertise and technical officers. The Government should give priority to technical expertise and highly skilled staff while creating that National Secretariat. Of course, the transition process on redeployment, transfer of assets of liabilities and pre-recruitment is unclear and needs to be established. There was inadequate consultation with stakeholders and here, the Ministry of Public Service is called upon in future to emphasise on that.In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service should in future, carry out adequate consultation with all relevant stakeholders, especially with the implementing structures prior to the formulation of the Bill. As I conclude, the committee, therefore, pleads that the country’s milestone in affirmative action and protection of the marginalised groups, and that include the older persons, should be prioritised by the Government strengthening the councils for special interest groups, increasing funding and adequate staffing, and national secretariat for the special interest groups that is being created under this Act. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, you have heard. It is the same thing on persons with disabilities. I now put a question for the person- Yes? MS ASAMO:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make that clarification where the report has retained Article 30. I think. It was an error. It is Article 32 to be removed which is talking about the district secretariat. So when we reach amendments we talk of Article 32 instead of 30. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: We should correct it when we reach that clause. I put the question that the Persons with a Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read the second time. (Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024New clauseMR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, insertion of a new clause. The Bill is amended by inserting a new clause, immediately before clause 1, as follows:“CommencementThis Act shall come into force on the date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument.”The justification is to give room for the process of rationalisation to take effect. 13002MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE CHAIRPERSON: Minister – MS AMONGI: I concur.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the proposed new clause stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.Clause 1, agreed to.Clause 2, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4, agreed to.Clause 5MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, under clause 5, they substituted the following:Clause 5 of the Bill is amended by substituting for the proposed section 26 with the following:“11. SecretariatThe Secretariat of the Council for Persons with Disabilities shall be the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups created under Section 5 of the National Women’s Council (Amendment) Act, 2024.”The rest has been done.THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister – MS AMONGI: I concur.MR MPINDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under the Persons with Disabilities Act, there is land that belongs to the Uganda Foundation for the Blind that was put under management of the National Council for Disability. Now that we are bringing them under one Secretariat, I would like to know from the minister whether that land is going to go under the ministry or the Department of Disability in the Secretariat of the Special Interest Group. THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mpindi Bumali, the law that we are passing does not amend your Act. What we are doing is creating the Secretariat. You will remain with your Act and the youth will also remain with their Act. There is no amendment of any of your Acts. So, you will remain with your assets and liabilities. MR MPINDI: Madam Chairperson, there is clarity I would like to get. Yes, the Act is there, but this land was managed under the National Council for Disability. We are uniting all the Special Interest Groups under one special – THE CHAIRPERSON: It is your property. MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, I stated clearly that the councils are not being merged. There is a schedule in the National Council for Disability Act which lists all the property and land, and it remains in your schedule of the Act. The council is not affected together with all the schedules, Acts and legal frameworks are only the Secretariat. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 be amended, as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.Clause 6, agreed to.Clause 7, agreed to.Clause 8, agreed to.Clause 9THE CHAIRPERSON: You have a deletion.MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are repealing section 32. MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, I think we are retaining Article 30 and repealing section THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202413003THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 202432 which is talking about the Secretariat, in line with the object of the Bill. THE CHAIRPERSON: So, how should section 9 read? MS ASAMO: “Repeal Section 32 of the Principal Act” because it reads, “Secretariat –THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want section 32 deleted? MS ASAMO: Yes. It is talking about the staff  of the Secretariat and that is what we are doing here – (Interjection)-  Yes, we repeal section 32.THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee  Chair -person, can you confirm?MS ASAMO: This is because section 30 is the structure, so you cannot touch it, but we are talking of the Secretariat, which is section 32. Thank you. MR BAKKABULUNDI: Madam Chairperson, what is in the Bill has no intention of removing the District Council Secretariat, under Section 32 of the Persons with Disabilities Act, as the honourable minister has said. I consulted with APC on them. What we wanted to maintain was the Council for PWDs, like it is for the other interest groups. THE CHAIRPERSON: Under Section 9?MR BAKKABULINDI: Yes, under Section 9. THE CHAIRPERSON: So, do not delete; retain it as it was. Is that okay? Retain as it was and do not delete. MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, that is okay. Retain the structure of the council.THE CHAIRPERSON: So, clause 9 stands part of the Bill.MR BAKKABULINDI: Exactly . MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, in the current Act, section 30 is the District Council Structure. It was put in error under clause 9 to say, “Repeal section 30”. It is supposed to repeal section 32. The amendment should be to replace section 30 with section 32 and clause 9 to read, “Repeal of section 32 of the principal Act”. So, section 30 was inserted in error. THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we are making an amendment to replace it with section 32, not section 30. I put the question that clause 9 be amended, as proposed by the minister, by repealing section 30 and replacing it with section 32. Is that okay? MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, we are maintaining section 30, as per the principal Act, and replacing it with section 32. Thank you. THE CHAIRPERSON: We are  replacing section 30 with section 32. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.Clause 10MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, clause 10 is amended in subsection (2) by substituting for the word – The word “may” is being maintained; we are not substituting it. However, “public service” is being substituted with “National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups”. The justification is to guarantee employment for staff to harness and capitalise on the already existing expertise and experience serving in councils. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Minister- MS AMONGI: I concur. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.13004MINISTERIAL STATEMENTThe Title, agreed to. MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister- 4.15THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House does resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister? 4.16THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2024” and passed it with amendments. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister- 4.16THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted. THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL 2024. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister- 4.17THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2024”, be read the third time and do pass. THE SPEAKER: I put the question that “The Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, 2024”, be read the third time and do pass. (Question put and agreed to.) A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2024” THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill is passed. (Applause)  Congratulations. I put the question that “The National Council for Older Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024”, be read a second time. (Question put and agreed to.)BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024 THE CHAIRPERSON: A new clause.4.19MR CHARLES BAKKABULINDI (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Madam Chairperson, the Bill is amended by inserting a new clause immediately before clause 1 as follows; THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202413005THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024THE CHAIRPERSON: Use the microphone, please. MR BAKKABULINDI: “Commencement” This Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument. Justification is to give room for the process of rationalisation to take effect. THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister- MS AMONGI: No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the proposed new stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.Clause 1, agreed to.Clause 2, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4, agreed to. Clause 5MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, Clause 5, Amendment of section 1 of the principal Act. The Bill is amended by deleting the definition of the word “secretariat” in section 1 of the principal Act. Justification: (i)  To give effect to the establishment of the National Secretariat of special interest groups under section 5 of the National Women’s Council Act; and(ii)  To avoid ambiguity. THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Minister- MS AMONGI: No objection. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 5, as amended, agreed to. Clause 6THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairper -son- MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, clause 6 is substitution of section 11 of the principal Act. The Bill is amended by substituting for the proposed section 11 the following; Secretariat, the secretariat of the National Council for Older Persons shall be the National Secretariat for Special Interest Groups created under section 5 of “The National Women’s Council (Amendment) Act,2024.” THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister- MS AMONGI: No objection. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 6 as amended stands as part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.Clause 7, agreed to. Clause 8THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 8 MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, Amendment of section 13 of the principal Act. For clause 8, they substituted the following. “Repeal of section 13”: Section 13 of the principle Act is repealed.Justification: This is a consequential amendment following the establishment of the National Secretariat of Special Interest Groups under section 5 of the National Women’s Council Act, Cap. 318. 13006MINISTERIAL STATEMENTTHE CHAIRPERSON: Minister- MS AMONGI: No objection. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.Clause 9, agreed to.Clause 10MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Chairperson, for clause 10, we intend to maintain the word “may” which we had intended to substitute with “shall”, but the word “public service” is being replaced by “National Secretariat for special interest groups. I beg to move. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.) Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.The Title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUMETHE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister?4.25THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi ): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House does resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister?4.26THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Older Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024” and passed it with amendments. MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSETHE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister? 4.26THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted by this House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister? 4.27THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Council for Older Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the third time and do pass. THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202413007THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA FRIDAY , 19 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that “The National Council for Older Persons (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the third time and do pass. (Question put and agreed to .)A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR OLDER PERSONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2024”THE SPEAKER:  The title settled and the Bill passed. Congratulations. (Applause)Honourable members, I thank you so much. I have one or two Bills for withdrawal. Honourable members, based on Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure, the Minister of Education and Sports is hereby withdrawing – which Bill?4.29THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo):  It is the Bill entitled, “The National Curriculum Development Centre (Amendment) Bill, 2024”. THE SPEAKER : Is it seconded? (Members rose_) It is seconded by the whole House. The Bill stands withdrawn. Honourable members, I thank you so much for your endurance and for staying up to this time. May the good Lord bless you. (Applause)  Hon. Sarah, you are saying “Just that?” That is why some people are unfortunate. (Laughter) When you tell me - they do not appreciate God. When you tell me God bless me, I get more excited. (Applause) Amen. We, therefore, adjourn the House to Tuesday at 10.00 a.m.For all the Bills that are under rationalisation, I am giving notice to the chairpersons: all the committee chairpersons with Bills under rationalisation must bring their Bills. Failure to bring the Bills, the House will proceed – without the reports – to consider your Bills. On Wednesday and Thursday, we shall be able to consider the tax Bills so that we give time for us to understand and discuss the tax Bills early as we go into the budgeting. Once more, thank you. Have a blessed weekend. House adjourned.(The House rose at 4.32 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 23 April 2024 at 10.00 a.m.)  