Tuesday, 2 April 2013

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you back from the Easter recess and as you may recall, the purpose of the short break was, other than allowing you to go for the Easter recess, to enable you make consultations on the Marriage and Divorce Bill. So, to get a structured feedback, I would expect an update from the whips during the course of today so that we can understand where we stand.

I also want to remind you that we have got a lot of work to do before we close the second session. I expect that we shall apply ourselves diligently to work. I also want to inform you that April is the period when we give our sectoral committees time to scrutinise the budget framework papers of all the sectors. The law requires that the papers are laid by the 1st of April every year. I have, however, received a letter from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for more time. 

I will accordingly exercise my powers under Section 22 of the Budget Act to extend the period for laying the Budget Framework Paper to the 10th of April. We shall not go beyond that.

I also want to inform that I led the delegation of Uganda Parliament to the 128th IPU Assembly in Ecuador. I was accompanied by Commissioner Lukumu Bintu, the hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Julius Maganda.

The main theme of the debate was “From Undulating Growth to Purposeful Development: New Approaches and New Solutions.” The thrust of the debate was to position Parliament to be able to contribute for the first time to the next set of sustainable development goals and we shall be giving you the website where you can make your contributions so that they are presented to the United Nations later this year.
In my general address, I talked about the need to continue supporting the vulnerable groups, about the key role of Parliament in formulating national development policies and goals. There is need for us to act as key stakeholders in the sustainable development goals after 2015 and the need for political stability so that we can have development.

There is a need to protect women and children during times of conflict and also the plight of the rural women in Africa who need better plans than we have done in the present. Hon. Okumu and hon. Amongi participated in the Committee on Peace and Security and hon. Amongi was chosen to report for the entire first Standing Committee. Hon. Maganda participated on the Committee on Trade and Sustainable Development, hon. Lukumu Jalia participated on the Standing Committee on Democracy and Human Rights.

We had bilateral meetings with delegations of Sri-lanka, Morocco, Australia, Thailand, East Timor and Ecuador. They were giving us feedback on our plans when they came to Kampala to form parliamentary friendship groups between all these countries and many of them have accepted and we shall be signing the agreements during the course of this session.

So, I just encourage the Members to look out for the website such that you are able to present our views to the United Nations. I also expect a report to be brought to this House so that we can debate it appropriately.

I also would like to inform the honourable members that the Parliamentary Network on the World Bank and the IMF will be having a workshop on 4th April from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. at the Conference Hall in the new President’s Office building. So, Members are invited to attend that workshop in the morning. Thank you very much.

In the Public Gallery, we have teachers and students of King James Comprehensive School. They are represented by hon. Joy Ongom and hon. Geoffrey Omara. You are welcome.

On this side, we have students and teachers from Gombe Secondary School represented by hon. Kivumbi and hon. Mariam Nalubega. You are welcome. (Applause)

3.39
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure regarding how we process Bills. We are aware that in most cases, it is Government which originates Bills. Once Cabinet has approved a particular Bill, then they can bring it to the House for first reading. The Bill is accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. 

There is something surprising. The Marriage and Divorce Bill over which we broke off for two weeks to consult our electorates, get their opinion on it has caused a bit of storm. It is a Bill that was originated by Government; it was read for the first time in 2009. The last Parliament expired before that Bill was finally concluded. The Ninth Parliament opted to save a number of Bills that had expired in the last Parliament and indeed, those Bills were re-tabled here. 
We, as Parliament, were trying to process an idea, a thought or a draft law originated by Government. To the best of our knowledge, the Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009 is the idea of Government.

I was surprised to hear that even His Excellency, the President, who chairs Cabinet and many ministers are disowning their own Bill and saying they are going to fight it as if it was introduced to the House by someone else.

It is very unheard of; why is Government putting itself into such a bad image? Instead of Cabinet sitting to agree on their Bill then they bring it here and put their efforts together, they want to fight their own Bill. We want to find out why Government has decided to take that approach.

Why is the President withdrawing his own Bill? If they knew that the ideas they had come up with were obnoxious, they should not have wasted our time.
Why bring something here and then turn around and say, “We are going to fight it. Some political players are not fair; this is anti-people Bill”?

We want an explanation from Government on why they have started fighting their own Bill as if it was brought in by someone else.

2.42
MR KRISPUS AYENA (UPC, Oyam County North, Oyam): Madam Speaker, I rise to say what a shame! This is populism at its best, I would say. I would totally want to agree with my brother that Bills which are brought by Government are owned by Government. You cannot produce a child and then you bring it for us to kill.

If you have a dog which steals, do not bring it to us to kill; kill it yourself. This matter is very emotive and I think this is what I call political flunk-man-ship.

When Government finally discovered that they have now arrived at a position where people do not agree with them, they have carefully turned. This is politics of changing goal posts.
Can somebody on that side shout out and loudly tell us that at the time when the idea of Marriage and Divorce Bill was being conceived by Cabinet and Government officials, they were asleep? Let them tell us if they were asleep. I can see my brother hon. Ruhindi is very amused about it and he was in charge. He is the one who brought this Bill here. Can he now be honourable enough to tell me that, “My brother, when we brought this, we were asleep and therefore, we woke up only to find that it was useless? Ugandans do not want it and we want to withdraw it.” We will need an apology. 

This Bill has already consumed a lot of resources of Government. I sit on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. We have analysed and tried as much as possible to prune the wild edges of this Bill and we thought that it was something that Government would help with.

Suddenly, the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister and all the ministers are bashing it. The other day, I heard my brother hon. Adolf Mwesige also bashing it. Now, who owns this Bill? We do not, at least, on this side.
If they do not want, let them withdraw it and we do not waste more time on it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

2.45
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate because our constituents have been telling us that we, Parliament, are the ones who are responsible for this Bill. We have been put to task to explain to them the various avenues through which we get a Bill here; that we normally have a Private Member’s Bill and then that from the Cabinet. Usually, Private Members’ Bills constitute only less than one percent.

What is disturbing us is that we heard from various circles that the whole Cabinet is shifting the ownership of the Bill calling it “Kadaga Bill” - that it is a Bill for Kadaga. They want to tarnish the name of our Speaker, hiding under that cover. 

We have explained to them that this is not a “Kadaga Bill” and that the Bill came from Cabinet. The Cabinet headed by the President agreed that this Bill was ripe enough to be taken to Parliament for debate. I told them that had it not been this Parliament, the Bill would be done because Cabinet agreed that this is the Bill that we need as Ugandans.

It is really very disturbing and disappointing that the entire Cabinet should shift this Bill and codename it the “Kadaga Bill” and that they will fight it. I am really very disappointed.

2.47
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Madam Speaker, we have been embarrassed very much by this Bill. When we go to the villages, people are saying, “What is wrong with Parliament? Don’t you have something to discuss so that you bring this Bill at this particular time?” It is very difficult in the villages to tell them that this is a Government Bill and it is not initiated by Parliament.
 
We have tried to explain this. I am told that this Bill has been on the shelves for some time but why is it being brought today? We have suffered with this Bill. It is as if it has been initiated by us. It is high time that Cabinet came and explained that they brought this Bill. This is because ours was not to initiate this particular Bill. Our work is different from this because we are supposed to discuss this Bill and bring out a good law. What is happening out there is that you hear Members of Parliament clashing with ministers when they are on the same pulpit. Hon. Kagwera clashed with hon. Adolf Mwesige; Kagwera supporting the Bill and Mwesige not supporting it yet, hon. Mwesige is a member of the Cabinet.

Something should be done. Government should come out and clear the air. Otherwise, the whole Bill has been blamed on Parliament. We have been demonised. When we go out, it is Parliament the people are saying that is discussing a law which is very irrelevant – (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: What is making matters worse is that when you were sending us for this mini-recess, you did not indicate that you were going to give us Shs 5 million because we know that it is part of our work. Government came in saying that if the Speaker has not given us the money, Cabinet was going to give it to us. Madam Speaker, are you aware about the Shs 5 million promised to be given to Members?  
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been in Latin America. I do not know.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, when you tell the public that you are giving MPs Shs 5 million, we end up spending Shs 20 or 30 million. We have spent more than Shs 15 million to consult on this. Once you go, they say, “Give us the money that you got.” The announcement was done and no money was even given to the MPs. It has been one of the hardest Bills that we have consulted on. So, we call upon Government to come out and clear our name. Otherwise, we have a big problem with our constituents.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I just want to tell the country that this Bill was brought here by Government. It was signed by hon. Kiddu Makubuya, Attorney-General and Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs then. The Government brought it for first reading and they were supporting it in the committee.

We sat as a Business Committee and lined up the business and they were there. We agreed which Bills are coming when. I am surprised about this. I think, Minister, you need to tell the country whether this is your Bill or not. Anyway, I am now waiting for a report from the Whips. Please, Whips, I want your reports.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, as Deputy Attorney-General and the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I associate myself with this Bill and I want to hasten to add that in the consultations that I am privy to personally, there is nowhere that Government has reneged on this Bill. This is in the meetings I am privy to and that I have attended. Very soon, after consultations, we shall come here with our position, as Government, on some amendments or otherwise, regarding this matter. Thank you.

2.52
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues. I think when the whole country looks at this House, it imagines we are serious leaders. It is our own actions that will determine the perception of the country about us, as leaders. This Bill has already left the committee; it has already left Parliament and it is at Committee Stage. In fact, by the time we broke off, many provisions of that Bill had already been passed. This insincerity on the part of Government should stop because they are acting for the Gallery as they are finding it hard to explain. This is your Bill; own it.

The point being raised by the honourable members is that in the public, it is now a “Kadaga Bill” - (Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, we have passed many Bills into law since Parliament was established in this country. There are not too many laws or Bills that have needed this kind of consultation. That shows that the law or the Bill itself has a larger meaning than we sitting here in Parliament and passing it as a law - [Honourable Members: “You are taking too long.”]- This Bill has taken a bit of time and so if you want me to be brief, I think you are also being unfair to yourselves. 

Madam Speaker, it is important for us, as Parliament, to go through a Bill thoroughly and if need be, consult our voters. I think this has happened and we all went - I do not think members of Parliament were forced by Government to go and consult. Rather, I think members of Parliament found it absolutely necessary to go and consult. 

Is it in order that people should now stand in this House and say that members of Parliament were forced by Government to go to the village and that Government has stated that this is a “Kadaga Bill”? Are they in order? Are they able to demonstrate?

Madam Speaker, can anybody substantiate that Government has said this is your Bill?

THE SPEAKER: As I said, I have not been here but I understand that some ministers have said they oppose the Bill in public and they are members of the Cabinet. Let us have that on record.

MR KATUNTU: That is why I think it is very wise of anybody that if you do not have anything to say, do not stand up and usurp the microphone.

The point being raised is that this is a government Bill and Government should own it. To have the hon. Adolf Mwesige, Minister for Local Government, hon. Asuman Kiyingi, hon. Lokodo go around saying they are coming to oppose their own Bill - to have hon. Alupo but above all, His Excellency, the President - because what has been reported is that he is going to oppose all the anti-people provisions in this Bill. 

When did these anti-people provisions come in effect? It is his Bill. This is the President’s Bill - (Hon. Janet Museveni rose_) - I do not know whether the Member of Parliament for Ruhaama has the authority to speak on behalf of the President. (Laughter) I graciously concede the Floor.

MRS MUSEVENI: Thank you, my honourable brother. Madam Speaker, I am not speaking on behalf of the President. I just want to speak as Member of Parliament for Ruhaama and member of the Cabinet of this Government. I know from reliable sources that there was a request from Government that this Bill waits for Government to properly consult and to give the members of NRM a chance to caucus on it so that it can come to Parliament – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, there are procedures of dealing with the business before Parliament. Either Cabinet, through one of the ministers, can come here and make a formal request to you that we want to stay this Bill or they can actually withdraw the Bill. Is the Minister for Karamoja and MP for Ruhaama in order to insinuate that there were underhand deals relating to this Bill; that a request was made somewhere that this Bill be stayed?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill was brought here by the Government for first reading on their own volition. No one forced the Government to bring that Bill here. They have been attending the committee hearings to defend the Bill. Parliament finished its work, wrote the report; went to the Business Committee, we said, Bills 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 are ready and they were there. We agreed on what Bills to bring and the Government was also in the Business Committee. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I do not intend to stay long on the Floor. But the point is, to go to the second reading, you must have a motion, and that motion was moved by Government. Why doesn’t Government own its baby? Whether the baby is ugly, it is your baby –(Laughter)– own it –(Interruption)

COL (Rtd) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, in your communication, you clearly stated that you are going to wait for the communication from the Chief Whips. So, is it in order for us to start discussing the Bill and even telling lies that Government is withdrawing the Bill? I have not seen Government withdrawing the Bill. Is it in order for us to continue debating this Bill at this moment?

THE SPEAKER: We are not debating the Bill. The Bill is on the Order Paper. We are debating my communication. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, since this Parliament started in 2011, we have passed many Bills. We have done a lot of consultation as members of Parliament. The job of a Member of Parliament is to consult his people on anything taking place in Parliament with his or her constituents and come and report to Parliament. 

It is very interesting – by the way, I am a Member of the Parliamentary Commission. But it is very interesting that on the Marriage and Divorce Bill, Government is proposing to pay Members of Parliament Shs 5 million and yet –(Interjections)– even the President talked about it. We have done a lot of consultations and we have never been paid Shs 5 million to do consultation. 

Madam Speaker, it is very dangerous for the Executive to pay members of Parliament Shs 5 million for Marriage and Divorce Bill –(Interjections)– if you read our payslips as Members of Parliament, it provides for going to the constituency to consult and we are paid this money on a monthly basis for that purpose. Now, what is the reason for Government to give a special Shs 5 million for only this Bill and yet we have more Bills to come?

I plead with you - and as Parliament, that we disassociate ourselves from that Shs 5 million. If that Shs 5 million is for the NRM Caucus, they can draw cash and give it to them but they should not pay members of Parliament under the normal channels because this could be an illegal payment to the Members of Parliament. Teachers are being paid Shs 70,000 per month and you, members of Parliament want to be paid Shs 5 million for the very work you are supposed to do. (Interjections)

In conclusion, I plead with my brothers and sisters who are making noise that it is illegal for you to pick that money because the Auditor-General will raise a query. (Interruption)

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, two weeks ago, you sent us on recess to go and consult on this Bill. And I want to make it very clear to the Leader of the Opposition that nobody has been paid Shs 5 million. If at all he has been paid, let him lay evidence of that money on Table for everybody to see. Otherwise, is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to tell lies on the Floor of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as I said, I have been away. The Commission has not sat. I do not know about the money. Let us go to the next item. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for that ruling. But at an appropriate time, I will lay on the Table – (Interjections) – not now, but I will lay it on Table later. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

UGANDA VISION 2040

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I rise to lay before this House the Uganda Vision 2040 for Parliamentary approval. Vision 2040 provides development paths and strategies to ensure that Uganda becomes a transformed society from a predominantly peasant to a modern industrialised country within 30 years. 

To attain this level, the country will exploit its opportunities in natural resources, ICT, industries and agriculture. These opportunities will be harnessed through investment, physical infrastructure, peace, security, defence and human development. 

Copies should be within your pigeonholes any moment now. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it will be sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and they can also work together with the Budget Committee and give us a report. 

FINANCIAL STATEMENT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.11
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with reports and opinions thereon by the Auditor-General, as follows: 

1. 	Kotido District Local Government 
2. 	Kotido Town Council 
3. 	Abim Town Council
4. 	Abim District Local Government
5. 	Nakapiripirit District Local Government
6. 	Nakapiripirit Town Council
7. 	Jinja District Local Government
8. 	Jinja Municipal Council
9. 	Kakira Town Council
10. 	Buwenge Town Council
11. 	Butemba Town Council
12. 	Bulamburi District Local Government
13. 	Gulu District Local Government
14. 	Gulu Municipal Council
15. 	Kumi District Local Government
16. 	Kumi Town Council
17. 	Fort Portal Municipal Council
18. 	Katakwi Town Council
19. 	Katakwi District Local Government
20. 	Wakiso District Local Government
21. 	Entebbe Municipal Council
22. 	Wakiso Town Council
23. 	Moroto District Local Government
24. 	Moroto Municipality Council
25. 	Bukedea District Local Government
26. 	Bukedea Town Council

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Committee on Local Government Accounts will examine those reports and report back to this House.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PUBLIC ORDER MANAGEMENT BILL, 2011

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Internal Affairs - where is he? 

3.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, the Minister of Internal Affairs may be in one of the bathrooms around and he is about to arrive. (Laughter) I spoke to him about five minutes ago. He must be within.

3.17
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I think we have to wait for the minister. But beyond that, I would like to remind you about how you allowed us to go and consult with our constituents on the Marriage and Divorce Bill, which just involves a husband and wife in their bedroom. This Public Order Management Bill involves the public, which means it affects everybody, including children.

In the circumstances, I would like to plead that you allow us time to consult on this Public Order Management Bill with our constituents. I am saying this because some people in the village kept asking questions about this Bill as we consulted them on the Marriage and Divorce Bill. I plead with you to allow us do more consultations on this Bill as members of Parliament. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I appreciate the need for consultations but you have had this Bill for some time. Are you suggesting that you have never consulted with your voters on this Bill?

MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Reflecting on what has been happening to the Marriage and Divorce Bill and since this Bill also involves the stakeholders we have been consulting with and it being one of the sensitive Bills we have - because it is about how people conduct their affairs in any given congregation - I think it is prudent that we do more consultations on it. Yes, we have been with this Bill for some time but you realise that even the Marriage and Divorce Bill has been in Parliament since 1965. 

Because this Public Order Management Bill touches Chapter Four of the Constitution, which is about fundamental human rights, I pray that you allow us to go and do more consultations. 

In that regard, I agree with the Leader of the Opposition that we go and do more consultations on this Bill, which touches the fundamental rights in regard to the freedom of assembly. Give us at least five days. We do not need the Shs 5 million. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know that part of your responsibility is to consult generally. So, let us first debate the Bill and if we find some contentious issues, then we can consult over the weekend for which I have facilitated you –(Interjections) - yes, I have facilitated you, normally, to go and consult. So, let us debate. We can go on Friday. 

Hon. Member, we are on the Public Order Management Bill and we had started the debate. So, let us have contributions. 

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This particular Bill has been brought here a number of times and as you can see, Members who are here do not seem to be ready to proceed with this Bill; not because they have not read it but because this Bill is a hot potato. We as a country are hungry; we want to eat this potato. It is too hot for us to put in our mouths and those of us who are holding it cannot hold it in our hands anymore. That is what I read from both sides of the House - not being prepared to proceed with it.

This Bill, as the Leader of the Opposition said earlier on, touches every citizen in this country: whether you are a child; a person not interested in public gatherings, as long as at the time when more than five people assemble, you are within the vicinity, automatically you are sucked in. Whether you like it or not, you are sucked in. Therefore, it calls for a very cautious move on our part as an institution that legislates. 
So, Madam Speaker, I will want to plead with you, that because of the sensitivity of this Bill - yes, we all need it. I pray and beg that we move cautiously and slowly on this Bill. 

It is true we have been out there. We have consulted on a few occasions but not exhaustively. Even on this Bill, the Marriage and Divorce Bill, some of us have consulted people in certain sub-counties and others are not yet even covered. 

So, on that note, for those areas which have not been covered, we may now have to shoot two birds with one stone; that while we are consulting on the Marriage and Divorce Bill, we also push in the element of the Public Order Management Bill. I beg that we give this matter some break and some consultations. I thank you.

3.24
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard and definitely, respect the views of some of the colleagues expressing reservation as to whether we should proceed with this Bill or go for consultations. As the Chairperson of the committee, I am also getting a bit worried that we are putting in a lot of work in some of these Bills, but we do not seem to be progressing - progressing as a committee but also as Parliament discharging our legislative responsibilities. 

I remember when we were discussing this Bill, I think there was general consensus that some good work had been done and an unprecedented amount of consultation was done and we seemed to be narrowing gaps between all the parties - the people across and the people around. I think we should be seen to be moving on with our work and my plea is that - I remember, I think 37 people had submitted on this Bill and we were proceeding on well to receive more submissions.

Therefore, my view is that more submissions should be received and we continue to work on the Bill. If there is any matter that needs consultation, it can be stood over. But to say that we should go back, I think, does not reflect well on us as a committee but also as a Parliament. 

So, my view is that we proceed and then if there is a specific issue that we want to consult on, then we can go on and consult. I am saying this against the submissions we received and the consensus that we received at the last meeting, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Actually, hon. Members, I seem to recall that all the members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs signed this report. Didn’t they – (Interjections) - no, all of them. I think that was made very clear here that all of them - NRM, Independents, the Opposition - signed that report. Yes, they did. 

MR AYENA: Order, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You are ordering the Speaker? (Laughter)

MR AYENA: Madam Speaker, with due respect, a matter is being brought to my attention to the fact that there is a constitutional petition that has been filed in the Constitutional Court, touching on the Public Order Management Bill. So, in that case, if it is true - and it was filed by hon. Kivumbi, challenging the propriety of proceeding with this Bill whose effects would tend to affect the decision of the Constitutional Court. 

So, would it be in order, Madam Speaker, to proceed, under the subjudice rule? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have no knowledge of any petition in any court. I have not been served. Let us proceed with the business.

3.27
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the argument of the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I remember we were here in this House and everybody from the Opposition and from the side of Government was appreciating the work, which the committee had done and the report was debated here. 

Outside, to the public, the performance of this institution of Parliament is judged by the Bills we pass. And the public has been blaming us for sitting here and wasting a lot of time and Government’s money. What is wrong with continuing debate on the Bill? The contentious sections can be amended any time and where it needs consultations, we can go on and consult. But we cannot continue to be subjected to the public that we are doing nothing; and this is what is happening.

Therefore, I would like to support your argument and to appeal to Members; let us debate because we are sent here to debate. Where there is no consensus, we can generate it or we can go and consult. (Hon. Mwiru and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us have contributions. We had started the debate; let us complete the debate. Can I have people who want to speak? 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members, we had started this debate. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance, pursuant to what has been said by a number of Members of Parliament, namely that in the recent past, the Constitutional Court pronounced itself on a fundamental challenge regarding human freedom in Muwanga Kivumbi vs. the Attorney-General. The public who we represent do not fully know that the pronouncement of the Constitutional Court fell on deaf ears. 

The clarification I am seeking is that would it not be prudent for us to know that it is important for the people we represent to exercise their constitutional rights by making contributions on this alternative undertaking under the Public Order Management Bill, which is seemingly a new phenomenon to them?  

I, therefore, propose - (Mr Ruhindi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Attorney-General.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I rise to object strongly to the observations being made by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi because this Government respects the rule of law. Really, to say, and I am happy to hear that all members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs signed the committee’s report.

The Constitutional Court annulled the provisions of Section 32 (2) of the Police Act and sustained the existence of Section 32 (1) of the Police Act. You hear the honourable member behind you who went to court is saying that that is true because the provisions of Section 32 (1) provides for the powers of the Police to regulate public assemblies and rallies. It is only Section 32 (2) which gave discretionary powers for the Inspector-General of Police to prohibit public rallies and assemblies. 

In other words, what was struck down were the discretionary powers of the Inspectorate of Police. Now, whatever is being done and has been done so far is the application of Section 32 (1) of the Police Act and thereby Government abiding by the Constitutional Court ruling. Certainly, it is not correct for the honourable Member of Parliament to give a deaf ear to the constitutional Court ruling.  

MR KEN-LUYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I wish the hon. Attorney-General knew what the Constitutional Court ruled – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, if you wanted this House to take judicial notice of the judgement, you should have brought it, laid it here and explained. I do not want to speculate. The judgement is not here, leave it. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged. 

THE SPEAKER: I cannot rule on something that I have not seen.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, I was demanding with humility that the people we represent are more important than us and should also be given the opportunity to pronounce themselves on a fundamental subject of this kind. Why do we fear to let them advise us? Who is the Attorney-General to stop this crusade? (Laughter)
 
3.34
THE STATE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker and hon. Members, when this Bill was introduced on the Floor of Parliament and brought for the second reading, I remember very vividly that the Leader of the Opposition requested you, Madam Speaker, for more time especially to study the complete minutes of the work of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we all supported that request. On that basis, the consideration of the Bill was adjourned up to now.

So, there has been ample time for Members to study the details of the proposals and the minutes to come up with a position. We have definitely consulted widely and for us, we are ready to move and discuss the proposed amendments by the committee and as I said in my statement two weeks ago - that we are going along with many of the proposals and I believe that we will get acceptance of the new proposals. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request that we proceed with the general debate and thereafter, move to the committee stage. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, actually hon. Baba has assisted me. You did ask me for time and I gave it to you. It must have been over nine months from February last year up to December –(Interjections) - yes, that is what I did. 

MR ANYWARACH: I thank you very much for this opportunity. I indeed followed your instruction and looked at the Public Order Management Bill but there are technicalities in that Bill. 

The first is that it is a combination of the Traffic and Road Safety Act plus the Police Act – just a combination. There are derivatives of the laws from here and there being patched up to form this current law that we are talking about.

Now the clarification that I would like to seek from the learned Attorney-General is that in coming out with this law, what defect are we trying to remedy because the two laws seem to be very clear except that we have imported from this and the other law and we have also brought some other interest giving almost express power to police officers to shoot people who are for public gathering? So, that is why, for me, you could have given that time but it could have been overtaken by events. My request is that in the interest of any constitutional governance with the exception of maybe UK where at least you have to legitimise the views of the people in the process of making laws, it does not do us any harm to consult. At least, some five days would be very important to consult and we legitimise the views of the people to whom power belongs according to our Constitution. That is my humble request. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you have responsibilities to the electorate. We gave you nine months from February last year up to December – yes, we gave you nine months on this Bill. 

If there are areas that you do not like, you can amend them but let us have the debate. Please, we cannot go on like this. Hon. Mwesigye, are you not a member of the committee? [Col Mwesigye: “No.”] You are not, okay. Let us have the debate and when we reach an area you do not like, you can apply or request for an amendment. 

3.38
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for allowing us to continue with the debate. 

It is clear that members of the Opposition, including hon. Katuntu, the Shadow Attorney-General, signed this Bill. Therefore, the Constitution –[Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “Procedure.”]

THE SPEAKER: What procedure?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right – maybe, before I raise the procedure, we are aware that we have a Dura Cement Report which you have not answered. (Laughter) Is it procedurally right, Madam Speaker, to say that all members signed when this is the only committee which has 19 members and out of 19, only 16 signed and that means that from 30, 14 never signed. 

So, is it procedurally right for the colonel to say that they all signed and he is forgetting that we have issues with Dura Cement? I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, do not change the rules. Once two thirds of the members have signed, the report is valid. Let us contribute. You will make your contribution. 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I will not be diverted and I will continue with my debate. 

THE SPEAKER: I will come back to you.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, the Constitution is very clear and it mandates all organs of the State and the people of Uganda to work towards the promotion of peace and stability. As society grows, new challenges emerge. For example, the challenge of democracy has brought so many challenges to this society. We did not have the Al-Qaeda and we did not know how they work. The Constitution is very clear in Article 212. 

The Constitution provides for the Police to protect life and property, preserve law and order and to prevent and detect crime. Therefore, I believe that this Bill, if passed into law, definitely is coming to address the new challenges that we are facing today, which were not there before. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to inform this House that as far as I am concerned and as far as we are all concerned in this Parliament, every weekend we are actually facilitated to do consultations with the various stakeholders and especially the people that we represent in this Parliament. Therefore, I am rising on an issue that is critical - a Bill in regard to the day-to-day running of this country - and I propose that a debate in this Bill kick-starts and then – (Interjections) - yes, I went to the right schools and the English I speak is very clear. So, we could go on with this debate and in case we feel that we need a recess, we can refer back to the people that we represent but I imagine that we continue with the debate of the Public Order Management Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the beginning of the debate on the Public Order Management Bill, I heard hon. Ayena say that it could be subjudice given that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has taken the Attorney-General to the Constitutional Court. Now that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi is here and the Attorney-General is also here, can he clear the air lest we offend the rule of subjudice? We want to know because hon. Kivumbi may not have the authority to serve the Speaker. The Speaker has not been served with that suit. So, we want first of all to get from these two what the status is today?

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Members. I do not want us to engage in that debate. I do not know what that case is about and I will not rule on it. Let us proceed with our debate. I want to be served constitutionally with court papers. I do not want rumours. Serve me and I will comply. 

3.44
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I have realised is that Members do not have anything to debate on this Bill. (Laughter) I already see this because it is like one group has gotten defeated and the other seems to think that they are already winning in the scenes. But what I believe is that it is very important to have public order in any society but of course, it should not be carried wholesomely by certain individuals. There must be guidance in terms of rules. 

We do believe that our Constitution provides safeguards in terms of provision of upholding the human rights of this country and, therefore, our friends on the Opposition side should not get worried at all over this because we have other laws that will guarantee the safety of our wanaichi at home - (Interruption)

MR GILBERT OLANYA:  Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Chemaswet for giving way. I would like to inform him that Members are very much interested in discussing this very important Bill but they have fear from the areas where they come from. For example, while consulting on the Marriage and Divorce Bill in my district, they told me that instead of this Bill, they would be so much interested if I consulted them on the Public Order Management Bill and corruption. Therefore, you can now see Members are lining up because we like the view of our people to be regarded in this House. That is why people are quiet; they are looking at their constituencies. What will be the reaction of our voters from the ground? 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in your wisdom, give us time to consult our voters and we come back. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not know whether you are speaking on behalf of the Opposition because when we last had this debate, the Leader of the Opposition said we should not finish it today; that we must continue debating it and that is what we are doing. He can answer. 

3.37
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I agree. I even want to agree with the Minister for Internal Affairs that we asked for time and we consulted amongst ourselves but you have seen what has happened with this Marriage and Divorce Bill. First, it was the Domestic Relations Bill in 2001, it has revolved and when it became contentious, we went to consult. I want to apologise that we could have erred in that instead of consulting the public that it affects, we consulted ourselves. So, we now have got experience from the Marriage and Divorce Bill that this was for two adults but the public is everything; the young, the old and even animals. 

So, Madam Speaker, what we are saying is you are right, for the minister is one but we have erred and that is why I am saying that given these circumstances, it will not be right because this law – (Interruption) 

MR ODO TAYEBWA: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, for giving way. I would like to inform my Leader of Opposition and even the House that I do not see why we are now in a hurry to debate this Bill. Madam Speaker, remember in the villages, they have referred to the Marriage and Divorce Bill as the “Kadaga Bill”. So, we do not want to get another scenario where they will say this is also a “Kadaga Bill”. The information I am giving to the House is that please, let us get time, go and consult the public because this is something that they own. It is a public order Bill. Actually, it is more important than even the Marriage and Divorce Bill. Thank you. 

MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my brother the Leader of the Opposition, it is clear that the speaker on the Floor is the Leader of the Opposition and allocates duties to his side to perform on his behalf. 

Madam Speaker, I understand hon. Katuntu is the shadow Attorney-General of the Opposition, he is the legal adviser to the Leader of the Opposition and he works on behalf of the Opposition. I am hereby reliably informed that in the report of the Public Order Management Bill, hon. Katuntu appended his signature. This is a clear indication that the person he appointed as shadow Attorney- General has already endorsed the report on his behalf. 

Is it in order, therefore, for the Leader of the Opposition, who has duly assigned his member a serious responsibility to perform on his behalf, to undermine the person that he appointed to work on his behalf?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please let us get serious. We had started this debate and you wanted more debate. Let us debate and see where we shall stop. If you have to consult, you will do it during the weekend because I have provided you with resources for the weekend. Let us debate.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for your wise ruling. A few minutes ago, I heard the Attorney-General commenting on the Marriage and Divorce Bill that, they have also consulted and shall bring their position. I want to agree with hon. Katuntu who is my Attorney-General and legal adviser but also in the process and in the same way that your Attorney- General wants to consult on the law as presented in the House, my Attorney-General also wants to consult on the signature he put on the Public Order Management Bill. So, it would be very dangerous for you to assume that my Attorney-General is an angel while yours is a Satan.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us proceed with the debate. I also wanted to clarify that this request was not just to go for that Bill. We normally have an Easter recess but I told you, I am giving you recess, go for Easter but also do the following. So, it is not special. We normally have an Easter recess; that is on my calendar. Let us have the debate. Hon. Kakooza. [Honourable Members: “He debated.”]

THE SPEAKER: Did you?

3.53
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): No, I did not. I gave information and it is on record, Madam Speaker. 

I want to add my voice and support the work done by the committee. When this Bill was tabled, I thought that we would not come to general consensus. This Bill has 18 sections and in my time in Parliament, this is the only Bill where all members of the committee came together, consulted and signed the report. When you look at that report, 90 percent of the members signed.

When I go to the object of the Bill, in (2) it says the Bill intends to manage public order in partnership with the organisers and participants in assemblies. What has been happening in the public is that we have had disorderly meetings and you find that this country has lost its image of being organised. When we pass this Bill, we shall have the peace we want in this country. I also think that when investors come here, they want to find an organised society. Therefore, if this Bill is passed into law, the way we have been conducting our meetings and assemblies will be organised.

Look at the Police duties and what has been happening. All this has been wanting. When you see the Police and the way they have been confronting the public, we want to hold meetings but there is no order. I think that if we pass this Bill, the responsibilities of the Police and the organisers will be known. That is why I stand to support this Bill and I appeal to Members that it is time to live in an organised society. We must be orderly. Let us pass this Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.57
MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, when the Minister of Internal Affairs was presenting this Bill, he alluded to a garden of roses that is allowed to blossom and flower. However, I want to entice him to another profound maxim of democracy and human rights which says, “I hate to hear what you say but I will die to ensure that you say what I hate to hear.” That is a maxim of democracy and we know where it has served.

I have serious reservations to this Bill and personally, I went to the Constitutional Court. I am not a lawyer by profession but I went there as an activist. There was a history to it and some of our friends who carry bodily harm are not here. I have a permanent defect to my respiratory system caused by the brutality of Police and for health reasons, I will not go into that.

When we are talking about this Bill, we need something great. I have serious contentions against this Bill and one is, we are aware of Article 92 of the Constitution that restricts this Parliament or any other organ of Government from attempting to make any law that is intended to do away with the ruling of any court.

I am also aware of the mandate of this Parliament, under Article 79(3), to protect the Constitution and promote democratic governance in this country.

I have shared this opinion with the Attorney-General and with the Chairman of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that this Bill carries a satanic clause that is more or less intended to re-write the very section of the Police Act that the Constitutional Court did away with and this is Clause 8 sub-sections 2 and 3. I am hesitant to state whether Parliament can also pass a law that carries these two clauses. 

That is why the Executive is happy with the report of Parliament because this report smuggled into this Bill – when I took it to the Attorney-General in our shadow cabinet he said, “How could that have escaped my eye?”

When you read clause 8 sub-clause (b), the committee recommended the deletion of sub-clause (c) on any other clause but sub-section (b) is very subjective. It says, “… the venue is considered unsuitable.” The word “unsuitable” is very subjective. By whom? By the Police. And when you go to sub-clause 3, it says, “Where the authorised officer notifies the organiser or his or her agent of a public meeting that it is not possible to hold the proposed public meeting on the date or venue proposed, the public meeting shall not be held on that date and at that venue.”

When you read sub-section 2, which was nullified by the Constitutional Court, in the Police Act – I have it here and somebody should assist me with the Police Act. You would see that sub-clause 3 is intended to restore the powers to Police to prohibit the same thing. And the Constitutional Court has already pronounced itself that powers to prohibit are unconstitutional; no officer can prohibit a gathering. 

Therefore, if Parliament goes on to pass the Bill – and the report does not touch on this clause. In fact, this is the gist of this Bill; that is why the Executive is happy with it. By doing so, you are reintroducing a section of the law that was declared unconstitutional. The Attorney-General is here, I want you tell us, how different is this wording from the section of the law that was declared unconstitutional – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. The information I would like to give is a verbatim quotation from the contents of Article 92 of the Constitution which states, “Parliament shall not pass any law to alter the decision or judgement of any court as between the parties to the decision or judgement”. ` 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you for giving way, my colleague. Madam Speaker, I was in Parliament during constitutional amendments. There was one Member of Parliament called Dan Kiwalabye from Kiboga and he was a very staunch NRM supporter. We wanted to put a clause that anybody can stand as an Independent Member. Kiwalabye stood here and said, “No, everybody must stand in a party”. We went for primaries and lost; immediately, he crossed. So, I asked him, if we had passed that law, would you have stood as an Independent Member of Parliament?

So, the information I am giving to my colleagues is that do not look at this law as if it is being done for the Opposition. Hon. Dr Baryomunsi had a problem; tomorrow, you might be passing by a market in your constituency and you may have a similar problem. I warn you never to come here to cry because I am going nowhere; I am still here. Even Museveni knows I am still here. (Laughter)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for giving way. Certainly, I do not want to pre-empt his debate, but only to say that in reading the Constitution and understanding it, it is always wise to read all the relevant provisions on the subject matter in order to get the full import and meaning of the legislation. 

For instance, when you refer to the relevant articles of the Constitution, you also need to look at Article 212 and Article 43. Article 212 is very clear; it talks about the functions of the Police. “The functions of the Uganda Police shall include the following: 
    a) To protect life and property
    b) To preserve law and order
    c) To prevent and detect crime …” – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague, for giving way. Hon. Attorney-General, are you suggesting that Article 212 in its words is doing away with Article 92? The two are not related. If Article 212 was trying to show that you can legislate to defeat the spirit of a judgement, then maybe it would be applicable. 

MR RUHINDI: I had no intention of reading Article 212 in juxtaposition with Article 92 because the Speaker has already ruled on the submission that was made on Article 92. I was only making reference to Article 212 in respect of the submission made by hon. Kivumbi as far as the proposed clause 8 (1)b and sub-clause 3 and 2 of that particular section are concerned. That is why I came in. 

As I said, at first, you know very well, hon. Kivumbi, that what was cracked down were the powers of the Police to prohibit without benchmarks on which to do so. I read that judgment and you can make reference to it verbatim. The provisions of section 32(2) which was nullified simply gave powers to the Police to prohibit without any guidelines or benchmarks upon which to base itself to make a decision. Those are absolute powers and certainly, in democratic governance, I agree that they are unjustifiable. 

Here is a Bill which gives you benchmarks; in 8(1)(a) and (b), the committee proposed deletion of paragraph (c) and we agreed. In fact, it is paragraph (C) which was trying to re-enact the provisions of section 32(2) of the Police Act and we have agreed together with the minister and the committee that that provision be deleted. 

Now, that done, if you look at Article 43 and Article 212 and you do not, for instance, incorporate the provisions the proposed sections 8(1)(b), then you would not be doing justice to this Bill. You are saying, you can go and demonstrate anywhere. Then, what is the crux of this Bill? 

Anyway, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, you are free to propose an amendment at an appropriate stage but I think you need to look at all the provisions to see how you can harmonise your mind. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, the matter we are talking about is very important because it touches on the lifeline of our Constitution. The Attorney-General is forgetting to relate to us what court said in that judgement. 

Court, briefly, said that it is wrong for Police to anticipate crime when it has the machinery to detect it. It is also wrong for Police to stop a rally or a gathering before it knows what sort of crime is going to be committed. In light of that, I think the Attorney-General is not correct to relate the contents of Article 212 with the contents of Article 92; they are two separate establishments. 

Lastly, if I heard the Speaker correctly, she never pronounced herself on the content of Article 92. You are just persuading her to commit herself to that content.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, with a tender heart, I would like to understand where he is coming from. But on the judgement – if you want to read Articles 212 and 92, there is need for you to also read Articles 20 and 29 on the fundamental human rights that are not guaranteed by the State because they are God-given. That means that all organs of Government and all persons at all times have to protect, promote and uphold those rights. It is that stand point. We do not come from the other position; we have to see it from the point that these are human rights and that no one, not even the President or Jesus Christ can take them away; they are given to us by God. That is where I am coming from.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the actual judgement – and that is why – he has talked about a very important matter that when you touch sub-sections 2 and 3, then this Public Order Management Bill is rendered exactly useless. The actual anchor of this Bill is in 8 (b) and 3 whose effect is intended to defeat the judgement and to that extent, even this Parliament engages in an illegality.

I would like him to convince me otherwise – (Applause) – let him tell us as a learned friend – I am not a lawyer but simply a human rights activist; I am not even a paralegal because I have never stepped in a law class. 

Therefore, my point of contention – with due respect to all those who signed – the French say that the most perfect law can constitute the most perfect injustice. So, the fact that honourable members signed this report does not at all in anyway impute that that is legal. It was an oversight and I would like to contest it.

Two, I would like to end on a cautionary note. In 1998, on a date I cannot recall, I was in Mbarara with the former Mayor of Kampala, Mr Nasser SSebaggala. While there, we met the then Mbarara Municipality MP, hon. Winnie Byanyima. At that time, she was also the Director of Communications at the defunct NRM Secretariat. We had gone to hold a rally in Mbarara Town. But that rally was brutally dispatched by Police. And when hon. Winnie Byanyima appeared on Capital Radio a few days later, she said, “How can you organise a rally in the middle of the road.”
 
Just in 2001, after the general elections while I was with the same hon. Winnie Byanyima and Col Dr Kiiza, we met the then Kampala Mayor, Mr Nasser Ssebaggala in the company of His Excellence, the President going for dinner. We were in the middle of the road on Entebbe Road.

Therefore, you may pass this law thinking it is all about me, but I would like to contend that that is not true. It is about everyone. It does not even exclude an elected leader to the extent that even the Speaker of Parliament will be at the mercy of a police officer at a police post somewhere deep in Kamuli to either grant or not grant her permission to hold a rally. And once that police officer says, “You cannot have it”, she will not have it.

The law has not excluded – that part of the law, whether Satan or Angel signed it – constitutes an illegality and Madam Speaker – (Member timed out.)

4.15
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I have read this Bill and I would like to say that we need to get serious on certain business. In line with what has been happening in our country, I feel there are certain things that need to be put right specifically in relation to management of public meetings. 

There are areas in this Bill upon which I also have reservations and for which I will move amendments at committee stage, but in line with what has been happening and the definitions that are here, I think honourable colleagues – this morning, I had children of the late Ariong, the Police Officer who was killed by goons while at work, in my office.

The two sons of the late had come to their mother at Naguru but failed to get back to school due to lack of money for transport. So, should we just look at Article 20? Shouldn’t we say the State has to come in and regulate in trying to put some order in place? I think we are missing a point somewhere, colleagues. Let us be honest here. I represent the young people and I am saying that most times, the young people are used - (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleague, for yielding the Floor. The point of order I wish to put across is; hon. Peter Ogwang is contemplating here about the children of the late Police Officer Ariong. But I am also aware that for the last six to seven years, about 100 people have been killed by security forces. These people left children and widows who are not going to hon. Peter Ogwang’s office. So, is he in order to be contemplating about one dead Ugandan yet there are many hundreds who have been killed leaving their children and widows behind?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think he had just started naming. I am sure he is going to add onto the list. Please continue.

MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for that wise ruling. And to my senior brother, hon. Wafula Oguttu, that is exactly why we need this law. It is to help us be able to avoid such circumstances. And for such security agents, if you know they have been doing that, expose them.
 
My dear honourable colleagues, I would like to appeal to you to look at the law as it is. Yes, I am also not a lawyer, but I have been trying to get some legal advice from the Attorney-General and if you also recall, he has always insisted that a good law is that law that is blind; that law which cannot tell whether Peter Ogwang will tomorrow be in the Opposition or Government. I do not think we pass laws here to only target the Opposition. These laws are for the good of this country.

So, if you are going to say, “We pass laws to target the Opposition”, you are missing a point. We pass laws for the good of this country. I thank you.

4.19
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the Bill. The report says that if people are mourning or are in the Church or any other such institution, the law cannot be applied.

Madam Speaker, you will also agree with me that especially when a politician has passed on, we always have chaos at the burial places. So, I think there is need to have order in such situations. (Laughter) Yes. There are people who just have walls, but call them institutions. Recently, you must have heard of some pamphlets being distributed in churches with messages. So, I think we should have order because when there is a stampede, it affects everybody. And when it comes to us people with disabilities, it is worse because some of us cannot run. Some disabled people like the deaf cannot hear what is being said; they will face more challenges. I think that the absence of this law will contribute to more disabilities because such chaos usually affects people who are not concerned with the rally or gathering.

There is need to deliberate about this law bearing in mind what has happened. I am really happy when hon. Wafula-Oguttu said it affected certain people. I think that is why we need the law, so that these people can be taken on board and if it is the Police, they can also be charged. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

4.21
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for a good report.

Madam Speaker, the Bill talks about public order management. When you bring the public in one place, you know the public consists of various kinds of people - the rough ones, hooligans, thieves and those who come to revenge. So, when you bring people together, definitely there must be order so that they are looked after and they are regulated. 

To make it worse, when the public is marching along the road and they disorganise the traffic, disorganise the people who are using the roads, definitely there must be a law to regulate them. There is no way somebody or a group of people can come around and march on the roads without any permission. You do not know the motives behind their going on the roads. So, this Bill is very important; it regulates these gatherings and this marching on the road. 

Madam Speaker, in the recent past you have seen what this walk to work has brought to the public and to the people on the roadside, and how the Police behaved because they did not have the public order management law. This Bill also supports the policemen. These days when the public is rioting, the Police’s hands are tied; they cannot revenge. We have seen how the police have been beaten and killed because they are not allowed to do anything. Definitely, if somebody has threatened the life of the police, why not shoot them on spot? –(Interjections)– Yes! That is what the Bill says. If you are threatening the life of a policeman, he must protect himself. He is the first person to protect himself. So, there is no way you can let the police be mistreated by hooligans.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This House is a House of lawmakers and of civilised people in a democratic country. From the way hon. Baba Diri is debating, she would like us to make laws whereby the policemen revenge against civilians and shoot them on sight. Is she in order to argue like that in this House?

THE SPEAKER: That is her way of presenting her views. Please conclude.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think somewhere in the law it says very clearly that if somebody intends or points at the policemen, or policeman for that matter, he can defend himself. That is what we are talking about. So, actually, what the public has done is that it has taken the work of the Police for granted, thinking that they cannot do anything. As a result, they are killed and they suffer during the time of protecting us, the civilians. 

So, Madam Speaker, I support this motion and those who love peace in Uganda must all support this Bill so that we bring order and sanity in this country. Thank you. 

4.25
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I want to say that during consultation - I consulted my constituency on this Bill, on the marriage Bill and on the anticipated anti-homosexuality Bill - my constituents were in support of this Bill. 

I have heard my colleagues expressing fear that this Bill is intended to persecute the Opposition. I can assure you, with due respect, my honourable colleagues and friends, hon. Kiyingi, hon. Ssemujju, hon. Lukyamuzi and most of us here, once this Bill is passed, it is going to put a stop to police brutality. It is going to bring order. I saw this in the last elections. I was watching what took place in one constituency in the East, I think it was Budadiri; if this Bill was in place, I am sure what took place there would not have taken place. 

Madam Speaker - (Interjection) - No, my time is limited. With due respect, I will allow you as I continue. The Constitution is very clear; it put the responsibility of keeping law and order on every citizen, but it goes ahead to emphasise who should take charge of regulating and managing public activities and public order, and that is the institution of the Police. The problem here seems to be the battles between those ones who are disorderly and the Police. We have witnessed that even on this disorderly issue, a lot of money is spent on teargas, energy and there is brutality and lives are lost. So, once this Bill comes out, it will be a good Bill for every citizen. 

How do you manage your own order wherever you are? How does the society manage itself wherever they are? This Bill is to ensure that this country, Uganda, is a country that allows every person to come in and live happily. These street running battles by leaders who should lead by example would not be there, and it spells out where this law can be executed and where it cannot. 

So, I support this motion, Madam Speaker, and I call upon my colleagues in actual sense to ensure that we pass this Bill, for harmony, for peace, to ensure there is – as one colleague mentioned - good democracy. We cannot have democracy with running battles on the streets. We cannot have peace and order with running battles. We cannot have any economic growth which is meaningful when police is running up against individuals. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that if this is passed as it is, it will put a stop to all the conflicts between the Police and those that are disorderly. Those that intend to mismanage themselves will be stopped or those who want to continue mismanaging their own lives. I, therefore, support the motion and I call upon all my colleagues to support the motion. The sooner we pass the Bill - that is what my constituents said - the better. The sooner this Bill is in the public, the better for us because we will have a good country, a meaningful country and a peaceful country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, who have made various contributions on this Bill. The last time we had debate over this Bill, uncharacteristic of our colleagues across the aisle, we had – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you not a member of the committee?

MR MPUUGA: No, I am not a member, Madam Speaker. For the very first time we witnessed praise after praise of Members of the Opposition that had appended their signatures on the committee report, and I witnessed the Minister of Internal Affairs saying everything is okay. I was very worried; when you see your neighbour praising your wife, you have every reason to be scared of their intentions. So I went home to actually try and appreciate the good spirit of our colleagues for appreciating us for participating and appending our signatures to the report. 

Actually, what my colleague referred to as a certainty clause was a reality. In fact, if you look at the committee report, this is almost a new Bill, a re-writing of the entire Bill. The minister was actually content on taking on a whole new Bill but as long as the certainty clause was maintained, clause 8 (1) (b) (c), (2) and (3). 

The reference in clause 8(1) (b) to somebody determining the unsuitability of a venue is actually very scary. They are saying here that “as long as the venue will be unsuitable for the purposes of crowd and traffic control or will interfere in the other lawful business”. I would like to invite Parliament to take note of this; the rallies and demonstrations are actually the business of those that are involved - (Interjections) - it is business. I am using the word “business” to place meaning to the import of this Bill. The question of the day is: which business takes precedence because a rally or demonstration is actually my business? So which business takes precedence in this case? Whose business should be given priority? It is also part of my business to hold rallies. 

In (c), we are being advised “for any other reason”. Now, who determines the other reasons? With due respect to our Police, we have seen the Police variously making partisan statements or taking positions clearly laden with partisan political banter and we are now empowering them to have it their way. Somehow, hon. Chemaswet, whom I think has left, made a statement to the effect that he already sees a section of Parliament losing. So, we are all here trying to debate an issue where there are losers and winners. 

I would like to invite Parliament to reflect on the command of the Constitution especially in our preamble, paragraphs II and V of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy, and appreciate what it means to build a democracy and also appreciate what it will take us to be able to build a society that has respect for human rights. I know for a fact that it is going to take a little while for some colleagues to appreciate that the Opposition exists wilfully. 

Madam Speaker, I remember that in one of the Parliament outreach programmes, I was with you in Fort Portal and you had to rein in some participants who actually thought that it was very wrong for the Speaker to move with members of the Opposition to go and greet the people. Here we are where we have Members of Parliament who also believe that actually people must be reined in and should not speak, otherwise you must seek permission to speak. 

I think we must remind ourselves of the fact- hon. Kivumbi articulated very well the importance of the ruling in the Muwanga Kivumbi v Attorney-General case. I would like to invite the learned Attorney-General to go and dust his copy of that ruling because the quotations he made here where actually very inaccurate. Please, go and dust your copy and appreciate the fact that in bringing clause 8 (2) and (3), we shall be in effect going against Article 93 of the Constitution. (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally correct for the honourable member, if the honourable member makes a submission that what I stated is inaccurate, to lay on the Table what he knows is accurate? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have repeatedly said that I will not rule on those issues until I have seen the text. You are talking about something that I have not seen and maybe you are inflecting with your own ideas. Where is the judgement? 

MR MPUUGA: My reference to the judgement was made in view of the fact that we are still debating and we shall have time to lay on the Table these documents. This is why I am inviting the learned Attorney-General to also go and prepare himself so that he can actually come and withdraw the Bill on behalf of Government and say that we cannot involve Parliament in enacting a nullity. I know for a fact that should we proceed, it will be challenged and will be defeated. We shall have wasted Parliament’s time and taxpayers’ money in proceeding with a Bill that we know very well that most of the provisions in the Bill are actually taken care of by other existing laws in this country. (Member timed out)

4.38
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to contribute on this motion because Kampala has had the misfortune of testing this Bill before it was brought to Parliament. Kampala’s gatherings and public gatherings have always been restricted since 2006 and so we can share with colleagues how this Bill or pre-Bill has affected the legislative and representative work of a Member of Parliament.  

Right from the beginning in 2007, when I was launching with other colleagues a project within Kampala, the Police asked me to write to them and seek permission. They asked me to indicate how many people would attend, their names, their telephone numbers and what time I thought they would leave. Of course, as a Member of Parliament for the whole of Kampala, to start listing residents of Kampala whom I thought may come after a public announcement for a meeting was in effect asking me not to hold the meeting. They went ahead – (Mr Baba rose_) - Could I clarify because I am still clarifying to you the situation that I have been going through?

MR BABA: I thank you for giving way, honourable member. As far as I know, the Police have never required anybody to give names and telephone addresses of people and I am denying it. If she has that letter, let her lay it on the Table. 

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, I actually feel threatened by the honourable minister refuting personal experience. You are still new, honourable minister; I think maybe you have not lived some of the things I am narrating to the House. 

It has been a problem for the Members of Parliament in Kampala to hold any public gatherings because we have not seen a gazette of the public places we can access without Police permission apart from Kololo. So, right now, a Member of Parliament has to write to the President’s Office to get permission to hold a rally at Kololo. If in their wisdom they deem that your meeting may not be desirable, of course it will be turned down. So, I want to urge colleagues to learn from our experience, to share and learn from what we have gone through with the pretesting of this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I want to also urge Government and this Parliament to explore and research on the legitimacy of some of the actions of the Police. If we give them too many powers, who is there to intervene when they abuse them? Instead of restricting the public and their representatives, shouldn’t the Police be facilitating MPs’ meetings and other politicians? I think Parliament should not be used to license the Police to use excessive force on legitimate public gatherings. 

We note that in 2008, the Constitutional Court ruled that section 32 of the Police Act limited the right to freedom of assembly as prescribed by our Constitution. So, I also urge the Attorney-General to re-categorise and gazette public spaces especially in urban centres that need special permission from the Police to access. Is the gazette available so that members know? Can the Attorney-General avail these gazetted public spaces and the judgement to the Speaker? Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.44
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I have one issue over this Bill. We have existing laws in this country and often we say we do not ensure proper implementation of our laws. This is more managerial, and proper management is a key to leadership. Maintaining law and order in the country is so good but we must evaluate to which extent we have effectively and efficiently used the existing law. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I am scared because as leaders of this country, right from LCI up to where we are, I assume that if we are supposed to hold meetings, and that is what we do as an effective way of gathering information, we are supposed to seek permission and wait for at least seven days to be given that permission. I have my LCI there, I have the LCIII chairpersons, I have the councillors at district level and I have the LCV chairman. Madam Speaker, how shall we have all these opportunities granted by the Police? Won’t the Police then be more engaged in giving permission other than doing other roles?

Madam Speaker, you sent us back to consult for two weeks but the NRM was delayed because they had a caucus meeting, and waiting for that report of the NRM took them almost three to four days. So, one week had elapsed and they were left with one week. If we had passed this Bill into a law, we would still be at home. So, I am questioning how this will be implemented when we approve it to be a law. 

Lastly, I think the police have also got their rights as human beings and we have intelligence systems. In case there is abuse, the police have also got the right to go and report. We have never stopped the police from reporting. So, I think the issue that we are trying to cure here is more managerial. This reminds me of what I went through during the NRM primary elections and the concluded general election. In each of the villages where I was, people were carried away and I was openly told, “Do you know, there are other camps which are above yours.” So, if this Bill was already a law then, some of us would not have got opportunities to campaign. People have got selfish interests and, therefore, I am afraid that some people will abuse this if we pass it into law. Thank you very much. 

4.47
MS RHONA NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Thank you, also, for the manner in which you have calmly conducted today’s House. I rise to thank the committee and Government for the initiative they have taken to ensure that we have order while conducting business in our communities. 

However, my concern is on clause 12, the responsibilities of organisers and participants. My understanding of this Bill is that since Government sees it important to involve the Police to help us in the day-to-day business, I believe Police is doing work on behalf of Government. Therefore, when I come to part (c) where they say that among the responsibilities of the organisers and participants is to ensure that all participants are unarmed and peaceful, and part (h) also says that I am supposed to ensure that I undertake to compensate any party or person that may suffer loss or damage from any fall out of the public meeting,  I now find it hard to absorb some of these points. If I have the Police coming to ensure law and order, why do you put this responsibility of ensuring that all participants are unarmed and peaceful on my part and not on the part of the Police? 


Madam Speaker, as politicians, we have opponents - whether on the Opposition or in the ruling party or independent. I believe that anyone can take advantage of such laws to ensure that there is some kind of chaos for you to undergo issues of compensation and paying parties or persons that suffer loss or damage. 

I am just pleading with the committee and the government to ensure that now that they have accepted to assist us in the manner in which we handle public business, they also take up these responsibilities as we move them from the organiser. The issue of ensuring that participants are unarmed and peaceful goes to the Police and the issue of compensating any party should maybe go to Government, since it has decided to assign the Police to do this work on their behalf. I thank you. 

4.50
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (DP, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happen to be one of the common victims of the police brutality that this Bill seeks to legalise. I actually think that before we think of putting the public to order, we should put the Police to order. As we speak today, the Police are gathering stones around the Constitutional Square. Actually, it is turning into a stones’ squad. We initially heard of the kiboko squad.

Madam Speaker, the Bill assumes that there are public venues waiting for public gatherings. If they are anywhere in Uganda, they are not in Kampala. If they are in Kampala, they are not in Rubaga. If they are in Rubaga, they are not in Rubaga North. In my constituency, the only place where you can go and have a public gathering is in a market place or trading centre. When I look at the element of suitability, I assume reference is made to areas like market places. In fact, last week when I was moving around consulting on the Marriage and Divorce Bill, the Police was giving me way to have gatherings in the very places where they dispersed my rallies previously.

I had a particular experience where the DPC of Old Kampala requested me to hold my rally in Nakivubo Stadium. This stadium is in Kampala Central and I represent Rubaga North constituency. The same DPC called me when I was moving around last week asking, “Why don’t you come to Kasubi now?” The place was unsuitable when we were talking about oil but it was suitable this time when we are talking about divorce and marriage breakups –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Surprisingly, Madam Speaker, during our campaigns as Members of Parliament representing Kampala, we conduct our rallies in towns, urban centres and other busy areas. Indeed, the Police allow that. But when it comes to consultations, it becomes illegal to use the same venues we used for campaigns. Thank you very much.

MR KASIBANTE: Rt Hon. Speaker, when I was moving around the constituency, I was given a Bible and a Koran and my constituents asked me to ask this Government to adhere to the teachings of those two books. This is because what we do on Friday is not what we do on Mondays. Reference was then made to His Excellency the President who disowned a Bill that came out of a Cabinet meeting, which he chaired.

This government has sold off all the playgrounds around Kampala and is making every place around Kampala unsuitable for public gatherings. Now it is bringing a Bill with elements of unsuitability - (Member timed out­)

4.55
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand to support the motion because much of this country is being sucked into a desolate moral vacuum. There is a space that is devoid of human values in this country, where anyone and everyone does what they want without regulation. This is not only here in Kampala City but it is trickling down to our local trading centres. People want to do what they want without regulation and they feel they can fight everyone and not be regulated at all.

Madam Speaker, how I wish Members of this honourable Parliament would think about the women and children who suffer whenever there are uprisings, whenever there is warfare and all the other conflicts that come from the gatherings that we conduct without regulation. The women and children are the ones who suffer most. The temporary and permanent separation of children and women from their relationships leaves a scar on their hearts because it deprives them of emotional and physical security.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request and plead with fellow MPs that while we may have contention on a few issues, we really need this law because it is going to protect not only us, the citizenry, but also the Police and how they are going to handle themselves. How I wish we read that.

Madam Speaker, this country has got people who are very wise and they think everyday. Therefore, at this point, I would like to ask for clarification from the Attorney-General; if a gathering of five people, who just intend to cause commotion, split themselves one by one onto separate streets to sit and strike in the middle of the roads, are we going to refer to these people as the public or as a person and how is this Bill going to regulate that?

4.58
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and the report of the committee and also urge Members to discuss the Bill. If we find that certain sections may not be very good for running this country, we can delete them. When you look at clause 12 (h), for example, which says the responsibility of compensating people should be for the organisers, this would be unfair. Some people can move to disorganise your rally simply to put you into trouble so that you have to meet the huge costs of compensation from the effects of what transpired at your rally.

Apart from that, as a country we need to put in place some regulations because if we think we should leave the running of the state to the interests of whoever wants to come up with his interests - You demonstrate along this street, the next day you are taken to court and the next day you are out because there is no law and things are not clear. We have had so many governments changed here because they were running a laissez faire system where you cannot control people. As a result, so many people - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, I think I am giving clear information.

If you are organising a rally and you let the authorities, the Police, and the public know the purpose of the meeting you are holding, and you carry it out peacefully as provided for in the Constitution, clause 29, I do not think that the Police would just come from nowhere and say, “no”. I am happy with my friend from Rubaga who said that this time round, it was the Police inviting him to go and hold his rallies and meetings where they used to stop people from holding meetings previously. This is because his intentions were clear. When you do not want the Police to know what you are doing, then that means there is some hidden agenda, something you are hiding. Why can’t we be open whenever we are conducting business in this country? 

You may ask for your rights but do it without causing anarchy. Once you cause anarchy, you incite people, cause hatred, and  you do not want people to know it. At the end of the day, you may think you are protecting the rights of the people but you end up actually infringing on the rights of many people. So, I want to say, let us move ahead and delete the sections that are not okay, but we pass the Bill for the purpose of managing the behaviour of people during public meetings. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.01
MR NACO ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. Surely, we should know that as society transforms, it is transforming economically, socially and politically. In this process, there are issues which we need to be able to look at critically and analyse and manage as we transform. That is why this Bill is inevitable. 

This Bill has a very clear objective, which outlines its advantages. The public will be empowered to increase their awareness of the responsibilities of these people who are going to manage this Bill. So, it is important that our people of Uganda are made aware of the roles and responsibilities of the persons managing public rallies; for instance, the Police, who are already mentioned, the organisers, the participants in the meeting and the entire community. If this Bill is passed, then everyone will know their roles and everyone will know when so and so has deviated. Why do we fear this important Bill?

This Bill is going to be important not only for Ugandans but it will also create a good image for Ugandans. Outsiders will look at us as organised – (Interjections) – We are not the only people living in this country; there are also other people from other countries. When we are disorganised, always running up and down on Monday, people become very unsettled because Monday is coming. 

In this Bill, there are 18 clauses. If anybody has found a clause or two which they think is of no relevance, let them bring it out so that we can discuss it and take it out rather than talking about the whole Bill as irrelevant. The Bill is very important, do not discard this Bill. Thank you. 

5.05
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work they have done. Looking at the title of the Bill, I know that it was found necessary during the time of the riots, demonstrations and public meetings. However, they fall short of telling us the riots, which it is intended to address, and the demonstrations. 

When you look at the responsibilities of the Police and the organisers, they are over stretched to the extent that if the Police fail at their duty, what will be done next? We know the capacity of our Police and we know that so many meetings can take place at a given period. Like now, we have been consulting on the Marriage and Divorce Bill; did we need police every time and everywhere we went? So, will you have to inform the Inspector-General of Police before you can organise a meeting as Members of Parliament? 

In Bufumbira East, there is no authorised officer to be informed, so what shall I do? Do I need to write to the IGP or the DPC; supposing the DPC is not there? So, although the law could be good, the issue of public meetings being sanctioned by the Police is abdicating our duty and it is very dangerous. 
For you, Members who have opponents in your parties, they will use it against you. (Laughter) The LCI chairperson will demand for a letter from the Police before you are allowed to speak. So, you should be mindful of what you are doing today. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: I thank the honourable colleague for giving me this opportunity to inform him. According to this Bill, everyone here, whether you are a minister or not, when you are being escorted from your house to go to the nomination venue, you are supposed to go with permission from the Inspector-General of Police.

MR OKOT OGONG: I want to invite the honourable member on the Floor to quote certain provisions of the Constitution. The Constitution, Article 43(2), is clear on the regulations; under public interest, it does not include political persecution –(Interjections)– That is very clear. If we put it in like that, then it is unconstitutional. 

What is going to be limited is based on rights that are not derogated. Look at derogation of powers, there are rights that are not derogated, there are rights that are fundamental, and the rights that are not derogated are the political rights, and the Constitution is supreme. Therefore, is it in order for the honourable member to misinform Parliament when he is aware of all the provisions of the Constitution and he knows the Constitution is the supreme law of the land? If this law goes against the Constitution, then it is null and void to the extent of its limitation.

MR KWIZERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleague has put up very good arguments, but hon. Okot Ogong has not told us of the saving clause for politicians in the same Bill we are talking about. If you are a family person and you want to have a family dinner, you must seek for permission. If you a member of the Mother’s Union and you want to have a meeting at church, you must have this public meeting with permission – (Interjections) - Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.10
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also support the motion, but not wholly because of certain reasons. I want to pose a question, first of all, to the Attorney-General, in case the Bill goes through the way it is. I am a Member of Parliament and every weekend I go to my constituency to hold meetings, do I have to write to the Inspector-General of Police every weekend? Answer me and I will know how to go about it. If I have to write to the IGP for every meeting every weekend, then we need to change that. 

As politicians, every weekend we go to the constituency, we have meetings. Sometimes we do not even intend to have meetings but you reach a certain community, people will gather and by the time you realise, a meeting is already taking place. So, if it becomes a meeting and yet I did not know it would become one and so I did not inform the IGP, will that mean I have broken the law?

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague. I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that clause 6 of this Bill actually cures your concerns and fears. Madam Speaker, can I read it out?

THE SPEAKER: Yes.

MR BYARUGABA: Thank you. This clause 6 is about the meaning of a public meeting and it states thus: “For purposes of this Act- ‘public meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, concourse procession, demonstration of three or more persons in or on any public road as defined in the Traffic and Road Safety Act or other public places or premises...” (Interjections) – Hold on, I am still reading. 

When you go to clause 6(2), it says, “Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, a public meeting does not include- 
(a) a meeting convened and held exclusively for a lawful purpose of any public body...” - (Interjections) – Yes! Hold on. 
“…(b) a meeting of members of any registered organisation, whether corporate or not, convened in accordance with the constitution of the organisation and held exclusively for a lawful purpose of that organisation; 
(c) a meeting of members of a trade union; 
(d) a meeting for a social, religious, cultural, charitable, educational, commercial or industrial purpose; and 
(e) a meeting  of the organs of a political party or organisation, convened in accordance with the constitution of the party or organisation, and held exclusively to discuss the affairs of the party or organisation.”

Madam Speaker, doesn’t that cover the fears of the honourable member holding the Floor?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I rise to make just one simple and small clarification. This clarification is that in debating this Bill, it is better to have a positive mind. This positivity should be based on Article 29 (1) (d) of the Constitution, which was cited by hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, and it says: “Every person shall have the right to- (d) freedom to assemble and to demonstrate together with others peacefully and unarmed and to petition.”

It is in the exercise of this right that you, who is demonstrating peacefully, needs protection. This is the origin of it all. If we look at it from the negative point of view, we will not get the meaning and thrust of this Bill.

To my friend, hon. Nantume Egunyu, let me say I am going to Bugolobi and I stand at the stage towards the flats where I stay in the middle of road with my constituents in the pretext that because they have found me there, I must respond to their queries; but I am in the middle of the road blocking and creating traffic! Is that justifiable?

MS JANEPHER EGUNYU: I want to thank the Attorney-General for the information though I am not satisfied with his explanation. Maybe members will help me understand it better. 

Yes, my honourable colleague gave the meaning of a public meeting, but if the definition talks about two to three people and that if the people are more and you have not informed the Police, that meeting is said to be illegal, I think that is another area that needs to be revised. I am saying this because if we sit somewhere and we are like 10 people discussing something, don’t you think that out of jealousy, another person can use this law to make a case out of that? I will need some clarification on that.

My colleagues talked about urban centres, but in Kalangala you find people concentrated in one place. When you appear there, they all come to you wanting clarifications on some matters. Are we making this law with the exception of the people who live in the islands and urban centres?

Lastly, it is stipulated in the Constitution that people have the freedom to enjoy the right of free expression. So, what will happen? Any person, out of any dissatisfaction, can decide to hold a peaceful demonstration after seeking permission from the Police. What will happen if this law is passed the way it is; will the Constitution be amended? Peaceful demonstration is stipulated in the Constitution of Uganda, so what would happen?  

5.17
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to oppose the motion and I oppose it for three main reasons.

Throughout the year 2010, and part of 2011, I campaigned in my constituency, Rubanda East, but I do not remember seeing police at any of my rallies. I think the reason is that we were well-intentioned people, so we never needed to inform the police about what we were doing.

Two, I believe that much as we make laws to sort out certain situations, it is important that we address the issues that usually lead people into carrying out demonstrations. (Applause)

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I have listened to the submissions from most of my colleagues, particularly the one from hon. Hanifa Kawooya, who indicated that once we have this law in place, we should forget about demonstrations. My issue is, I do not believe that putting this law in place will stop demonstrations from occurring. 

As a Member of Parliament for Rubanda East, Kabale District, I want to make the record clear that I do not support this Bill because I believe it is not going to solve anything. When you internalise it, you do not see what exactly it is going to deal with. I believe this is intended to target certain individuals. As a Catholic, my sense is that what we need to do now is to change our behaviour and the way we do things other than legislating laws to curtail freedoms of people. I thank you. (Applause)

5.20
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion because I know the Bill is well-intentioned. It is true that many times we have abused the freedoms we are given and because we abuse the freedoms we are given, other people suffer. This Bill is brought so that those people who are suffering innocently are protected. 

Madam Speaker, I have been here long enough but I observed that in the past regimes, there was no way anybody who would organise anything that could affect the people was left to go scot-free. This is the time that we should make a law, not for ourselves as Members of Parliament because we know we are trouble causers but for all Ugandans. Sometimes some of us want to cause trouble just because we have seen a lot of peace prevailing. Because we want to see some kind of chaos, we tend to do contrary to what is required so that we make a name for ourselves. But if this law comes into place, if I have no problem, if I am trying to make sure that I protect the rest of the Ugandans, to bring sanity in the country, why should I fight such a law? - (Interjections) - I am informed. 

I want us to understand very clearly that if we have no bad things that we do, why don’t we want to protect other people? This law is well-intentioned as I have put it. It is not a law that is meant for a few of us but for all the Ugandans who are out there suffering. Somebody’s tomatoes are trampled over and these are not paid for and yet the causers go scot-free. (Member timed out)

5.23
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As Uganda, we are signatories to so many protocols and charters on peoples and human rights. So, I believe that it is our responsibility as a country and as the Ninth Parliament to ensure that peace prevails in a country like Uganda. I want to refer this House to this very Bill that we are debating, the Public Order Management Bill, clause 6 (2) (a), (b) up to (c). It protects all the interests of the people who are seated in this august House.

Madam Speaker, I want us, when we are debating issues that pertain to the development of Uganda, to put our interests aside or merge our interests with the interests of the public. Today I may be a Member of Parliament, protecting my own interest, but tomorrow I may not be. As you are aware - I know you are among the long serving members of this Parliament - there are so many faces that have passed here and have gone. Therefore, as we debate the Public Order Management Bill, we need to debate something that is sustainable. I believe that the Public Order Management Bill is sustainable for Uganda as we speak today- (Interjections)- I can give my reasons. 

I represent the people of Ngora and I am going to speak on that. Madam Speaker, since the rallies and the riots are happening in different parts of this country, if one is to sit down and assess the kind of riots we have, - (Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)- I am much informed, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man - these riots happen for selfish interests. If I am going to organise a rally in Ngora, I go there as an elected Member of Parliament, that means I am legitimate; I go there as a member of NRM, which is a party, which is well taken care of in this Bill. Therefore, honourable colleagues, what we want to prevail in this country is peace. 

This Bill cuts across. I am not debating as a member of NRM; no. I am not debating as a woman; no. I am debating as a woman and as a Ugandan. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As I conclude my submission on this Public Order Management Bill, I would like to call upon all Members of the Ninth Parliament to realise that this Bill cuts across parties. 

The only clarification I would need from the Attorney-General is on clause 12, the responsibilities of the organisers. I could have called my meeting, anybody out there or an organisation out there could call for a meeting, with a well-intentioned motive but some people come and disorganise the intention of the meeting. Will I be held liable as a member who participated in organising that meeting?

Lastly, our Constitution is very rich in its wording. There is freedom of expression but the freedom of expression should not impinge on the right of others. (Member timed out_)

5.28
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Part of the problem we have as a country is that we are dealing with colleagues who are not honest; otherwise, the law would be okay. We have just gone through very turbulent times here when we lost our colleague, hon. Nebanda. Do you remember what happened? After some of our colleagues held meetings with the Police, the following day they were being charged with stealing body parts of hon. Nebanda by the very people with whom they were having meetings with. If we had professional people running institutions and who would apply the law as it is, we would not have a problem even with a bad law. 

I can tell you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, that I have attempted to hold meetings in my constituency. The last time, the DPC went and prepared a letter himself, forced people who were running the taxi park in Kireka to sign and then brought it to me himself - the DPC – saying that the people who are running the taxi park said you cannot have a meeting here. Just go to one of the neighbouring countries here during campaigns. One of the candidates who was in power hired out all the venues in that country, so the Opposition never had any chance to hold a meeting because all the venues were hired by those in power. 

Look at the intention in this law. Actually, I am no longer worried about myself but I am worried for my children. I have walked the full mile; I have gone to prison but each time I have gone there, I keep reminding people. One time I saw former Vice-President, Prof. Gilbert Bukenya, shedding tears as he was being taken to Luzira. For me, I hugged my wife and said bye because there is nothing good I am expecting from this Government.

The honourable Chris Baryomunsi spent the Christmas holiday in jail. Even Police and the military shot at his people welcoming him; maybe they had forgotten he is also NRM. The hon. Ssekikubo was made to abandon his vehicle at a fuel station at night. Actually, I am the one who informed people first because a colleague of mine who was there told me, “Your colleague is being forcefully arrested.”  So, we are making one point- (Interjection) - Prof. Kabwegyere, you used your time, I do not think you want to use ours as well.  (Laughter) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to behave like a witch – (Laughter) - and think that I have lived my time when I am still breathing? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, I can confirm that you are alive. (Laughter)

MR SSEMUJJU: I was only referring to the life expectancy. (Laughter) However, the point that I am making, Madam Speaker and colleagues, is that you are lucky that you have an Opposition that is civilised. Some individuals picked arms, went to Luweero and killed people to come to power. Human beings will never run out of options.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I am really touched that an honourable Member of Parliament stands here and says that people came to kill people to come into power – [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes. It is true”] - It is not true! The people came to Luweero and we participated to remove bad governance but not to come to power. So, is the honourable member, Ibrahim Ssemujju, in order to tell this House lies when those of us who fought this war know what we did? We were not fighting to come to power but to remove bad governance.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, if you were removing a bad government, what will be the next? After you have removed them, what happens? Is it taking over? (Laughter) (Applause)

MR SEMUJJU: The point that I was making, honourable colleague, the Minister for Works – (Member timed out_)

5.33
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am at great pains with this Bill because most of the provisions in the Bill are already addressed through the law. They are already covered. The Police Act, Section 32 (1), covers the issue of riots. There is even the Riot Act in the Police Act that addresses most of these issues. Now, why are you wasting the taxpayers’ money just to legislate a section which you have been directed that you must come to this Floor and pass? It is so sad. 

Article 29 and 20 of the Constitution gives Ugandans inherent rights which are not provided by anybody else. Ugandans have the got the right to associate and demonstrate. We are here busy telling the whole world that Ugandans have got freedom of expression, association and demonstration. Why are you coming out with laws to stop these rights of Ugandans? Why are we doing this?

I wonder how, Madam Speaker, you are going to conduct business in your constituency because some of us cannot even move five meters without being stopped by our people. I cannot move in Mbale without people following me and I cannot run away from them because of this bad law. This is a very bad law.

I want to remind members in this House that this law is being made for everybody. For those who think that it is being directed to us, it affects everybody in this country wherever you go. Just look at your constituencies where when you wake up in the morning, people are there waiting for you – three people whom you cannot meet and talk to because there is a law. Even when you say that we must apply to the Police, they will not give us this permission because they are doing things selectively – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: I thank you, Rt. Hon. Speaker. The information that I want to pass on to the House is that actually as we are seated here, chairpersons of districts sit on district security committees and they have declared intentions for some of your constituencies. Once this Bill comes into law, they are actually going to use the same Bill to disorganise you as you are in your constituency. I thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, this is indeed a very bad law and our constituents, the people who sent us to Parliament, are asking if we are going to pass this Bill into law. It affects everybody, it affects the public, and that is why I wanted to request earlier that we go back to the people because Parliament legislates and passes bad Bills. I never supported the oil Bill because I had my reasons but the Bill was passed on this Floor of Parliament; we debated here. How many people were called and told what to come and do in this House? We know that it is – (Member timed out_)

5.37
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. To begin with, I think that the spirit of this law seems to be very good in the name of protecting the community, regulating the organisers, the agents and so forth. However, it is so biased that it does not even impute any liability on the police officers who may use excessive force or kill and so on. That makes the spirit of this law very bad.

Worse still, the Bill gives power for them to shoot. In clause 11 it reads, “A police officer may not use a firearm……” It should have been, “shall not use a firearm” and then later you provide for maybe self defence and so forth. I think the learned Attorney-General will have to tell us why this very clause says, “A Police officer may not use……” It should have been, “shall not use”

THE SPEAKER: Information from the chair.

MR ANYWARACH: I am not taking the information for now.

THE SPEAKER: This is the chair of the committee.

MR ANYWARACH: Oh, the chair of the committee! I am sorry.

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you so much, honourable colleague, for giving way. I just wanted to inform you that if you read that clause that you are quoting together with the report, you realise that actually the committee proposes deletion of that clause because it is already provided for in another law and so it is no longer part of it. We proposed that it be removed from the Bill.

MR ANYWARACH: I thank you. That is valuable information. Rt. Hon. Speaker, but still there should be liability imputed on Police officers for use of excessive force.

On the use of a public address system, Rt. Hon. Speaker, you know how beautiful it is to campaign with a public address system and you also know that the Catholics, for example, use the public address system in their meetings. In this legislation under clause 13, those exceptions should have come to exclude even the born again who are using these microphones and so forth at their places of worship, if their meeting is not defined within the meaning of public meeting. 

Clause 12(d) says, “ensure that statements made to the media and public do not conflict with any law.”  Rt. Hon. Speaker, there is a difference between making statements and reporting a made statement. I cannot be responsible for telling the media to report exactly what I said. I think that was the issue in Obote v Ben Kiwanuka where Obote made a statement about Ben Kiwanuka and the media reported about it and Ben Kiwanuka went to court and said it was defamation. Obote denied and said, “No, I just said the statement is up to the media; I do not know why they had to report.” But the court ruled that he should have been aware that the media was there. So, here we are talking about separating what is made and what is reported. I cannot take responsibility for what is reported in the media.

Clause 12(h) says, “undertake to compensate any party or person that may suffer loss or damage…” I think that is not a good law. Sub clause (g) says that the organisers should be present at the meeting to coordinate with the police officers. What if I leave much earlier as guest of honour and the people remain behind and they commit atrocities? Do I take responsibility for that? (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, there is the issue of the organiser’s address to which acceptance or permission should be delivered. We are in a hi-tech world. You know very well that delay defeats equity. Police can delay to send an acceptance notice or permission deliberately by maybe delaying to deliver the notice which is supposed to be sent by postal address. What is the reliability of postal services especially in my village in Padyere where I come from? So, I think provision for the phones should be made here.

There is also this issue of any public road. If I am going to the constituency and there are five people gathered on the road and they block me and I begin addressing them, am I wrong? I think this law should also provide for legitimately elected leaders to have their meetings justified, like the LC IIIs and so forth, but we should be excluded; our meetings should not be called public meetings. However, far and wide, we actually do not need this law, Madam Speaker. 

5.43
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for coming up with this law. I happen to be a member of the human rights committee and anything that violates the rights of persons is unconstitutional and against the law, so we have to reconsider some of these provisions in this Bill. We have the Constitution and it states clearly the rights of every human being and some of these rights are not given by Government. We do not have to make laws to regulate some of these rights, Madam Speaker. 

I have an issue with clause 6, where it says, “‘public meeting’ means a gathering, assembly, concourse, procession or demonstration of three or more persons in or on any public road…” - in my constituency, I have public roads – “…as defined in the Traffic and Road Safety Act or other public place or premises wholly or partly open to the air – 
(a) at which the principles, policy, actions or failure of any government…” Madam Speaker, can we analyse this - the failure of any government, the actions of any government, the policies of any government. Where are they? Are we going to discuss the policies of this Government or any other government to come? I think this violates the Constitution, Article 29(a) – (Interruption)

MS BABA: Honourable Member, thank you for giving way. In my statement in the second reading of the Bill, I did concede that there are a number of amendments which the committee made which we conceded to, and this is one of them that we will concede to and not adopt. So please, when we go to committee stage, there are a number of areas where we will agree with the report of the committee and this is one area definitely where we are conceding.

MS ATIM ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am happy the mover of the Bill has realised that some of these things violate the rights of human beings. I think it is not only this; there are quite a number of them that have been highlighted. If we are to go clause by clause, we are saying more or less the Bill has no meaning. Why don’t we use the Police Act? We have quite a number of laws. This is a replica of one law working effectively. For how long and how many laws are we going to make to have in this country Uganda and they are not being implemented. 

If we are to check clause 7(2) (c), I do not know whether he is also going to admit to that, it talks of the estimated numbers of the persons expected. Why? I am telling them about the policies of the government, I am telling them about the bad roads and how many people do I say I expect? If I expected 50 and 100 turn up, who is liable for this? Madam Speaker, some of these things are not the best – (Member timed out) 

5.47
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to take the opportunity to thank the committee for the efforts. Much as I want to support this motion, it is hard for me to detach myself from the reality and this, I believe, applies to everyone here. 

As long as the Police continue to behave like a regime protection Police, it is very hard to imagine that they will actually change if we empowered them with this kind of Bill or law. What we need to do for now is to streamline the Police and remind them that they are a national Police force and should not be partisan. As long as they continue behaving in the way they behave today, we are actually digging a very deep grave for ourselves and it is very dangerous for us to continue with this Bill and I believe Ugandans are not ready for this Bill. The truth is, it is very early for this Bill and we should think wisely when tackling this Bill. I submit, Madam Speaker.

5.49
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report that was submitted to us. Before I make my submission on this Bill, I just want to give clarifications to hon. Muwanga Kivumbi. Unfortunately, he is not here. He stated that his rights cannot be taken away by anybody, that not even Jesus Christ can take away his rights. I support him but I want to clarify that much as human rights are not granted by the state, they are God-given and God the father and God the Son are one and the same. So, Jesus Christ can take away his rights or anybody’s rights. That being the most important issue, I want to go to the report now.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the Constitution recognises the different religions. Is it in order for the member to refer to Jesus, who is believed by Christian religions as God, to reduce his powers as God to an ordinary mortal?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the member is a messenger of God.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much. I think I have made my point clear. 

Madam Speaker, I have read through the report and I have found that the chairman made some recommendations for amendments on clause 10, but I think he may have made an omission by leaving out an amendment on clause 10(2)(c). It says, “For the purposes of subsection (1), the police shall – (c) carry out risk assessment on all factors before the public meeting, and notify the organiser or his or her agent accordingly.” 

I see this as an escape clause for the Police because after they have carried out their assessment of risk and they inform the organiser, what happens next. Assuming they have carried out their assessment and they say that it is risky for you to carry out that meeting in that place, what happens? They can use this law at any one time to stop a person who they do not want to have a meeting, for reasons of regime protection, and to deter that person from carrying out a meeting in that area. (Member timed out)

5.52
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Dear Members, I want to thank the committee for preparing this report. I think the Public Order Management Bill is really not required. When we are having our political rallies, we just need to inform Police of our schedules of rallies and they will not even appear at our rallies and the rallies will go on peacefully without any problem. We do not need the Bill.

Article 29(1) of the Constitution provides for freedom of speech and expression. Expression can be in any form other than writing or words. It is a constitutional right for any Ugandan to express his or her opinion. Article 38 gives us the civic rights and activities; any Ugandan is free to participate in any activities or affairs of Government as individuals or a group, and you can express your opinion. Article 38(2) of the Constitution says, “Every Ugandan has a right to participate in peaceful activities to influence the policies of government through civic organisations”. So, we do not really need this Bill. 

Article 36, provides for the protection of the minority; even if you are the minority, your rights must be protected. (Member timed out)

5.55
MR CLEMENT OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for affording me this opportunity. I rise to support this motion for only one reason. I support this motion because I actually believe that this Bill reinforces the fundamental principle of human rights, which is that in the enjoyment of your rights, you should not infringe on the rights of other people. What is being done is to make people enjoy their fundamental human rights responsibly.

It is not only in Uganda that human rights are regulated. We saw this during the Wall Street demonstrations and we saw it during the London riots. When the expression of rights becomes an inconvenience to other people, the Police have a right to step in and regulate the expression of those rights.

This law has no expiry date; if it had an expiry date, I would be concerned that the NRM is passing a law that will cease to exist when it gets out of power. So, unless my colleagues across the room have resigned themselves to stay in opposition for the rest of their lives, I really do not see why they should be afraid of this law. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.58
MR SIMON ALEPER (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Madam Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity given. One great American President once said that one thing you can fear is fear itself, and in this Bill I see a lot of fear. The Government is in fear, MPs and the public are in fear, and that is the reason why we need sobriety when we are talking about this Bill.

What are some of the characteristics of a good law? It must be universal, it must be for posterity and then easy to interpret. If you look at the provisions of this Bill, there are certain provisions that are creating a lot of fear in us. When you talk about “where three are gathered”, I can give reference to the archaic law that was made one time. There was a proposal brought into this Parliament by Bataringaya that where you get three Karimojong gathered, they are either planning for a raid or they have come back from a raid. It became difficult to implement such a law. Now we are repeating the same law that may become difficult for us to effect, and that is why we have fear.

MR ANYWARACH: The information I want to give is that further to what is he is saying, there are funny laws which were enacted by Grace Ibingira on detention without trial and he became the first victim of that law. He pleaded with Obote to release him, but Obote said, “But you are the one who actually passed the law.” We have to be cautious when passing this law.

MR ALEPER: Just in Kenya, there was a case that was brought to Parliament to be resolved, whether the issue of inciting the public could be resolved and handled in Kenya. Some members said no, it must be taken to the Hague. But who are in the Hague now? It is the same members who opposed. The law went round and hammered them. We must be sure that the law we are legislating is the law that will make all of us be comfortable.

I can assure you, honourable members, as a parent when you are eating and your child is crying, you must know that there is a problem. How did this law come here? There were a lot of riots. What will happen to this law if all Ugandans sat and there were no demonstrations and no riots? Contrary to what my brother was saying that there was no expiry date, I can assure you that there is an expiry date here. If we all sought to sit down and not hold demonstrations, this law would become redundant. We should not make laws that will become redundant in future. America is as it is because the founders made laws for posterity. (Member timed out)

5.57
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. From the onset, and to continue from where my colleague has stopped, this law is not about the Opposition like some people tend to imagine. This law is about all of us. It is not even about Members of Parliament. A chairman of a clan may have to consult with his clansmen that may be more than two or three people and he will have to ask for police permission. A small group may be sitting to discuss how land was sold in Temangalo and they will need police permission. I can assure you that sometimes in my place, people will sit around socialising in the evenings and they may start discussing, around their malwa pots, the omissions and commissions of Government. These are issues.

Madam Speaker, in my opinion if there was an identification of a lacuna in the Police Act and in the Traffic and Road Safety Act, I think Government ought to have come with an amendment Bill to address those lacunas. I find it inappropriate for us to start legislating and determining the powers of an authorised officer and the duties of a Police officer, which are actually covered in the Police Act. How do you start talking about when and when not a Police officer should use a firearm? Really, those are issues that ought to be included in the Police Act. I find this irregular.

I sympathise with certain arguments given by some colleagues who say this law is really good for all of us because of public meetings. Somebody laboured to define a public meeting. He however fell short and ended up worsening the situation because according to this Bill, two or three people moving along the road, discussing a government policy, are already holding a public meeting. More than two or three people moving is a public meeting and without Police notice, that is a crime.

I also wonder because as we speak, our police are not very well facilitated. How do you expect police to be running up and down attending to notices for meetings from clansmen, LCI- Where are we going to get the facilitation for these Police officers? 

Regarding issues to do with the use of a public address system, you have to get written authority from the Police. For God’s sake, we might think that this will handle the Opposition but I can assure you that all of us will cry and wail. The Leader of the Opposition said do not cry. We are just putting it to you that this law is not a necessary requirement. If this is the opinion of Government, we ought to amend the Traffic and Road Safety Act and the Police Act instead of coming up with- (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. One of the virtues of a law is its universal application. So when you make a law, do not guarantee that you are going to be safe from its capture. If it is a good law and you go against it, you will also be captured.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much. He has amplified it, that it has universal application. Once we make a law, we should be careful; it should not be for a certain section. Indeed, I have asked myself a question: NRM has been in power for the last 27 years and the issues raised here have been the duties of the Police, what evil did the government realise last year to prompt them to come up with the Public Order Management Bill and yet we have been going along well for the last 27 years? The Police have been doing their duty, so what is this that has prompted the enactment of such a law? 

6.06
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for their work. I have a few observations to put forward. 

One, I have seen in this country that when a law is being made, it targets a few individuals. Looking at the origin of this Bill, it came at a time when walk-to-work was being organised and A4C was very active. That means that the idea of coming up with this Bill is really biased and wrong. If we continue making laws to target a few characters and individuals, we are going to mess up our country. This means that in the future when any character comes up, we shall look at that particular character and come up with a law to constrain that particular character, not looking at the future. Within the NRM, for example, someone may think of some people who are seriously competing with the current President. That means that tomorrow we shall come up with a law to stop those people from doing so. When we are enacting laws, let us not look at a few characters or individuals. 

Should we pass this law, I will have a lot of sympathy for the Police officers as we shall waste a lot of resources and our Police officers shall be put in a fix. Good enough, we do not have enough resources. In some districts like Amuru where I come from, we have only one Police vehicle and our area is too large. We shall organise rallies five to six times in a day and therefore I really sympathise with our Police officers. Upon passing this particular law, there is going to be a lot of chaos in Uganda. (Member timed out)

6.09
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I stand to support this law. I know that there may be issues with the law but the legal committee has really done a lot of work in overhauling this law. In case there are still some issues, which the legal committee may have missed, we are here. We are going to sit as the Committee of the Whole House and we shall be free to discuss and amend those particular clauses, including those that we think are incompatible with the Constitution.

This Public Order Management Bill is really meant to improve the environment in which we work in our country. It is meant to ensure that people go about their business, the business people do their work, the children go to school, those who want to go to hospital do so, and those who want to go for ceremonies like burials go without interruption. So I really do not see any problem with this particular law. 

It is also meant to ensure that visitors to our country come to see our beautiful country in safety without fear for their lives. They can visit the country and then leave the country to their own countries safe and alive. During the time of walk-to-work, when the riots where going on, visitors feared to come to Uganda because the roads were being blocked, there were tyres burning on the roads and so forth. We want to create an environment where everybody is happy with our country and where visitors can – (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAYI: is the honourable member right to say that people were scared to come to Uganda because of the demonstrations yet there were demonstrations all over the world? Even at Buckingham Palace, even at the White House, in Egypt, there were demonstrations everywhere. So, is he in order to say that visitors are not coming here because of the demonstrations?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, substantiate. 

MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, the figures from the Ministry of Trade and Industry and Ministry of Tourism show that during the period of walk-to-work, the tourist arrivals into Uganda reduced. Hotel occupancy rates went down from where they were; those which were at 60 per cent went to 30 per cent. All countries were giving advice to their citizens that they should not come to Uganda unless they first consult with their embassy. So, we want to put an end to this.

On the issue of getting police protection, when we were consulting on the marriage Bill, I made sure that at all my consultation rallies I had police people to watch. Not everybody in my constituency wishes me well; there are some people who might want to cause chaos. So, to make sure that we are all safe, my supporters and those who do not support me, I made sure that the police were around to ensure security. (Member timed out).

6.13
MRS NAOME KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One, I would like to get clarification from the people on the opposite side on where it is written in this Bill that it is for the Opposition. I have heard them so many times saying that the Bill is for the Opposition. To me, the Bill is for all of us – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the law reads, “Public Order Management Bill”. You have to read very carefully –(Interjections)– I am going to show you. Clause 8 is about notification by an authorised officer. For the NRM, you do not need to notify, but for the Opposition, you need to notify.

MRS KAABULE: Madam Speaker, I think the Leader of the Opposition is misleading this House. I have been looking with four eyes and I have not seen it anywhere stated like that. I was very clear when I asked for the clarification; it does not talk about the Opposition. This law is not made by NRM; according to me, it is a Government Bill. 

I believe the object of this Bill is good and with good intention but I seek clarification on one thing. The Bill does not talk about incidental assemblies. We all know what happens when we go to our constituencies, especially those of us who come from rural areas. I come from Luuka and it is rural; when passing through Luuka District, people stop you along the road. How is that defined in this Bill? I need clarification from the Attorney-General on how we are going to handle incidental meetings. 

Secondly, I would like to thank the committee for their work, but I think they skipped something on clause 7(3). What is meant by “proprietor of the venue” – (Interjections) – In clause 7(3), it talks about a letter of clearance from the proprietor of the venue. If I am consulting my voters along the roadside, where am I going to get a letter of clearance? If I am in an open playground, who gives me that letter?

Lastly, in clause 12(e) we talk about agreed time. I still think it is contradictory because we may agree to end the meeting at 1.00 p.m. but because of incidentals, the meeting may continue up to 5.00 p.m. So I suggest to the committee that we leave it as 6.00 p.m. and not as per the agreed time. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 76 Members have contributed so far. Tomorrow we will hear from the Leader of the Opposition and then we shall continue. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3 April 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

