
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 14 April 2022

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to today’s sitting. I would like to inform you that I received a letter from the Lord Chief Justice, Justice Alfonse Chigamoy Owiny-Dollo, in his capacity as the Chairman of the Board of Trustees, for the Jacob Oulanyah Education Foundation, whose content I would like to read verbatim.

The letter is dated 12 April 2022 – 

“To: Rt Hon. Anita Annet Among, the Speaker of Parliament of Uganda, Kampala,

Madam Speaker,

Re: Contribution by the Honourable Members of Parliament to the Jacob Oulanyah Education Foundation Limited. 

First, allow me to thank you, for all you did in your official capacity and also in your personal capacity to support the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, during his illness and in ensuring that he gets the most befitting send-off.

On behalf of the Jacob Oulanyah Education Foundation Limited, where I am a Director, I write to thank you for agreeing to be a key promoter of the foundation.

The Jacob Oulanyah Education Foundation Limited gives  a chance of a blessing to Jacob Oulanyah’s children and dependants. I was pleased when you steered a passage of parliamentary motion that will see Members of Parliament contribute Shs 554,000,000 to the foundation. My sincere appreciation goes to the Honourable Members of Parliament. I am forever indebted to the Members of Parliament for that.”

The bank account has been given for the foundation.

Honourable colleagues, as I communicated yesterday, next week, the House will be sitting from Tuesday in the morning and afternoon to consider the sectoral committee reports and the ministerial policy statements.

Rule 149(1) of the Rules of Procedure stipulates that the reports of the ministerial policy statements should be presented not later than 20th April. Aren’t you hearing, Members? [Honourable Members: “No!”]

Clerk is telling me that you enjoy listening to my voice. Should I remove the masks – [Honourable Members: “Yes!”] I think you just want to see my smile. Honourable members, we are supposed to have a sitting from Tuesday, in the morning and afternoon, to consider the ministerial policy statements. Can you hear, Members? [Honourable Members: “Yes!”] Members, did you listen to the letter I read, where the Lord Chief Justice, Owiny-Dollo, thanked you for the contribution you made towards the Jacob Oulanyah Education Foundation. He has thanked you for promoting the foundation towards the education of Jacob’s children. At least, you should clap because the money is yours. (Applause)

Honourable members, as you may be aware, we have a long Easter holiday that ends on 18th April. This, therefore, implies that we need to work very hard to finalise with the ministerial policy statements. I, therefore, direct the chairpersons of the different committees and the staff, to ensure that we have the committee reports ready for presentation. 

On Tuesday morning, we shall have the Committee on Presidential Affairs, Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, Committee on East African Community Affairs and the Committee on Physical Infrastructure present their reports.  Chairpersons, work hard to ensure that you have the reports ready. While in the afternoon, we shall have the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance, Committee on Foreign Affairs and Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. This is for Tuesday.

On Wednesday, we shall have the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Committee on Education and Sports, Committee on Health, Committee on Environment and Natural Resources,   Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Those are the reports to be presented on those two days. I want to thank you so much. Members, for these few days, put extra energy to have the reports available. It is a kind request. Can we have matters of national importance?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication.  In case we shall not be here, I wish everyone a happy Easter. I am rising on a procedural matter. This is the first time to have our two Speakers coming from the backbench and this is a blessing to the backbenchers.

I am lucky that when I came to Parliament, Hon. Lumumba was our Commissioner at that time and we used to have some kind of in-house meetings, as Members, with Rt Hon. Speaker and talk about internal issues affecting Members.

Madam Speaker, these Members you see have a lot of issues, but they cannot release them in public. I, therefore, pray that we get an in-house meeting, where we can talk away from the fourth arm and give you matters affecting us.

Therefore, would it be procedurally right that when we come back after Easter, we have an in-house interaction. Otherwise, the commissioners we have these days - I really do not want to comment about them, but they are in their own world and Members are on their own.

Madam Speaker, you must have seen what happened with our ministers; they allocated money for their constituencies for development. Rt Hon. Speaker, as backbenchers, we pray that you give us a day to have a closed meeting here so that we talk about our internal issues that are making Members unhappy or very uncomfortable. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker, that you do that? I learnt it from Hon. Justine Lumumba; she used to come here and explain to us everything and we would give issues and they would not be circulated anywhere. 

Therefore, can we have that time, Madam Speaker – with your wisdom – when we sit here, give our internal feelings and, as backbenchers, our hearts shall be at rest? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We will handle that. Let us handle that issue after the budget. We can do it after June – after we have presented the budget. We don’t need to come here. We can even do it outside and we discuss our issues. 

Regarding the allegation that the ministers are allocating monies to their districts, appropriation is in your hands. The ministers don’t have the powers to appropriate money to their districts unless you have given out your powers.

MR SSEWUNGU: I have all the powers, but there is something they have put on Table and it cannot be reversed because -

THE SPEAKER: We shall reduce it. 

MR SSEWUNGU: We are also going to look at it and come in as you agreed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS OPENDI: Thank you. Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Is it on the same matter? (Laughter)

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday, I raised a procedural issue when the Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development was here and she laid the regulations for NSSF. You directed her to bring the list of members and the evidence of the new board that is gender-balanced. Now that the minister is here, would it not be procedurally right for her to lay the document if she has it here? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have the document – evidence that  one third of the board members are ladies?

2.13
THE MINISTER FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have written to you a letter officially submitting names of the 12 Board of Directors of the National Social Security Fund in which I withdrew Mr Fred Bamwesigye, the representative of the Federation of Uganda Employers and Mr Julius Bahemuka, the representative of National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU) – both men – and replaced them with the Ms Annet Birungi, a member representing NOTU, and Ms Annet Nakawunde Mulindwa, representing Federation of Uganda Employers. 

Therefore, the board now has three women out of the nine and the 10th being a managing director with no voting rights. I would like to lay on Table all the names of members constituting the Board of Directors of NSSF. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, lay.

2.15
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the gross mismanagement of the construction of Amelo Technical Institute in Adjumani that started in 2014. To date, the work is not done; contractors have abandoned the site. 

Secondly, the temporary learning site for the institute is highly mismanaged. A week ago, the community beat up the principal because of the mismanagement.

Madam Speaker, many students are having retakes because the courses are not taught. Therefore, there is gross mismanagement of the construction site and the temporary site.

My prayers are that: 

    1. The Minister of Education and Sports should come to the House and tell us why this construction has taken eight years without being finished and when they are going to finish it.

    2. We request, as the people of Adjumani, to have the principal transferred and replaced. 

    3. The Government should consider covering the cost of the retakes for the students because it was Government’s mistake not to deploy the relevant staff to have the courses taught.

    4. The committee of Parliament on education should visit that institute for further investigation.

    5. Teachers have not been paid evenly and we request that the issue of human resource be sorted. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as you raise matters of national importance, let us look at issues of emergency. That is something that has taken over eight years and it would be prudent enough for you to write to the ministry and have the ministry handle that issue.

2.18
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the Member for raising this. I would like to begin by saying that we should all go out, as leaders, and encourage our people to go for technical education because that is the way we shall enable skilled people employ themselves and others. 

However, I am going to inform the Minister for Education and Sports. Thank you.

2.19
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Lubowa Specialised Hospital -

THE SPEAKER: I thought you rose on the matter that she talked about.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: No. Madam Speaker, in this financial year, this specialised hospital has been allocated Shs 348 billion. In the budget proposal before the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and in the ministerial policy statements, another Shs 319 billion is going to be allocated to the same hospital. 

Madam Speaker, there is a controversy as to the level of construction that has been going on in that facility and to justify – because this money is being paid through a promissory note. With the promissory note system it is like on completion; immediately, the ministry has to give money through Vote 130.

The matter of national importance I am raising is that, wouldn’t it be within your powers to ask the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Committee on Budget to immediately visit Lubowa Hospital and ascertain the level of construction that has gone on to justify the Shs 606 billion that, in two years, would have gone to that hospital? If we found it lacking, do we have the stamina to reject this payment? 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that you use your powers to order the committees on finance and budget to immediately visit Lubowa Hospital and ascertain whether there is value-for-money. (Applause)

2.21
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Members of Parliament are supposed to be free with you as our leader.

This is something that the Member ought to have come and had a discussion with you on, such that in the process of handling the budget for the different ministries - especially concerning the health facilities he is talking about. For them to beef up the committee, they should all go there so that it does not have to come to the Floor. 

I think, as Members of Parliament, we should take advantage of your office whose doors you have left wide open, to receive such advice.

Members are free to go, visit the facility and make recommendations to this House. Thank you. 

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker –

The Speaker: Honourable member, sit down – Hon. Justine, I know where this is coming from. There is a team that went to that hospital and was denied entry. This, we must speak about as Members of Parliament. What we need to do is that the Prime Minister must give us the position on what is happening with Lubowa Hospital before we finalise with the budgeting process. (Applause) 

Ms kasule LUMUMBA: Most obliged.

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament come to your office when they have matters of national importance. There is no way you can permit a Member to come to this microphone to present such a matter, when he or she didn’t consult with you before.  

The honourable member from Adjumani –(Interjections)– honourable, I am on a point of procedure. Learn the procedures of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the honourable member from Adjumani raised a very pertinent issue about a technical school in her area. Indeed, Government promised to construct technical institutions in every subcounty. The evidence to that is that, the former Secretary-General of NRM drafted the manifesto.
 
Therefore, the procedural matter I am raising is: Is it procedurally okay for the senior minister, who is representing Government, to intimidate a Member like Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and I by saying that we should not come here for minor issues? 

Is she in order to speak in vernacular or another language that I do not understand, in this House? Is it okay for her to say that we don’t come to you, but to this House, without you giving us permission and understanding our matters of national importance? Is she trying to underrate your office?

The Speaker: Omusomesa, sit. I did not see anybody being intimidated. Actually, you are the one intimidating the minister. (Laughter)

2.25
Mr Boniface okot (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance over the inhumane eviction of the residents of Ilera Parish, which is in Ayer Subcounty, Kole District, by National Forestry Authority. With these evictions, the livelihoods of most of the young people that I represent, have been significantly disrupted. I have received multiple visits and distress calls from youth leaders of Kole District in this regard.

The origin of this inhumane eviction, which is characterised by destruction of houses, crops, torture of residents and animals - and even residents have no access to water points or their gardens - is that the National Forestry Authority claims that this disputed land is a forest reserve. On the other side, the residents claim that this is the only land –(Interruption)

The Speaker: Hon. Judith, why don’t you allow Hon. Okot to finish?

Mr okot: I will take information after. The residents on this land claim that this is the only land they have lived on since 1930. We are talking about 92 years of settlement. 

In a recent ruling in the High Court of Uganda, dated 22 February 2022, in the case of Oder Martin and 111 others - that is the National Forestry Authority - court granted an order of temporary injunction restraining National Forestry Authority, its agents, workmen and successors from evicting the residents from their residential and farming land, cutting down their trees and crops planted in the disputed land; and also interfering with the status quo until a final disposal of the main suit. 

However, this ruling has been in vain. I am actually in possession of a copy of the court ruling. Probably with your permission, I will lay it on Table for more information.

My prayers are that:

This House demands that the Ministry of Water and Environment, and its agency should be tasked to explain to us why they have failed to abide by this court injunction, and have instead continued to torture residents and the young people in this particular area. 

Secondly, that the security officials who are deployed in this area immediately vacate or even stop the inhumane treatment of our people in that particular –(Interjections) 

Ms alyek: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Hon. Okot. I am rising to give information on what the honourable representative for the youth in the northern region has given. Indeed, our people in the area that has been mentioned, Ilera in Kole District, are suffering. The women and children have been displaced. 

I was called this morning and I got the information. It is quite appalling that in history, it seems there has been some area that had been gazetted by Government, but even the people of the National Forestry Authority are not aware of their boundary. The people who have been evicted have even gone beyond the so-called forest reserve that the Government had earlier. 

Recently, there was a directive from His Excellency the President, that no one should be evicted from any land. However, these people have already been evicted and are suffering, with the women having no access to water and children in a school. This is what is happening in Kole District in the place called Ilera Parish in Ayer Subcounty. 

The honourable member can now continue with his prayers, but I think the responsible ministry should take keen interest in this matter because we are not going to be silent about it. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Hon. Okot, you gave out your time. You became the Speaker. Can we have Government say something?

2.30
The minister, office of the prime minister (General Duties) (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me get in touch with the minister responsible for the docket to come and give us a response since they have raised the issue that people are suffering, especially the women.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was a directive from the President that people should not be vacated from some areas like those. I think the ministry needs to make sure that these people stay in that place peacefully. He said that some people are being raped; that must stop. Minister for Security, you need to ensure that our people and property are safe.
 
MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. Now that the ministers in charge of security and the one for internal affairs are here, please go and give directives so that you save human lives, especially the mothers. Thank you.

2.32
MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity granted. I stand to raise a matter of national importance against the discrimination in issuance of licenses to the fish maw traders in the country. 

We are all aware that the Statutory Instrument 2010 No. 33 of the Fish Act, directs the ministry to issue licenses to stakeholders in the country in accordance with the department of fisheries. 

Accordingly, during the media conference on the licensing of fisheries activities conducted at Uganda Media Centre in Kampala by the State Minister for Fisheries, he directed that the issuance of licences must run from January to 31st March following any calendar year. 

Rule 12 of the Fish Act, 2010, prohibits any fishing activities without licences. Rule 13 calls for members or stakeholders to apply for these licences. Madam Speaker, the local traders, and Ugandans have applied for these trading licences. Surprisingly, the ministry has gone ahead to issue licences to only the foreign dealers in fish maws; Indians and Chinese. The local Ugandans are suffering; being arrested and their goods confiscated at the expense of the jubilating Indians and Chinese.

Madam Speaker, this contradicts Article 21(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. In the same manner, it is contrary to the National Objective XIV(b) where all people in the country must be treated equally irrespective of sex, colour, and gender. 

It is surprising that the ministry has not accorded respect and has not given any guidelines on how to protect the Ugandans dealing in fish maws at the expense of protecting the Indians, which is a sign of promoting oligopoly and monopoly –(Interjections)- I pray that – 

THE SPEAKER: Can we have your prayers first – Hon. Robert, if you have an issue on fishing, you will bring it on your own. Hon. Suzan, you will also bring it on your own; all the fisherfolk can bring it singly.  

MR TEBANDEKE: My prayers are that: 

    1. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries explains why it is effecting a discriminatory issuance of licences to only the foreign dealers in the sector against the suffering Ugandans. 

    2. The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in conjunction with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should explain circumstances under which the department responsible for issuance of licences shall protect the local dealers - the Ugandan citizens - in such a lucrative business, without discrimination. 

    3. The minister for  fisheries is liable to explain why there is effective implementation of the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill before it is brought here in the House for debate and Parliament passes it. This is because the stay of enforcement officers in military uniform - the soldiers - contradicts the enforcement rules and principles. It is important to protect the local dealers and Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, biashara emekua mbaya na wanainchi hapa wana upata biashara emekuwa kali. Tunataka ministry ekuje to protect Ugandans from business. We cannot allow this –(Member timed out.) 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Member that has raised the issue to do with the fisheries business. I would also like to thank him for reminding us that our second official language is Swahili. Thank you so much. (Applause) 

The issue the Member has raised is to do with the livelihood of the people in the fishing business community. If time allows, let the minister for fisheries be accorded time to come and make a substantive submission on this matter because it affects more than half of this country, in terms of livelihood; but also, there is a component of business. 

He has also raised an issue concerning the Constitution.  We are a law-abiding Government, so it would be better that we have a substantive submission. I submit. 

THE SPEAKER: All the Members of Parliament from the fishing communities should give their issues to the minister so that the minister reports at once. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I suggest that to simplify their work, whoever has a submission should be received by the Office of the Government Chief Whip, and those issues are handed over to the minister with an acknowledgment sheet so that they do not have to go to the ministry to look for the minister. This is because the ministers of agriculture are in the field.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lumumba is the acting Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, the next item is a very important one; it is about the lives of people. Please sit. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO IMMEDIATELY STOP CATTLE RUSTLING AND RESTORE PEACE, SECURITY AND STABILITY IN THE SUBREGIONS OF TESO, LANGO, ACHOLI, KARAMOJA, BUGISU AND SEBEI

2.41
MR ANTHONY ESENU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, to move a motion on a resolution of the Parliament of Uganda urging Government to immediately stop cattle rustling and restore peace, security and stability in the subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja, Bugisu and Sebei:

 “WHEREAS Objective III(i) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, enjoins all organs of state and the people of Uganda to work towards the promotion of national unity, peace and stability;

AND WHEREAS Objective XIV of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, enjoins the state to endeavour to fulfill the fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development, and ensure the maximum social and cultural well-being of the people;

AND WHEREAS armed raiders and accomplices have historically raided cattle, sheep, goats, property and killed people from the neighbouring districts, inflicting terror, untold suffering, displacement, damage of property, loss of individual and household economic assets, creation of orphans and widows in the effected districts, Government policies and initiatives to restore permanent peace have been inadequate, inconsistent, and slow in being implemented;

AWARE THAT a similar motion on ‘Disarmament of Karamoja’ was moved on the Floor of this august House in the Sixth Parliament on Thursday 9 March 2000 by Hon. Capt. Mike Mukula (MP, Soroti Municipality) with prayers for the disarmament of Karamoja, removal of armed warriors from neighbouring districts, setting up local militia to protect neighbouring districts against the rustlers, provision of relief to affected households, and calling upon Government to address socio-economic and developmental needs of Karamoja;

FURTHER AWARE THAT Government carried out a disarmament exercise from 2005 to 20l0 in Karamoja and Sebei subregions and successfully recovered over 40,000 illegal guns through voluntary and forceful disarmament, with a promise to guarantee the protection of lives and safety of livestock from internal and cross-border raiders through the security forces;

NOTING THAT as a result of the disarmament exercise, cattle rustling was halted and from 2011-2018, security, peace and stability were restored in the entire northern and eastern Uganda and Karamoja subregion, which in turn allowed the return of our people to their ancestral lands, resumption of social and economic activities in the affected regions, plus increased development activities in all the affected areas;

CONCERNED THAT from 2018, Government withdrew security forces from Karamoja and the neighbouring subregions while reabsorbing and disbanding LDUs, inadvertently creating a security vacuum that first ordinary cattle thieves exploited with impunity, paving way for illegal rearmament of the Karimojong;

CONCERNED THAT since 2019 to date, the cattle rustlers in Karamoja have re-acquired guns, thereby increasingly attacked peaceful citizens, stolen unspecified number of livestock (cattle, goats, and sheep) from within Karamoja and the neighbouring subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Sebei, and Bugisu causing fear, terror, injury, and loss of lives;

FURTHER CONCERNED THAT the Karamoja subregion is additionally afflicted with cross-border raids from the heavily armed Toposa, Turkana, and Pokot;

RECOGNISING THAT the raids have grossly affected service delivery and socio-economic activities, caused displacement of people, and disrupted the normal lives of local people in all the affected subregions, particularly in districts bordering Karamoja;

ALARMED THAT in light of the foregoing, the level of military deployment and response put in place by Government to prevent and counter these raids is far short of the magnitude and extent of the insecurity and mayhem on the ground and, worse still, the perpetrators are not being brought to book;

FURTHER ALARMED THAT whereas His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, launched the livestock compensation programme for the subregions of Teso, Lango and Acholi, on the 26 March, 2022 in Soroti City, with these continuous raids, the intended purposes of the compensation programme cannot be achieved with this ongoing cattle raids and insecurity in the same subregions;

CONVINCED THAT the short-term and long-term solutions to ending, once and for all, this senseless: looting; terrorism and killing of innocent Ugandans; raiding of hard-earned animals; displacement of people; and the ensuing general insecurity; disruption of Government programmes and service delivery; and perpetuation of underdevelopment and poverty in Karamoja and its neighbouring districts/subregions; always lies with Government of Uganda (Articles 20(2), 22(1), 24, 26(2), 202(a), (b) and (c)) which has more than sufficient capacity to take firm, decisive, targeted, and comprehensive actions to address with immediacy, the underlying causes and effects of the armed raids within Karamoja and its neighbours;

PERSUADED THAT the active involvement of local, national and, where necessary, regional political, civic, cultural leaders and other stakeholders from the subregions of Karamoja, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bugisu, Sebei, and our neighbours, Kenya and South Sudan, in charting a way forward, is critical for finding sustainable solutions to this menace;

NOW, THEREFORE, may it be resolved that Parliament of Uganda, on this date of l4 April 2022, urges and resolves as follows: 

    1. That Government, in accordance with Articles 26, 209, 212, and 222 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda urgently and adequately deploys security forces in Karamoja and districts bordering it from the subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bugisu, and Sebei, with adequate logistical, material, and financial resources, to stop cattle rustling that is illegally depriving people of their right to own property; and subjecting people to torture, cruel and inhumane treatment; and thereby restore peace and security.

    2. That Government, in accordance with Article l7(b-d) of the Constitution reinstates the LDUs from the affected districts as a permanent auxiliary force under the command and coordination of the UPDF with improved management and remuneration - trained, armed and deployed within their villages/communities - to support and work with the UPDF and Uganda Police Force in deterring raids, protecting lives and property, plus tracking and recovering of stolen animals from the armed raiders.

    3. That Government takes steps to immediately remove all armed herdsmen moving within the subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bugisu, Sebei, and Karamoja including all the armed Turkana, Toposa and the Pokot. 

    4. That Government with immediate effect and in accordance to Article 22 of the Constitution relaunches and accelerates a comprehensive and sustained disarmament process in the Karamoja subregion to remove all illegal guns from civilians and raiders. 

    5. That Government, within six months, from the date of this resolution and in accordance with Article 22 of the Constitution, implements a mechanism to prevent the reacquisition and the proliferation of illegal guns within Karamoja Subregion and from the neighbouring countries. 

    6. That Government holds accountable, for negligence and failure of duty, security officials charged with protecting lives and property  under whose watch unabated armed raids occur, innocent lives of Ugandans are lost to the raiders and property is destroyed, and insecurity ensues both in Karamoja and its neighbouring subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Sebei and Bugisu. 

    7. That Government, in accordance with Objective XXIII of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, through the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), immediately provides relief to the affected and displaced people in the affected areas whose normal lives have been disrupted by the perpetual cattle raiders.

    8. That Government verifies and pays compensation to the people who have lost lives, livestock and property to the cattle rustlers. 

    9. That Government, in a measure to deter raids and ease the monitoring, tracking and recovery of any raided or stolen livestock, urgently implements through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), a programme to brand and tag all livestock in Teso, Lango, Acholi, Sebei, Bugisu and Karamoja subregions. 

    10. That Government, in accordance with Objectives XII (iii), XIV (a) and (b), XVIII, XX, XXI and XXII, undertakes special measures in form of affirmative action programmes in education, health services, economic infrastructure, and food security, for the catch-up development of areas and communities whose economic growth has retrogressed or stagnated due to the cattle raids, so that they may enjoy social and cultural wellbeing like the rest of Ugandans.

    11. That Government identifies and develops sustainable solutions to the underlying factors causing the perpetual possession of illegal guns, cattle raids, insecurity, and ensuing poverty in northern and eastern Uganda. 

    12. That in accordance with Articles 79 of our Constitution, a law be enacted to adequately and specifically criminalise, penalise and make raiding a very expensive and consequential venture to all its perpetrators and abettors.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Esenu. Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Kibalya, Hon. Mpindi, Hon. Olobo, and even Hon. Joel –(Laughter)- Hon. Okupa, Hon. Hassan, Hon. Koluo, Hon. William, Hon. Achayo, Rt Hon. Prime Minister – it is seconded by the whole House. Hon. Esenu, can you speak to your motion?

MR ESENU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to speak to the motion. I also thank Members for seconding this motion. Given the scale of this problem and the impact it is having on our country, I beg that you allow me to speak to it to enable Members to appreciate what we are dealing with. 

Cattle rustling and violent conflicts in Karamoja, and with its neighbours, predated the colonial era and was centered on livestock competition for grazing land and water for animals. The difference, being then, was that the raiders were using spears and arrows, which their neighbours could effectively counter. These armed raids caused the kind of insecurity that made both the British Colonial Government and Post Independent Ugandan Government devise unique mechanisms for policing and securing peace in and around the subregion.

I would like to paraphrase what I watched last night on UBC Television. I learnt from the talk show that Uganda’s border could have extended up to Lake Turkana. But due to insecurity, the British decided to split the Karimojong and the Turkana so that the two belonged to different administrative units to avoid one entity being overwhelmed by insecurity. 

After the 1979 fall of Idi Amin’s Government, when the raiders accessed an unknown quantity and array of modern and automatic weapons from Moroto barracks, the raids and conflicts became frequent, massive, deadly and widespread; and led to the regionalisation of insecurity and cattle rustling. No one in the neighbouring areas of Karamoja was safe. The raids extended past Mbale to Pallisa District in the east, past Acholi up to Adjumani in West Nile, and even across the borders of our country. 

Between 1999 and 2009 alone, in Karamoja, raids had caused more than 1,200 people to lose their lives. I have a quotation for that source of information. Unfortunately, I was unable to gather the data on the lives and livestock that was lost during this period to cattle raiders in the subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Sebei and Bugisu. 

However, Madam Speaker, my conservative estimate put it at about seven million herds of cattle that were lost by these regions to cattle rustling. This matter is not new to this House. As I said earlier, it was raised in 2002. 

In 2005, the NRM Government decided through the wisdom of the President to use a mixture of voluntary and forceful means to disarm and remove illegal arms from Karamoja, which ended in 2010, with the recovery of approximately 40,000 different sorts of weapons. The impact of this has been the following: 

Immediately when there was disarmament, it ushered in peace and security in the entire northern and eastern part of Uganda from 2011 up to 2018, which led to among other things: 

    a. One, return of people to resettle in their ancestral lands that border Karamoja, leading to the emergence of new subcounties. We, alone in Kapelebyong, have had three new subcounties emerge from this peace. In Karamoja, people moved out of Manyattas, that is staying together and enclosed in small areas and unable to do much activities; and moved out into open areas, where they could conduct agriculture and engage in mixed farming. 

    b. Two, it brought about resumption of social and economic activities in these once insecure areas, leading to the emergence of trading centres – 

THE SPEAKER: Can you summarise so that other people also speak?

MR ESENU: Thank you… leading to weekly markets, schools and health centres; and economic activities were able to emerge. It also attracted investors, both local and foreign into these regions. 

Madam Speaker, there is a list of people who have been affected; they either lost animals or lives, and I will not go through them. I have the list in my document, and I will lay it here for the purpose of Parliament’s records. 

However, as soon as Government withdrew UPDF soldiers, insecurity immediately returned. In the Teso area, the deployment was so low that you could go to a detach and find only three to 10 soldiers, who were unable to provide security for the large stretch they were covering.

The criminal elements saw this loophole and resorted to, first, cattle theft without guns; and later on, when they got arms, insecurity escalated and the demand for guns shot through the roof.

The consequence was that all the neighbours again began to face – from 2019 – growing and increasing cattle raids from Karamoja. This was not helped by the UPDF policy of not responding to calls for help at night.

I would like to inform the House that in these regions, when there is a raid at night, UPDF will never come out of their barracks until morning when they show up after the animals have already disappeared. I must underscore and make it categorically clear that we, the movers of this motion and the people we represent, know and we are confident that the UPDF, being one of the best armies on the African continent, has more than enough capacity to neutralise the insecurity that is coming from the neighbours within no time.

By October 2021, we began to contact and inform authorities about this insecurity - Madam Speaker, because of time, let me just say a few more words before I conclude.

    a. These raids have not only caused loss of property and lives, but they have paralysed the economic activities in these areas. 

    b. They have caused people to lose confidence in the commitment of the UPDF and the Government of Uganda to protect their lives and property.

    c. It has caused increasing and widespread fear and terror among the people to the point that they are unable to continue with their normal activities and some have fled Kapelebyong – close to six parishes of people have fled to other parts of Teso because of this insecurity, leaving behind their assets.

    d. This inaction and slow response by Government to deploy and provide security has caused pain, anguish and exasperation of our constituents, which we think could have been avoided if there was immediate action.

We appreciate that on 9 April, 2022 some of our leaders went to my constituency and drummed up the interest for people to pick up arms and defended themselves. Currently, there is a lot of excitement in my constituency among young people, who want to get arms. Yesterday, young people, again, offered to riot and demonstrate about this whole matter. 

As I conclude, I salute His Excellency the President for his effort and for passing out over 6,000 Local Defence Units personnel with a plan to deploy in those areas.

I request that Government hears our prayers and acts with immediacy to ensure that our people’s lives and property are secured. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Esenu. Honourable members, the issue of cattle rustling has been on-going for some time and it is a matter of public importance, which needs to be resolved once and for all.

This House needs to urge Government to invoke Article 222 for the people with guns to be disarmed. People have lost lives and property. Children are no longer studying and people have generally gone back to camps. Once we get a lasting solution for all the neighbouring districts, it will help this country. The seconders, you have two minutes each.

3.05
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Madam Speaker, two minutes are not enough for me, given the fact that the insecurity that you are talking about started in Karamoja and we have contained the pain for three solid years. Allow me put across some information that this House requires.

It is true that in 2010, there was successful disarmament and Karamoja enjoyed peace and security for about 10 years. I commend the UPDF for an excellent job. In 2018, Government made a decision to withdraw forces from Karamoja and it opened a window for criminal elements to come and take advantage of people who had already handed in their guns to Government. 

During the disarmament exercise, the leadership of Karamoja persuaded the people to hand over their guns on the promise that Government would protect them and their property, a promise which was broken in 2018 and people started being killed and losing property. 

We lost a number of peace actors in 2019 alone. Because of that broken commitment, the peace actors had to pay with their lives. 

During the elections of 2021, more than 50 per cent of elected leaders in Karamoja lost their seats because the promise to protect the people had not been fulfilled and, so, the people were holding their elected leaders responsible. They lost those seats on behalf of Government. 

The magnitude of the insecurity in Karamoja is huge. Madam Speaker, we have not been silent. You are aware that in this House, we have mentioned it either as an issue of urgent national importance or to support somebody else’s motion – we have smuggled it in every time possible. However, it has not received the attention it deserves, perhaps because of the assumption that: “These are criminals. Keep quiet.”

In 2021, when we had just got elected, we had a meeting that the then Chief of Defence Forces called in Moroto Division. Fortunately, he is here to witness – he is now an honourable member; Hon. Gen. David Muhoozi. We explained to him the problem of the people of Karamoja and what needed to be done. We warned him that trivialising the conflict in Karamoja and the insecurity that had trickled in would affect the lives of many people.

At that time, we had just lost 24 lives in Napak alone in one month – that was in February, 2021. That meeting restored hope to my heart because my honourable colleague knows how to communicate and I was at peace that he was going to take action.

Several other meetings followed; we had meetings with the high command and with His Excellency and he gave guidelines on what needed to be done. Unfortunately, not much has been done. That is the reason it spilled over to the neighbours. I said, and I will repeat, that the real fire is in Karamoja. The neighbours see the smoke for three solid years. We had hope - the reason you have not seen this motion coming from us the MPs from Karamoja is because we had hope in the several meetings with Government officials and the people who are supposed to restore security to Karamoja. We had hope because they made that commitment that security and peace would be restored in the region. 

Now it has been lost. Many people have lost their lives. During the last State-of-the-Nation Address, through the permission of the Speaker then, as Members of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group left - we absconded the State-of-the-Nation Address and we went to the region to give our people hope that the Government was still committed to protect them -

THE SPEAKER: You did not abscond; you asked for permission to go. 

MS NAKUT: Thank you, English is a problem. The Speaker gave us permission to leave and even gave us transport to visit every district in Karamoja. Madam Speaker, there is a report I would like to lay to guide this motion.

THE SPEAKER: What is the report about? 

MS NAKUT: Of the 26 Members of Parliament from Karamoja who went to the region -

THE SPEAKER: Did you lay it on the Table that time?

MS NAKUT: The opportunity was not given. 

THE SPEAKER: You cannot just smuggle it in now.

MS NAKUT: Okay, I said with your permission, but if I do not have your permission, I will not force it. You are the Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Next time. 

MS NAKUT: Okay. You are the Speaker; I respect that. When we wrote these reports in July -

THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude?

MS NAKUT: Yes, I am about to conclude. Yes, when we wrote this report in July –(Interruption)

MR ONGALO OBOTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is a motion on the Floor regarding cattle rustling in the subregions of Teso, Lango, Acholi and Karamoja and I thought that the honourable member had risen to actually second that motion. However, it now appears to me that the honourable member is trying to amend the motion without notice; because she is not seconding it, but bringing an angle, which is not contained in the motion. 

Therefore, is she procedurally correct in doing so without seeking your leave to amend the motion? If not, I would prefer that we stick to this motion, which is about cattle rustling in the subregions of Teso, Karamoja, Lango, Acholi, Bugisu and Sebei. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Member is not amending the motion, but talking about the origin of the whole issue. She is telling us how the whole process started. The only question I would ask the Member is: What was that promise that Government failed to fulfill?

MS NAKUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is important for this Parliament to understand the issue in order to get the solution. The moment we do not understand it, we will get a wrong solution and the issue will recur even in the next government. The promise that Government made was, “give us your guns, you do not need them for your protection; we will protect you.” That promise has not been fulfilled. And that is why we are struggling with the issue again.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask you again? After removing the guns, were the Karimojong attacked by anybody else and Government failed to protect them? 

MS NAKUT: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Who attacked the Karimojong?

MS NAKUT: Very good. In 2019, our people suffered raids from the neighbouring countries. That was the first raid.

THE SPEAKER: Neighbouring countries, not neighbouring districts? 

MS NAKUT: Neighbouring countries.

THE SPEAKER: The Pokot - Okay? 

MS NAKUT: Yes, our people suffered raids and they reported to the forces and recovery was not done. That happened and they have done it again. Even recently, we have had villages being burnt in Kaabong by their neighbours, but nothing is done because these are neighbours who must be respected. Therefore, the injustice against Karamoja has continued because we have been trivialising it thinking that it is a Karamoja thing. They will deal with it after all. The people in Karamoja are Ugandans. They are as important as all other Ugandans. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I said that by the time we wrote this report in July 2021, we had counted 466 deaths. Now, we are counting more than 3000 in a period of less than a year. Because of inaction, people have lost their lives. 

It baffles me and it really hurts because I am also a mother. In Karamoja, with the statistics from UBOS, more than 65 per cent of households are headed by women because their men are no more. So, when you ask me about the street children, it is obvious because there is not much we can do when we have a community that is subjected to that level of persecution and mistreatment. (Applause) 

In terms of the number of livestock, we have counted more than 200,000, which you can compute in terms of money. If they were to rob a bank and rob that amount of money, the pain is  very grave. It is way too much. 

We have seen -

THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude?

MS NAKUT: Alright, Madam Speaker. What I demand of Government are the issues, including the prayers, which are captured in the motion, but most importantly; take immediate action to rescue the remaining people. The remaining lives must be saved with immediate effect.

Regarding the criminal elements - by the way, Madam Speaker, the criminality now is really not tribal, as we think that it is cultural. The criminal elements that have been found so far are of different tribes including the Karimojong. They are there and they can be traced and treated as criminals without tribalising and bundling up everybody in the region as a criminal. 

That is the reason I supported this motion. I knew that it is a motion that speaks for all of us as a people of Uganda. (Applause) If it was not so, I was going to block this motion and stop it here. However, because it is a motion that looks -

THE SPEAKER: Anyway, you do not have the powers to -

MS NAKUT: I do not have the powers, but I would do my madness. Okay, sorry. But I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue that is being discussed is about humanity. People have lost their lives and property. People are dying and as the seconder has said, let us not tribalise it. The people who are being killed are either Karimojong, Iteso, Sabiny, Gishu, Langi or anybody else; and the criminals must be brought to book; all these criminals must be brought to book.

Hon. Chemutai is the second seconder of the motion. Let us first hear from the seconders and then, you will all speak.

3.19
MS EVELYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion. And before I speak anything, I would like us to remember the saying that states – and let me bring it in the context of Karamoja - that when Karamoja sneezes, the neighbours catch a cold. That is what is happening now. In Sebei Subregion, because of what is happening in Karamoja -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Evelyn actually says that it is the smoke. The smoke from Karamoja is what is coming to all these other areas.

MS CHEMUTAI: That is why I have said we have caught a cold because Karamoja is sneezing. Sebei Subregion borders Karamoja and because of what is happening in Karamoja, all the Sabiny decided to shift their cows to the upper side that is near the forest. 

In the forest, we have a national game park. Now, the Sebei people are fighting with Uganda Wildlife Authority because that is the only place they can hide their cows. Meanwhile, we have thieves from the neighbouring district - the other side of Mount Elgon - who come and raid the cows from where we are hiding them. This raiding has become commercialised. The moment the animals are raided, they are put on lorries and taken for sale. When you try to trace, you cannot find where the animals were taken. 

Let me tell you, honourable colleagues. The 10 years that our Hon. Nakut said we had peace, indeed, there was already economic activity that was happening between the neighbouring districts and Karamoja. We had jobs for all the neighbours. We have teachers coming from Sebei working in Karamoja, nurses, doctors and all other kinds of jobs - even businesses. 

Therefore, the moment Karamoja is in trouble, social life is affected, the economic activities are affected and people become jobless. They have to come back home for safety. 

Let me talk in terms of security. Madam Speaker, when there were tears in Karamoja, all the ASTUs - the UPDF who were guarding the people of Sebei Subregion were withdrawn and taken into Karamoja to help with the insecurity there. Sebei was left open and indeed, all the barracks are open. The raiders or the thieves have now taken advantage. They come in and do anything they want because we do not have anyone to protect our animals and the people. At the end of the day, we have very many people who have died because of lack of security in our districts. 

We also have an issue with restocking. We talked about the composition and restocking of communities that were affected by these raids. It is unfortunate that some of the affected districts were not included, and because of that, it is already raising eyebrows. They are saying that most people who are affected have been left out. If we want to plan to restock for our neighbours or friends who have been affected, what happens to those ones who were raided? For example, in Sebei, all the cows were taken. If they restock, for example, in Teso and other districts, what will happen to the ones who do not have cows? 

I believe that a local problem needs a local solution. I really pray that Government looks at this and brings back the LDUs to us. They understood more about what we were going through. They are local people who come from that specific district and knew all the corners that the raiders were passing through. They can block and support our districts and our people from facing all these problems. 

Then, let me speak about disarmament briefly. The people of Karamoja were disarmed and equally those of Sebei Subregion.  Most of them were promised to be rewarded because they were being disarmed peacefully. Sebei is affected by the Pokots from the Kenyan side. Of course, our neighbours as well come in. People gave up their guns and they were not given what Government had promised. 

Therefore, when such a thing happens, people take advantage and say, “Last time, we gave out the guns and we were not compensated; we have to look for a way of protecting ourselves.” It becomes difficult to stop such people from acting violently because they were disappointed. 

In conclusion, the people of the Sebei Subregion have chosen to wait on Government for they know that, maybe, they will have a lasting solution and they will be protected. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Everlyn. Honourable Prime Minister, as you have heard, when Karamoja coughs, the neighbouring districts catch a cold. Why don’t we deploy armed militia around the borders of these districts - the borders of Sebei, Bugisu, Teso, Acholi, and Lango so that we have a temporary solution for this? As you do the disarmament, you deploy armed militia.

As she has said, the people within those areas are the ones who know the region. They know the location. When you deploy people in that area - for instance, I remember that time, we had Arrow Boys, who rescued people in Teso. There was Amuca in Lango and another in Acholi.  What would be the local solution to help these people?

3.27
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us reduce on the time. It is soon the Prime Minister’s time. 

MR OMARA: I rise to second the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Before you second the motion, in the public gallery, this afternoon, we have a delegation from the Muslim community coming from Bukedea. (Applause) They are represented by the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament. Please, stand up and we see you. You are most welcome. They are also represented by Hon. Opolot Isiagi and Hon. Ikojo John Bosco. They are here to observe the proceedings of this House. Karibu Sana.

MR OMARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The insecurity in Karamoja has for many years, continued to cause a lot of suffering, not only in Karamoja, but also in the neighbouring districts and subregions of Lango, Teso, Acholi, Bugisu and Sebei.

The honourable members might recall that for almost 20 years, northern Uganda was engulfed in a very destructive debilitating war, that caused much suffering, death and loss of cattle that used to form the basis of their economic livelihood. Lango alone lost over a million heads of cattle. This does not include the sheep, the goats and so forth. The raiders exacerbated that condition. 

Fortunately, Joseph Kony and his gang of killers were defeated and the people of the region - Lango and Acholi - had 15 years of peace and tranquillity, where they had an opportunity to rebuild their lives and livelihoods. 

Madam Speaker, our fear is that the insecurity in Karamoja might reverse the gains that our subregion has achieved for these 15 years, where we had the opportunity to lay the foundation for social and economic transformation. 

I represent the people of Otuke County. Otuke District borders Karamoja on the eastern side. Every time there is insecurity in Karamoja, the immediate district that suffers from that incursion is Otuke.  Every time the raiders have come, we have lost people, animals and property. For peace and stability to prevail in this country, no group of persons should be allowed to own guns illegally and use them to terrorise neighbours, to terrorise citizens, and destroy property; and do it at will.

Madam Speaker, the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, under Chapter Four, provides for fundamental rights and freedoms, one of which is the right to life, which should not be taken for granted. In this regard, the State is enjoined to protect those lives and the properties of the citizens without exception.

I wish, therefore, to urge this House to support the motion and the prayers therein, so that Government of Uganda can take action to deal with the insecurity in Karamoja, which is causing a lot of mayhem in Karamoja itself, and the sufferings in the neighbouring sub-regions, where Lango is part.  Madam Speaker, I submit.

3.31
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. On a sad note, I would like to bring to the attention and notice of the House that a few days ago, a child, five years of age, was burnt in a house by Karimojong raiders in Kitgum District. This continues to be the song.

Right now, there is total unrest in these two districts of Acholi Subregion - that is Agago and Kitgum districts, in Orom Subcounty. The people are now on the run, seeking for where they can find peace.

The UPDF has tried, but I want to also note that the interventions being made by the UPDF are also being affected by the local leaders within the neighbouring districts, especially in Karamoja. Some of these local leaders, if I may mention, connive with these cattle raiders. When we had a meeting, some of them stood up and defended the actions of the UPDF and they wanted to protect them.

Madam Speaker, these issues we are talking about have to do with the lives and property of human beings. We are looking at cattle compensation. I do not know how the people who are going to be compensated will go ahead and buy the cows and replace them, when the neighbouring districts are going to suffer from the cattle raiding. 

Looking at the Parish Development Model, I can assure you that, no economic activity or any activity meant to boost the economic situation in these areas can be achieved when we still have these challenges. In Orom Subcounty - these areas of Akurumor and the rest - you can hardly see any kind of development. Their children do not go to school; the parents cannot even go and practice agriculture. You just see poverty; you do not even need to look at any scientific proof, but the whole situation is because there is no security. As we all know, for us to achieve anything, we need proper security. 

These are my prayers, Madam Speaker: 

1. Government needs to come up with a robust strategy. First of all, to look at how we can address the short term -

THE SPEAKER: Are you amending the prayers of the motion?

MS ABER:  Madam Speaker, this is a supplementary to the motion, which has been brought on the Floor. Some of them were mentioned and I am just throwing highlights. The short-term strategy is to provide relief support to these communities that are being affected, and also draw a strategy that addresses these challenges the way we are doing for the refugee-hosting communities, if we are to help these people. 

Lastly, we must think of compensation for this affected community. If we do not have this addressed as soon as possible, our people who are affected with this cattle raiding, will feel like Government is not doing much. Indeed, it will be a challenge on our side as leaders. 

Another plea I bring on Table is that the politicians or the local leaders, and the national leaders, are very ready to support the work of the security teams to go on the ground. Even if the measures are tough, we are ready to defend them as long as they can bring peace to the people that we lead. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, use only two minutes. Members, I only want new points. Do not repeat what has been said. Whatever has been said has already been captured.

3.36
MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Most obliged, Madam Speaker. When he alluded to Article 222 and the reading of that article of the Constitution together with Article 79, Parliament discharged its obligation and made the relevant laws - that is the UPDF Act. Possession of firearms is an illegality. It should worry a man in uniform to hear that somebody else is in possession of a firearm; it should give that person sleepless nights.

Madam Speaker, the motion today is a very difficult one because this is something we experienced while we were growing up. It is very unfortunate that the years have passed by and we have gone back to the insecurity that we all thought we had resolved. Whereas Karamoja and the neighbouring districts are discussing insecurity, other parts of this country are already discussing progress on how to implement development programmes. It is a painful moment. It is my humble appeal that the pain in any part of this country should be the same thing that should be felt in all the corners of Uganda. We have to stand together and realise that anything, which is impeding growth in any part of this country should pull all of us together to see to it that peace is in Uganda.

It is very painful. I support the prayers that have been put in the motion. The matters of security - If you look at it – it is akin to the right to life. It is like somebody going to the theatre. It cannot – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, the Members are saying that instead of us wasting money on the Parish Development Model in those areas, let us first restore security because that money will be wasted. People are going to be killed. Even if they use it for anything like development, the money will be stolen. Therefore, let us not waste the taxpayers’ money in that subregion. Please, first restore security and then you invest.

3.39
MS JACINTA ATUTO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapelebyong): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving - 

THE SPEAKER: I did not give way to you. (Laughter)

MS ATUTO: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion. As you are already aware, there has been insecurity in Sebei, Lango, Acholi and Karamoja subregions. Currently, Kapelebyong is one of the districts that has been hit severely by cattle rustling and killings. The issue of rustling is no longer news, but a real situation that has befallen the aforementioned subregions. 

We have been raising this issue on the Floor of Parliament as a matter of national importance, but nothing has been done. On 30 March 2022, Otai Daniel was killed by rustlers in my district in Okungur Subcounty. The body of the deceased was carried to the district headquarters, but it was very difficult to handle that situation. We, therefore, want Government to know that the people of Kapelebyong are more aggrieved and have suffered innocently at the hands of these cattle rustlers.  

We accommodate –(Member timed out.)

3.41
MS JULIET ACHAYO (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, a peaceful, stable and secure environment is critical to every single society since it affects all aspects of social and economic development. 

In the 1980s and 1990s, the Teso, Lango, Acholi, Bugisu and Sebei subregions were ravaged by cattle rustling that inflicted untold suffering to the people for about two decades; lives and property worth billions of shillings were lost. As a result, the economy of the affected areas got shattered and poverty increased to very high levels. In fact, the situation would rather be imagined than described.

Madam Speaker, Government, however, managed to contain the situation and cattle rustling was brought to an end, after the implementation of the disarmament process. Peace later returned to the said subregions and coupled with various affirmative interventions, the economies of the affected districts were revitalised. 

It is mind-blowing to see resurgence of cattle rustling in the same subregions at a time when we think that Government has the capacity in terms of security personnel, intelligence gathering and the necessary military hardware to deal with such criminality. Madam Speaker, I urge Government to do all it takes to end cattle rustling, and restore peace and stability in the said subregions. Otherwise, how shall we attain the Sustainable Development Goals? 

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to end with the famous quote which says “It is not enough to talk about peace. One must believe in it. And it is not enough to believe in it. One must work at it.” Thank you

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I am going to pick Members from every region. Let us have Hon. Fred Opolot, Hon. Lorika and Hon. Achia. Remember, today is Thursday, which is Prime Minister’s Time.

3.44
MR FRED OPOLOT (NRM, Pingire County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion on behalf of the people of Pingire. Pingire County is about 70 kilometers from the border of Karamoja. However, given the precedence of what happened in the late 1980s and 1990s, Serere was directly affected. The people of Pingire, therefore, empathise with our brothers and sisters due to the current spate of cattle rustling in Karamoja, parts of Teso, Sebei, Bugisu and so forth.

I join the uproar of my colleagues in the House on behalf of the people of Teso regarding the current situation. In view of the confidence we have had in the UPDF over the years because it pacified that area, as leaders, our capacity to raise this issue and question authorities responsible has been put to question by the people of Teso, despite our concerted efforts towards that direction. Therefore, those that are responsible for protecting our lives and property should take this issue with utmost seriousness and put it to an end. 

In addition, Madam Speaker –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As I said before, it is not about the people of Teso per se; it is about the people of all the affected areas including Karamoja. It is a national issue. What affects eastern region affects the whole country.

3.47
MR FRANCIS ADOME (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. However, I want to put emphasis on some of the issues that were discussed earlier especially, on the nature of the conflict in Karamoja.

It is unfortunate that all this has been reduced to mere raids; people talk about cattle rustling, but the main issue is that the people of Karamoja are being exploited at the cost of Government watching. People are being tortured; there is a lot of human rights abuses. We are only talking about cattle, but I am going to talk about things that are more productive. People lose lives on a daily basis and it is only of late, when we lost geologists that the country started understanding that there is a lot of trouble in Karamoja.

Madam Speaker, why am I saying this? Right now, we have pockets -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Pacuto Jane, what clarification are you seeking?

MS PACUTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member. The Member has stated that the situation in Karamoja or the people of Karamoja are being exploited. I would like him to clarify because we do not want people to exploit others. Who is exploiting who, and why?

THE SPEAKER: The other thing is that people are being tortured. Do they pick people from their houses and torture them without any problem? Or are they being tortured, when they go for the raids? If the Karimojong are being tortured, must they take that anger to Teso, Sebei and Bugisu?

MR ADOME: Madam Speaker, we have situations, where cattle has been recovered, but end up in the hands of the wrong people; cattle is not given to the owners and that factor is very clear. We have many complaints. Cows have always been put together and people are called for identification, but the rightful owners do not receive the cattle that they are meant to. 

Secondly, if you look at the way people attack villages nowadays, they actually come, kill people, burn homes and even burn the kraals. Therefore, I am interesting the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) to pay attention because this might not only be cattle rustling, but a rebel activity. You should actually try and understand exactly what is happening. If we talk of rustling, yet, there are groups that just come and burn homes, kill people and even burn the cattle and walk away, that means they are trying to terrorise the community and pass a message. That is what we need to understand. Thank you.

3.50
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg your indulgence that as the Chairperson of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group, you give me some extra time.

My colleague here has answered in depth – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am allowing this debate for the next 10 minutes only. 

MR ACHIA: Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, I am not giving you 10 minutes. (Laughter) The 10 minutes are for the whole debate and we adopt the report. The report has very exhaustive recommendations and we are repeating the same things. So, please, speak and I come this side. Hon. Abed, you will have two minutes.

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to recognise the achievements of Government, especially the UPDF, in Karamoja over the last 10 years. It was commendable and we enjoyed peace. I also want to condemn the emerging criminality within Karamoja, which has spread to our neighbours. Madam Speaker, it is almost 12 months ago when we sat as elected Members of Parliament from Karamoja to go and talk to the people and meet the security team, but there is very little action and it is impossible to understand. The Masaka murders came and we sorted them. The Kampala bombings came and we sorted them; and we are now in Congo. I cannot understand, even after giving a full report last year, that something was happening in Karamoja. We went and got the details and told this Government to stop this before it spreads; 12 months ago. 

Madam Speaker, you gave us permission to go to Karamoja and we met security people and gave detailed information. However, there has been no action. All I beg of this House is, please, can we move our Government to take action? It has the capacity and resources. Why are we waiting? It is now 12 months. We have sorted other things, which are visible to the press, but for us, because we are invisible – the problem in Karamoja is now becoming –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR ACHIA: Thank you. The problem in Karamoja is becoming visible in the country through the neighbours – this is the smoke, but not the fire. How can 3,000 people die – more than COVID-19 killed – and we are sitting here? 

The problem in Karamoja is because 80 per cent are illiterate. They find their own method of solving problems. The 20 per cent of us, who went to school, continue to be affected – and the neighbours. We need a lasting solution for Karamoja.

Madam Speaker, the solution is education – free compulsory education for 10 years. Otherwise, we shall solve this problem now, but in 10 years, we shall come back here and find that the warriors have recruited another 80 per cent to follow their trade. If we give free compulsory education, there will be no insane person who will go running around the bushes stealing other people’s property. 

I want to move a motion to amend prayer number ten, that this House resolves that free compulsory boarding primary and secondary education be given to Karamoja for the next 10 years. (Applause) It is cheaper than the billions of shillings we are spending on buying bullets and guns. 

THE SPEAKER: Is the amendment seconded? [Members: “Yes!”] Actually, what the chairman is saying is very correct. Maybe, that would change the mindset of the people in Karamoja. That could help us in solving this problem forever. Hon. Abed -

3.55
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Madam Speaker –[Mr Achia: “May I conclude?”]- (Laughter)

MR ACHIA: Madam Speaker, through this education, the recruitment of young men into warriors will stop and we shall come here in 10 to 15 years and thank this Government for the great work it will have done. It would be the best policy move for Government and people of Uganda, so that we can save the whole country. Then, we shall focus on fighting the Toposa, Pokot and Turkana at our borders, and not having this thing internally. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

DR BWANIKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add value to this motion as a veterinary doctor and the Shadow Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. There are two tools, which we have not deployed in Karamoja in regard to cattle rustling. The first tool is animal branding. Animals are branded according to the owner, subcounty and district. Another tool is the tool of radiofrequency-emitting devices, where microchips are inserted under the skin of an animal. Both these tools are not expensive. 

I pray that the motion be amended to include a prayer that in this year’s budget, we provide for funding to ensure that we brand all animals in Karamoja and the surrounding areas, and also provide for the radiofrequency-emitting device. These are simple tools that are deployed internationally and the veterinary doctors in this country should be allowed to do their work, in addition to the work of security. The cattle rustling can be handled. I so pray.

THE SPEAKER: I have seen Hon. Nandala-Mafabi standing there. He is representing Bugisu.
 
3.57
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I am not only representing Bugisu. I even represent Teso because that is the area –(Interjections)- You know. (Laughter)

The issue of cattle rustling is a serious matter. One of the reasons why Government is compensating Teso and some cooperatives is a result of cattle rustling. There must be a deliberate effort because cows do not just move in pockets. There must be something happening, which we must deal with. How does a cow move for 20 kilometres from one subcounty to another without it being noticed? This is something Government should come out clearly and tell us. Of course, they have told us that our colleagues from Turkana have been coming to steal our cows; and they are also telling us that there is cattle rustling among ourselves, the Karimojong, Bagisu,  Sabiny and Iteso. However, how can a cow move for 20 kilometres without it being noticed? So, I also want to make an amendment to this motion that since my friend has brought the issue of Government coming up with compulsory free education, I would suggest that Government should come up with a policy and build a wall – Berlin Wall like President Trump. Yes. Are you getting it? 

Madam Speaker, it is possible; either a wall, even a chain, so that whoever crosses, it will be easy to identify them because they have cattle rustled for many years and we have made a lot of losses.

THE SPEAKER: We need to co-exist and that is not a national perspective that we would believe in, we need to live with each other. So, the issue of the fence would not work. Let us see a way out to have peace.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, if we are doing the international integration, we should also ask our colleagues across that if we are in economic integration, free movement of people does not mean free movement of animals.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the Prime Minister wants to make a statement first, because this is the body that is going to help us.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we also always use our rules to suspend some issues. This is a matter that has touched lives and property. Is it not procedurally right if we suspended Prime Minister’s Time to next week and we deal with this matter which has affected the people of Teso? (Applause)

That would show how committed Government is that they can even forego Prime Minister’s Time in order to deal with the situation in Teso and the neighbouring districts.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, what we want to be acted upon is on the document. We want a commitment from Government, and the amendment that we need to make on this is the timeline. If you are talking about disarmament, how much time are we giving these people. If you are talking about providing food to the affected areas, how much time are we giving because we are repeating the same thing?

Is the problem being solved? So, can we hear from the two ministers - you are not going to distract me with your procedures.

4.02
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, I want Members to note that Government has been taking note of the problems that we have in the country, especially in the areas of Karamoja and the surrounding districts.

Yesterday but one, Members came here and said that the Prime Minister should come up with a statement on the rising prices of commodities, we have prepared this statement and I look at this as urgent.

The problem of the African army worm, I am being sincere to you, this one is also like another pandemic; it is a big problem. Madam Speaker, I request that during this Prime Minister’s Question time - I have been uploading all the answers of Members’ questions and they have them. I request that we use just a few minutes to inform the public and our people who are stranded in our villages, suffering and losing hope, so that we can give them hope. What has Government done?

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon, do you want to make a presentation on the skyrocketing prices during Prime Minister’s Time?

MS NABBANJA: Yes. I wanted Members to note that I have uploaded. Now, I have a statement -

THE SPEAKER: Let us first adopt this motion. Members, we have an amendment.

4.04
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, it is with pain that we speak again today after 20 years because I was here when that motion was moved by Hon. Mukula on 14 March, 2002; no wonder it is again 14 April, 2022. We who come from Teso and the neighbouring regions are so embarrassed because we think Government is doing this intentionally to embarrass the Vice-President and the Speaker who come from this area. 

There is no way this should happen in the area where the Vice-President, the Speaker and the Deputy Commander Land Forces, are coming from. We are being abused and embarrassed that this is happenings at this time. Government must tell us why it is taking a snail speed to address this matter. I would like the UPDF to tell me why they cannot act the way we acted to go to DRC? Unless some people have intentions of stealing cows, which I am going to tell you.

A Member of this House told me how one of the Members has been sold 300 cows that come from that region. Another one, his voters called him that cows have been brought to me, send us money; we want to buy cows.

Madam Speaker, I am going to tell you the Honourable Member of Parliament. There is business happening in Karamoja; I do not know why the President has taken time to change the leadership of the division in Karamoja. 

When we were in Soroti with the President, he asked the Division Commander; “why can’t you have roadblocks; cows do not move by air?” and he failed to answer.

I know UPDF has the capacity to stop the cattle raids, but there are people who want to take advantage to make Karamoja to continue lagging behind; they are profiteering their people dealing in cows. I lived in the war-torn area during the 1990s and 2000s. We suffered, but there are people who were businessmen-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought you were moving an amendment on the time.

MR OKUPA: I am coming to that; I was giving the background. Our colleagues who come from that region that has been affected; Hon. Okiror, Hon. Esenu, the woman representative of Kapelebyong, Toroma here are under pressure from the constituents, but we speak because we have faced the wrath from the cattle rustlers; they have ever been to Serere, Pallisa, Sebei, everywhere.

I believe the UPDF has the capacity to deal with this situation. Can you, please, act fast? Why have you reduced the number of ASTU forces? When they were based there, it was able to deal with the situation.

There are cows in the barracks in the 53rd battalion, the Political Commissar of that battalion was asked why the cows are still there. He said they were still waiting.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I informed you, we have captured all these issues and it is because of this motion that everybody is going to Karamoja now. For your information, even the President is going to Karamoja tomorrow, but we want the security personnel that is there to be changed. I do not want to name the person because we know the names of the persons – what is his name? Please, say it on the microphone.

4.09
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP,    Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, he is called Brig. Joseph Balikudembe; it is funny that he is sharing a name with me. You cannot have roadblocks in Karamoja and talk about cattle rustling when the cattle is ferried in vehicles at night. There is an intention. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, Karamoja had LDUs who were doing very good work. Hon. Remigio is not following - but these people were brought this way and removed from Karamoja. You cannot manage disarmament without using the locals. So, who takes the bullets manufactured in Nakasongola to these people of Karamoja? These are bullets either sold out by the very soldiers or making business.

THE SPEAKER: But also, after listening to what Hon. Nandala said, how can cows move from one area for about 20-30 kilometres without security realising that the cows are being stolen? And these cows are being escorted by security.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I will give you the name of this RDC - when he raised the matter in the 53rd battalion, he was told, “Please, can you go slowly with these things” because he was questioning why cows had continued to be in that detachment. The cows had been there for over a month and he asked what the cows were doing there.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have the deployment within one week’s time so that we are sure? We are going for Easter, but we are even scared of going back to our homes.

4.10
MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move an amendment on the motion. We have had -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aisha, why don’t you put on a mask?

MS AISHA KABANDA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I beg your pardon. We have had cases of torture and I have not had any prayer to that effect - and we have, indeed, seen videos of people being tortured by the UPDF. A person being pulled by -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aisha, the torture, which is being talked about is of the people who are stealing cows. For example, if I get you stealing my cows, can I leave you just like that? 

MS AISHA KABANDA: The amendment I wish to bring -

THE SPEAKER: Leave that one.  Our torture is based on our cows.

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker and honourable Members, I have taken note of the motion moved by Hon. Esenu and indeed, the earlier petitions, because this is not the first one to this House; including that raised by Hon. Bosco Okiror, MP Usuk County, regarding the matter of cattle rustling and related insecurity within Karamoja and the neighbouring districts.

This rekindles our common effort and interest to seek solutions with Government. This honourable House had also asked Government to come up with a concrete plan to address the problem. So, I want to assure Members, including the mover of the motion, and Hon. Nakut, in particular, not to lose hope. Government has no intention of abdicating its responsibility to provide security to the people of Uganda, and indeed, of that region. 

I would like to report, in passing, that Government has not been seated doing nothing. Civil engagements have been made at various levels across Government - led by the President himself - and the Vice-President. And as we have been informed, the President is going there tomorrow. Had it not been for the misfortune of losing the Speaker, he would have had the meeting earlier to find solutions.

Through these engagements, evaluation of the problem and what needs to be done and some interventions have been made, even as we speak. At an appropriate time, very soon, we shall report back with a detailed plan of action on how to tackle this matter –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. The honourable member from Karamoja stated very clearly that after the disarmament, Karamoja was peaceful for 10 years. I would like to find out from you where the current guns are coming from? Who are the people currently supplying guns to Karamoja? What is unique currently and where are the bullets coming from? We are told they are coming from Nakasongola. 

Madam Speaker, let the minister be very clear. Where are the sources of those guns that are coming into Karamoja currently?

THE SPEAKER: You know, honourable members, the minister is not one of the rustlers. He may not know where the guns are coming from. What we are asking the Minister is to adopt our resolution; that we want the disarmament to be done. And that is it. 

Members request that the cows that have been taken should be compensated because there is evidence that some of the things are just criminal; they are not rustlers. [A Member rose_] Let us first hear from the minister. 

GEN. MUHOOZI: As I was saying, Madam Speaker, we are yet to present a concrete plan of action to answer all the Members’ concerns and questions. And in this, if it can be highlighted, we shall look at the whole concept of operations and share it with the House and the approach that we think can address this matter conclusively. 

However, regarding specifically the issue of security, we are looking at a tridimensional approach in the border areas - international borders, especially Kenya and South Sudan - to look at the neighbouring districts and how to protect them from incursions from Karamoja, and then to handle the problem in Karamoja itself within the nine districts that constitute Karamoja. 

We shall also look at the accompaniments for this to take effect; on the forces and their levels, and spread intelligence enhancement, the logistics aspects, mobility - security roads, water points, communication, etc. And then command and control issues, the quality and tours of duty. 

While it is true that some forces were removed, they are going to be removed and they are being replaced now – [Mr Nambeshe rose_]

THE SPEAKER: Whip, leave the minister to finish. I am saying that the whip should leave the Minister to conclude. Please conclude. 

GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Regarding the issue of troops being moved from Karamoja; indeed, they were moved for justifiable purposes, but we are replacing them now. We have got to replenish the forces. 

On the LDUs, we agreed, especially on the LDUs from Karamoja, that they were part of the problem and we disbanded them. That one was agreed with the leaders. I remember even when I was CDF, we agreed with the leaders because these were becoming part of the problem.

Madam Speaker, under cross-cutting measures-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what about the militia from different districts?

GEN. MUHOOZI: Madam Speaker, I would want to be cautious on that one because in a way, it would submit to the idea that Government has failed to provide security.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, on LDUs for other districts?

GEN. MUHOOZI: LDUs, Madam Speaker, that is possible. And of course, we need the support of the House because it needs -

THE SPEAKER: No, it is in the resolution that they want you to deploy in all those border districts.

GEN. MUHOOZI: We shall come back with a plan, Madam Speaker. The other cross-cutting issues of education, opportunity diversification, etc. will be addressed in the plan. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I want to thank you so much for this effort. This is a very important issue that must be put into action. It concerns the lives of the people - I know all of you want to debate, but we will not have all the time. Imat Cecilia, for now, first sit. Let me just hear a word from the Leader of the Opposition, in one minute.

mr nambeshe: Thank you, Madam Speaker. At last, I have caught your eye. I rose because I needed clarity from the minister, especially on the major outcry of the motion. There is a thin military deployment to counter these raids. As you took us through some of the plans that you are mooting, you did not mention anything to do with changing the deployment. 

Since 2010 after the disarmament - which disarmament has never ended, actually - that is why in the Speaker’s communication, she was also wondering whether there has to be a timeline to end this disarmament. 

However, what is grave is that when you go through the statistical data of the Karamoja Development Forum, we realise that Karamoja is highly rich in natural resources. The land has been gazetted; 40 per cent for wildlife, 64 per cent for Government institutions, 12.5 per cent for forestry conservation and 24.8 per cent for mining concessions. The rest of Karamoja, as we speak, has been invaded by land speculators and grabbers. These have illegally acquired vast chunks of land. That is another time bomb. 

As the Karimojong are engrossed in this cattle rustling fight, the innocent Karimojong, inhabitants of the land, are losing it slowly. That is another time bomb, which has to be nipped in the bud in advance. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Thank you. Honourable minister, as I mentioned before, we need deployment at the borders - outside and then at the district borders.

Gen. Muhoozi: Noted, Madam Speaker and honourable members.

The Speaker: I am giving you a week to report back to the House on the security situation in the area. (Applause)

Gen. muhoozi: We will present a cross-Government solution to the House. 

The Speaker: We need reports every fortnight on the disarmament. 

Gen. Muhoozi: Noted, Madam Speaker.

The Speaker: I thank all honourable members - those who have spoken and those who have not. I know you represented everybody. The report is here. All I want is implementation. I am one of the victims, for your information. My cows were also stolen. 

I now put the question that a resolution of Parliament urging Government to immediately stop cattle rustling and restore peace, security and stability in the sub-regions of Teso, Lango, Acholi, Karamoja, Bugisu and Sebei be adopted, with amendments.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Resolution adopted.

statement by the rt hon. Prime Minister on the invasion of the African armyworm

4.23
The prime minister AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, permit me to thank you for the motion. I pledge, on behalf of Government - and I want to inform you that the NRM Government is known when it comes to handling security matters. This issue of cattle rustling will come to an end.

Statement on the invasion of the African Armyworm

As you are already aware, it has been confirmed that in over 40 districts, the invasion of this armyworm has taken place, causing massive destruction of crops and threatening the livelihoods of our people. The most affected crops are maize, millet, sorghum, wheat, as well as pastures. It has also been observed that they feed on sugarcane.

As of yesterday, the outbreak, which was first reported in March 2022, was confirmed in the following districts: Mukono, Wakiso, Katakwi, Bukedea, Bugweri and Serere; Busia, Bugiri, Mityana, Kiryandongo, Namutumba and Kumi; Luweero, Kasese, Masindi, Soroti and Nakapiripirit. Bulambuli, Hoima, Amuria, Luuka, Kwania, Oyam and Kaliro; Nwoya, Bukwo, Kiruhura, Kikuube, Lira, Kiboga and Mbale; Apac, Kumi, Lyantonde, Kisoro, Amolatar, Kaberamaido, Nakaseke, Nakasongola, Tororo and many others, as the report showed yesterday.

The invasion of the African Armyworm is currently spreading quickly because of the wind and dry weather, as well as the delay in the onset of the rains. They are currently attacking the recently planted young crop of cereals.

Government, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, is responding as follows:

    1. The Ministry of Agriculture has procured 23,000 litres of the recommended insecticide known as the Cypermethrin 5 ec and is distributing it to the affected districts to demonstrate its use to the effective control of the pest. 

    2. The ministry has so far acquired 100 motorised pumps and 200 sets of  protective gear for use in the affected districts.

    3. Farmers have been advised and sensitised that when the caterpillars are detected, they should spray Cypermethrin 5 ec using a dosage of 100 to 120 ml of the pesticide in 20 litres of water. 

They have also been advised to take precautionary measures to protect themselves against the side effects of the pesticide by putting on protective gear such as gloves, facemasks, gumboots and overalls. 

    4. Distributors of this insecticide have been requested to stock enough supplies. 

    5. The ministry has also dispatched inspectors, including our ministers. They are in the field to aid in the surveillance and provide guidance on the control. 

6.  	The 100 UPDF personnel earlier trained to fight the locust invasion will be deployed to support on the ground by spraying these army worms. 

7. 	National, district and subcounty taskforces are being formed to support surveillance and respond to this problem.

Finally, the public is advised to continue monitoring and report to the nearest authority, any sign of the outbreak in the subcounty to the parish chiefs, and of course, our technical staff. I have also attached a list of the affected districts and specific areas, as reported by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

My brother, the honourable minister in charge of animals is here. He is welcome to add something. 

THE SPEAKER: While ‘adding something’, he will need to tell us whether this chemical is not dangerous to livestock, as Hon. Wilson said. You need to give us information whether it is safe or not.

MS NABBANJA: Now that I have somebody who has been in that ministry much longer, let him give us this information.

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. About 1,407 farmers have been affected. Just like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has rightly said, we have provided the pesticides, pumps and guidance to the farmers. We advise that where you have sprayed, do not allow animals to graze in the very area for some time, to avoid the animals getting sick. 

We are also praying that the rains come soon because when they come, they disrupt the breeding cycle of the moth. People should know that it is only the caterpillar stage that is very destructive. When the rains come, they will be washed away and that will end the breeding cycle of the armyworm. 

Madam Speaker, we are on top of this situation, and in case the rains do not come, we shall come back to Parliament seeking for support to broaden the intervention, but currently, we are in control.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is good that you have gotten the information. We wanted to know the number of affected districts and what Government is doing. Members, as you go for Easter, advise your constituents that if a place has been sprayed, livestock should not go and graze in it. He said you should take one week without grazing animals in the sprayed area. 

MS KAAYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister. The information I would like to give is that there are some agronomic practices that have been cited on the number of millilitres (mls) that can be applied in 20 litres. However, the coverage of the mix is not listed. 

In the report, it has been highlighted that the pesticide is available, but very many districts are reluctant to pick their doses from the ministry. What we see are the interventions at the national level with the agriculture ministry. As we go down, we are only hearing of the UPDF. Can we have a plan on how the ministry, with its professionals, are going to reach the local governments through the use of our district agricultural officers, who are allocated Shs 700,000 to offer agricultural extension services every year? We would like to hear of that plan. 

Honourable minister, we are also waiting for your contribution as far as climate change management is concerned. The other day, we talked about wildfires; and yesterday, we talked about the destruction of energy infrastructure due to enormous winds. Right now, we are talking about limited rains and winds, and all this is because of global warming. 

All of us, in the different ministries, need to come up with mechanisms of planting trees that are going to consume this carbon so that we stabilise our weather. Otherwise, this business of rain-fed agriculture; waiting on God to help us bring the rains such that it can go with the armyworms, cannot be accepted. We cannot remain like that. We must do something as God helps us. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: The simple question is: Can each of you tell me how many trees you have planted around your area? Otherwise, let us act exemplary. Yes, let us start with our leaders. Go and plant trees and teach the locals to plant trees before we talk about climate change. Let us start with ourselves. 

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The plan to reach out to the farmers is available because we reach the local governments through production departments. I want to inform the House that we have increased the extension workers in preparation for the Parish Development Model. Therefore, these extension workers are receiving direction from our inspectors in the affected areas. 

Fortunately, this is not a strange worm. It has happened before and they know how to deal with it. We are actually dealing with local governments using extension workers to reach the farmers –(Interjections)- Can I explain? Let me first finish. 

The issue of giving farmers information about the availability of the pesticide is very important for farmers like you and I. Where there is a shortage of supply from Government, you can go and buy it and use it. Therefore, it is only fair that while we give Government’s interventions in the immediately affected areas, we inform farmers and all farming communities of what measures to take, in case it happens. 

The issues of climate change and failed weather conditions are not only for the agriculture ministry; it is for all of us. It is a global concern. That is why in the agriculture ministry, we are now focusing on water for agricultural production on farms. Yesterday, we were in Abim and the day before, we were in Teso Subregion. Therefore, we are actually taking the lead to ensure that we provide water for both livestock and crop resources.

While we appreciate the weather failed conditions, as Uganda, we are not sitting back and watching. You are aware that we have made several interventions. We have also rehabilitated several irrigation schemes. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister –[Hon. Gilbert Olanya rose_] Hon. Olanya, do not smuggle in – please sit. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, Oyam District, which I represent, has been invaded by these worms and you mentioned it. The clarification that I am seeking is that, one, most of the farmers had already planted their seeds: What plan does your ministry have to compensate the farmers because they do not have seeds to plant anymore?

Madam Speaker, agriculture contributes to about 22 per cent of our GDP, which provides us with food and income. If the crops are destroyed and farmers do not have seeds, then, we have a looming famine. I want that clarification from the minister. 

Finally, Minister, you have talked about using pesticides and animals are not supposed to go and graze there. However, as I was reading, it is also a no-go zone for the bees. I would like you to give some clarification on what we should do with bees? We also have bee farmers. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Santa, what do bees do in the gardens? 

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the minister about these procurements. We appreciate there are 100 motorised pumps and 200 sets of protective gear. However, honestly – against 40 districts – if you divide, it is literally two pumps per district. Is that adequate? Even the five protective gears per district cannot be adequate. 

In addition, look at the districts. For instance, where I come from, in the Bugisu subregion, you have earmarked Manafwa, which is sandwiched between three other districts of Bududa, Namisindwa and Mbale – and we border Kenya. From the information, the worms migrated from Kenya. So, are these other districts safe? By the time you are done with Manafwa, then the rest of the districts may even be worse.

You have done well to give us the doses, but you could have considered acreage; how much or how many litres are sufficient for an acre? Here, it is still confusing and we do not think that 23,000 litres of Cypermethrin 5 ec will suffice.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I want us to really look at the issue of the skyrocketing prices.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, my sister from Oyam, we have actually sent pumps and the chemical to Oyam. We have also briefed the extension workers.

Now, the issue of compensation is that here in Uganda, we are not in that category of the developed world. We have never developed a compensation policy, and we have never discussed it here in Parliament - be it for livestock or crop resources. 

However, what we do is that when there is a disaster, we come in to help the farmers to reinstate their capacities.

Secondly, Hon. Nambeshe, you are very right. The equipment and chemical we have sent is not adequate. However, what I can say is that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has not existed today.

In the farming community, there are many pumps available for different purposes. What we are giving them is an addition and empowering them. I am quite sure that even in Elgon, you know that the coffee farmers have these spray pumps and the same spray pumps will be used to spray these caterpillars. 

Now, these caterpillars - it is true that the area was not stated, but we are aware and I can inform Parliament that the affected surface area is 5,665 hectares. Therefore, in whatever we are doing, we are actually factoring it in. 

The good news is that the pesticide works instantly and the chemical is biodegradable. Therefore, if you leave it for three days, it would have no effect on human beings and animals. However, we are taking precaution because if it is fresh and, as a human being, you swallow something with it, it will affect you. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. We shall be coming next week, after Easter, to brief you on the progress over these armyworms.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We need constant updates on what is happening. That means we need to plan for food shortage soon. As you do your budgeting – do not ask the Prime Minister for food – do it properly so that you budget for any eventuality that may happen, especially if the worms eat everything. Prime Minister?

4.45
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Madam Speaker, like I had earlier told you that we have organised a statement on the rising prices of essential commodities in the country, I would request that you give me time and I call Hon. Bahati to come and give us the statement.

THE SPEAKER: That is okay.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker.

The purpose of this statement is to explain to the House and the country, the drivers of the recent rise in consumer prices of selected essential commodities and products, and Government’s policy and responses in the short, medium and long terms, and also invite people’s representatives to have an input in the solutions to the current crisis.

Madam Speaker, in recent months, there has been a significant increase in prices of some of the essential commodities and services. These include, laundry bar soap, domestic fuel pump prices -

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the document?
 
MS NAMUGGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is presenting a report that is not anywhere. We do not have it uploaded and I think the gadgets should be put to good use. Can we, kindly, have the report before it is discussed, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: I think you just wanted to speak on the microphone because I was the first to ask whether you had the report. 

Clerk, can you make sure this is uploaded? We can still go ahead and listen – this is a very crucial matter.

MR BAHATI: Thank you –

THE SPEAKER: Let us listen. You are going to get the document on your iPads –(Member rose_) - My muko, sit. No, I do not need support. I am chairing the House. Can you listen?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that in the recent months, there has been a significant increase in the prices for some of the essential commodities and services. These include: laundry bar soap, domestic fuel pump prices, cooking oil, some food crops (matooke, sweet potatoes and onions etc.), education services and building materials like cement and steel, among others. Overall, monthly inflation increased by a considerable one per cent between January and February 2022. This, Madam Speaker, is the highest monthly change recorded in the last five years. 

Annual headline inflation also increased considerably, from 2.7 per cent, in January 2022, to 3.2 per cent in February 2022. In March 2022, there was a further increase in annual headline inflation to 3.7 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, I want to make a small comment on the trends in domestic prices. 

According to the information from the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), cooking oil has registered the highest rise in price by 5.6 per cent, between December 2021 and March 2022, and a 34 per cent rise in the past one year. 

The price of laundry bar soap has increased by 47.8 per cent, between December 2021 and March 2022, and by 72.7 per cent in the past one year, while fuel (petrol) has risen by 13.2 per cent in the past four months and by 35 per cent during the past one year, among other items. 

As a result, the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for March 2022 increased to 3.7 per cent, from 3.2 per cent, in February 2022. At this rate, Uganda’s inflation remains within the target of 5 per cent and one of the lowest in the region despite the increase in prices of some of the essential items. 

It is also important for Members of this House to know and note that the worldwide annual inflation rate has increased. For example, in the USA, it accelerated to 8.5 per cent in March 2022, the highest they have recorded in 40 years, while UK inflation increased to 7 per cent in March 2022, the highest they have recorded since May 1992. Likewise, prices have increased in several of the emerging economies such as Brazil (11.3 per cent) and India (6.9 per cent) as well as in developing countries like our neighbours Kenya (6.3 per cent), Rwanda (7.5 per cent), and so forth. So, it is a worldwide trend.

Madam Speaker, there are a few reasons that I want this House to be aware of, for the price increase of some of the essential goods. 

The recent increase in the prices of essential commodities is as a result of events that have occurred outside Uganda. Uganda is a net-importer of intermediate raw materials used in the production of items such as refined cooking oil and laundry bar soap. The causes are outlined below, but not exhaustively. However, the following are some of the reasons I want to highlight:

The first is the effect of COVID-19 restrictions across the world, which disrupted supply-chains leading to higher transport costs a shortage of intermediate raw materials used to produce items such as soap, cooking oil and others. 

In the recent past, the global economy has faced high shipping costs, a shortage of shipping containers, and higher fuel prices leading to supply shortages globally. In addition, adverse weather conditions in South America have led to the low production of wheat and edible oils. 

Also, some of the SOPs adopted worldwide for example, the requirement of quarantine for 14 days in China and other countries, also affected the logistical supplies of these materials.

The full opening of economies globally following relative containment of COVID-19 has led to a rapid rise in aggregate demand for a number of fast-moving-goods (FMGs) beginning with oil, yet production levels had been constrained by COVID-19 restrictions. 

Demand is increasing, but for a number of two years, they have been constrained on the side of production. This has led to an increase in prices everywhere in the world. 

Lastly, the situation has been worsened by the Russia-Ukraine conflict, which has further disrupted the supply of oil, cereals such as wheat, corn and sunflower oil, as well as essential metals like aluminium and nickel. The two countries (Russia and Ukraine) are major producers and exporters of these commodities. In times of war, it is very difficult to export. 

As a result of the above factors, prices of several commodities and services in Uganda have increased significantly and raised overall inflation. The affected commodities include cooking oil, soap, fuel, and education services. 

I want to bring to the attention of this House some few facts about specific items, and I will just pick two; the laundry bar soap and oil, and then fuel.

The prices of cooking oil and laundry soap have risen mainly due to the rising price of crude palm oil on international markets. Approximately 70 per cent of crude palm oil used as an input in the production of these two commodities is imported. A total of 70 per cent of the raw materials to produce cooking oil and soap is imported. So, if anything happens on the side of the import, then the price is also affected. 

Manufacturers import these raw materials mainly from Malaysia and Indonesia – the two are the leading surplus producers of palm oil. In 2021, the two countries accounted for 84 per cent of palm oil exports in the world. 

So, for all the palm oil used in the world, Malaysia and Indonesia account for 84 per cent; meaning that, if there is anything that affects those countries, then the other countries are affected too. 

In the past two years, crude palm oil prices have almost doubled, driven mainly by two factors: 

a) 	Increased demand for palm oil, driven by the growing importation by China and India – the two largest buyers of palm oil globally; and 

b) 	Severe labour shortages in Malaysia due to COVID-19 protocols, export restrictions introduced in Malaysia and Indonesia that limit the export of crude palm oil, as well as extreme weather conditions in Malaysia and Brazil, which have affected palm oil production. They are the highest exporters of palm oil, but again, they put restrictions to export this palm oil to other countries, and Uganda was also affected.

In addition, the decrease in the global sunflower and soya bean oil exports from Brazil, Peru, and Argentina, which are close substitutes of crude palm oil, has increased the demand for palm oil and related products thereby propping up the prices. 

Furthermore, the on-going geopolitical tensions between Russia and Ukraine – the two nations that account for half of the global supply of palm oil substitutes, has exacerbated the global shortages resulting in higher prices of raw materials. 

Lastly, the supply of raw materials has further been affected by increasing logistics and transport costs. For example, shipping costs per a 20-foot container from Shanghai in China to Mombasa has increased from US$ 3,050 in 2020, to now US$ 6,100 in 2021. 

As a result, transport and logistical providers, have increased their prices to meet the growing demand for their services following the full reopening of most of the economies in the second half of 2021 and early 2022. To offset the increases in freight and transport-related costs, manufacturers are passing on these costs to the consumers and hence, the increase in prices of these commodities.

Let me say something about domestic fuel prices; domestic fuel prices have also increased considerably mainly due to the increase in international oil prices which increased by over 112 per cent between January 2021 and March 2022.

Thus, the rise in domestic fuel prices has partly contributed to the increase in distribution costs for the manufacturers since they rely on trucks to transport both raw materials and final products to markets.

Government and all of us are aware of what is happening about the prices and meetings are taking place, chaired by the Prime Minister and all the stakeholders, including the manufacturers and others to come up with some responses; short-term, medium-term, and long-term solutions.

As indicated above, the main cause of the recent increase in commodity prices is due to supply shortages on the international market, which has affected domestic prices.

Therefore, the solution to the recent price increases is to focus on addressing the challenges affecting the supply of these commodities. To this end, Government’s policy response is aimed at implementing sustainable policies that will ensure continued supply in the short, medium, and long terms.

In the short to medium-term, Government will continue to support our farmers to grow more food and vegetable seeds and cereals to ensure sufficient domestic supply, as well as take advantage of the rising global and regional prices to boost our export earnings.

Exports like maize can be used as substitutes by some of our regional partners who have been more dependent on imports of food from affected countries like Ukraine. 

In this regard, Government is fast-tracking the implementation, as you know, and in a few weeks, we will be discussing this in the budget.

The Parish Development Model, which targets an increase in the production of strategic commodities for domestic consumption and export especially, targeting 39 per cent of the households of Ugandans who live in a subsistence economy, into the money economy; to build their capacity to withstand shocks such as price hikes.

To cushion consumers against high fuel prices, Government will continue to promote a free and fair competitive environment to support the continuous supply of fuel.

This will ensure that the demand does not outstrip supply. We are working with the private sector to expedite the alternative fuel import routes across Lake Vitoria to be able to mitigate the prices of transport by vehicles, and that is being worked on with the speed that it deserves, to avoid unnecessary supply disruptions.

We think that if we get an alternative route in Lake Victoria, we will decrease the cost of transport by almost 30 per cent, which we hope will feed into the prices of other goods, because fuel has a multiplier effect in terms of prices.

Learning from the experiences of other countries, Government is avoiding implementing counterproductive and unsustainable policies like price control, which result in supply shortages and subsequently, further price hikes.

From empirical evidence by all economists in the world, anybody who has tried to do price control, has been hit through supply shortages and subsequently further price hikes. So, we are trying to be sensitive to this.

In the same vein, the use of subsidies and tax reductions are not only unsustainable but also cause other problems to the economy. For example, they have the unintended consequences of creating market distortions such as smuggling. If you put a tax at this time, you encourage the smuggling of some of those products.

They do not benefit the intended groups, especially the lower-income groups - people at the pyramid base - you reduce the taxes, but these dealers continue maintaining the same prices.

They lead to revenue loss to Government, which negatively impacts on service delivery and also in the COVID-19 situation, to lose any coin now through revenue is not a wise decision.

Government, through the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, has been and will continue to regulate the domestic fuel market to ensure that fuel price movements are a true reflection of the economic environment.

To this end, we want to commit to the people of Uganda that the committee, which has been put in place by the Prime Minister, monitors to ensure that the fuel price movements are a true reflection of the economic environment. So, nobody is going to over increase the price of fuel under our watch. 

Government has taken keen interest in reports of possible hoarding of some products that are currently experiencing price increases.

We have subsequently dispatched a team of technical people to verify these claims with a view of taking punitive action, including revocation of trade licences against anybody found engaging in this vice.

Additionally, Government is fast-tracking the consumer protection law which is currently before Cabinet. The purpose of this is to safeguard buyers of goods and services against unfair practices in the marketplace.

Government, through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and the Bank of Uganda, will continue to monitor the situation and respond using the appropriate fiscal and monetary policies, to mitigate the impact of price shocks.

Policies so far undertaken have ensured a low and stable exchange rate, which has ensured that prices do not get worse due to exchange rate depreciation.

All of you who are monitoring the performance of our Shilling know that now the exchange rate is a bit low at 3,500, and the change has been for the last two years; and has never gone beyond 3,620. That is important because the exchange rate also affects prices and inflation.

Medium to long-term measures

Government medium to long-term policy interventions will include the following: Construction of additional fuel storage infrastructure in Buloba; the money that you already approved will provide for strategic fuel reserves as another measure to cushion incomers from effects of fuel supply shocks.

Furthermore, we have completed all preconditions of oil production including securing the required financing and right of way for oil and gas-related projects.

This House approved a lot of resources to support the Albertine area by improving the infrastructure, and when you go to Bunyoro now, the infrastructure is ready to support the production of oil.

We are expediting implementation of project activities to ensure the timely start of oil production, as well as the development of an oil refinery.

Government will continue to support efforts to scale-up production of palm oil, sunflower, and soya beans to ensure sufficient domestic supply. 

We have partnered with BIDCO to grow palm oil in Kalangala and will provide more land to BIDCO and Bukoola Limited in Sango Bay, to grow more palm oil. In addition, Government will continue to provide support to farmers in northern Uganda and other areas, to grow sunflower and soya beans for manufacturing oil. 

The global shortage of palm oil, sunflower and soya beans provide an opportunity for Uganda to scale-up production of the commodities to replace the imported content. Government will also continue to support citizens and their businesses in order to recover their sources of livelihood from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic so that they can withstand such price shocks. 

You will recall that we put Shs 481 billion in UDB; you have approved the money for other programmes like Emyooga, Microfinance Support Center, small business recovery fund, yes, there could be some challenges of implementation, but you have appropriated and we are saying these resources can actually help our people to get out of this situation; the financial filler inclusion of the Parish Development Model, and other programmes.

To ensure reduction in transport and production costs, we will continue to focus on infrastructure development, in particular, water transport, water for production, road maintenance, and rehabilitation of the metre gauge railway. You recall that you also approved quite a sizeable amount of money to repair these, and the process of repairs is ongoing. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in conclusion, let me make three points. One, given that these developments are mainly external, Government will continue to implement the import substitution and industrialisation strategy, and support the private sector to produce domestically some of the intermediate goods used to produce most of the affected goods and services. 

As you will note, most of the drivers of the price increases are global in nature. Our interventions will help to mitigate the negative impact of the recent global developments, and we urge the public to remain calm, but also remain frugal with their resources as we manage this temporary situation. 

Madam Speaker, I have also informed you that there is a standalone committee in Government, to continue monitoring, and if there are any administrative measures that we can take in the meantime, we will be able to take them. 

Lastly, we invite the people’s representatives to also make an input in resolving this crisis. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, I am waiting for a number of licences to be revoked because most of these require going against what Government has decided. So, you need to take very serious action, especially at the petrol stations. 

Members, we are supposed to get a report from the Opposition and I would like to request that Hon. Francis, the shadow minister, presents his report on Tuesday and we will debate both reports. Out of respect for our Muslim brothers and sisters, whom I have invited to come here, kindly allow me to join them. Thank you. 

I, therefore, adjourn the House to Tuesday at 10 o’clock.

(The House rose at 5.12 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 April 2022 at 10.00 a.m.) 

