

Wednesday, 4 April 2018

Parliament met at 2.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As I communicated yesterday, tomorrow morning His Excellency the President will be coming here to be part of the launch of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum on Malaria. We are requested to be seated by 9.00 a.m. Please keep time to avoid any inconveniences that could arise if you come when the President is already here. I urge you to respect that time.

I am informed that there is another forum that had also organised a meeting in the same venue. However, as you are aware, the President takes precedence and any meeting that he is coming to attend should take precedence. The other meeting should be adjusted accordingly to accommodate the presence of the President.

2.09
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to report that the panga wielding thugs that operated during the better part of last year have resurrected in Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality. 

In the morning of 31 March at about 2.00 p.m., two people were attacked in Gangu A, Busabala Ward, Masajja Division of the municipality. The following night, two others were also hacked but luckily, none of them has died. However, two people are still in critical condition while another two have been discharged though their condition is very bad.

We appreciate that security organs are on the ground; I observed yesterday that we had more patrol cars. However, I would like to report that we need more manpower and equipment, in particular motorcycles, because the area is not very accessible by road. The thugs use the small roads to access those areas that are very dangerous. We request that we are provided with more motorcycles so that we can do better work.

It is unfortunate that yesterday when I was talking to the Officer in Charge (OC) Police in the area, he also informed me that the same thugs are using the same tricks they used last year. They have now dropped anonymous letters threatening to attack again. This has exposed us to more danger and we feel that we are no safe at all. 

We would like to request the security organs to take stern action. I understand that by this morning, four people had been arrested but the motive is not yet known. Whereas it may not be what Government suspected - a threat to the state - the thugs could use this opportunity to terrorise people. We pray that the security organs kindly come to our rescue. Thank you so much.

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, and honourable colleague, sorry for the incidents that are happening in your constituency. We request the Minister for Internal Affairs to investigate the situation, take action and come to the House and report on the progress in the next sitting.

2.12
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Saturday, 31 March, a day before Easter Sunday, a boy’s dormitory known as Nile Block at Bukalasa Technical College was burnt and all the students’ property, including beds, was damaged. The building is currently damaged beyond repair because all the walls cracked and are almost on the ground. 

This happened at 6.00 p.m. when the students were out of the building for a sports activity while some had gone home for the Easter holiday. We thank God that there was no loss of life. The building was accommodating 40 students who are now helpless. They have been gathered into one conference room without mattresses and beds. They are just sleeping on mats, which have been provided by the school management. 

A similar problem happened at Bowa Community Polytechnic Institute in 2016. The girls’ dormitory was burnt down but up to now, there is no response from the line ministry.

Mr Speaker, these are Government institutions and that is why I brought this up as a matter of national importance. As a way forward, I wish to request that the Government moves its line ministries to help us where possible and provide at least some school beds, mattresses and constructs the structures. Thank you.  

2.14
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. We are going to handle the matter in two phases. The immediate is to provide the materials as hon. Ssembatya has requested. The Office of the Prime Minister will liaise with the district to find out what kind of support can be given immediately. 

Secondly, the Ministry of Education and Sports will have to work with the Ministry of Works and Transport to carry out investigations to find what they would require to give support towards reconstruction of the damaged building. 
 
2.15
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance, which arises from a report that NTV has been showing for the last two days concerning Uganda selling charcoal to Kenya and Tanzania. 

According to the news report, Kenya and Rwanda have stringent legislation against tree cutting in their countries. As a result, Ugandans have found it very lucrative business to sell charcoal to the two countries. In that particular news item, Busia town was featured and according to the report, the charcoal was coming from northern Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I hail from the West Nile sub-region in northern Uganda and I am a regular traveller on the West Nile-Kampala route. I have been keenly observing the type of goods being transported along the route. On a daily basis, over 50 overloaded trucks of charcoal are always transported, mainly at night, towards Kampala. It is very perturbing that this kind of business can be allowed, much less trucks that are overloaded with goods. Many times, the traffic officers look on as they let these trucks go by under their watch. 

Most of the charcoal comes from West Nile and then there is the one from Nwoya District, and all this is brought and kept in Karuma. The charcoal from parts of the Lango sub-region is also transported to Karuma at night. The one from Lango sub-region is transported through Masindi port and is brought and kept by the roadside at night. All this charcoal is transported mainly at night. 

It is very unfortunate that we are depleting our environment. Last February, I was attending a function that was presided over by the Rt Hon. Speaker in Lamwo District and the LCV chairperson of the district petitioned the Speaker. He said that there are some traders who deal in tree cutting and they are very untouchable. They have, as a district, tried to bring it to an end in vain. They are also cutting trees of great economic value, especially the shea butter tree. 

The LCV chairperson petitioned the Speaker so that this honourable House could preside over this kind of vice. More so, in the recent past, we have heard and learnt about the desperate situation in which the local government authorities are trying to deal in this vice. We are aware of what the local council chairperson for Gulu District was doing to stop this vice. He had resorted to caning those who have been cutting these trees. Many times we thought that it was a weird kind of approach, but I think he was pressed to the corner and he resorted to that.

Therefore, I suggest that we, as a House, take this matter seriously. Our environment is being depleted at a very fast rate. About 90 per cent of the Ugandan households consume energy from wood fuel. As such, the rate at which we are consuming our environment is alarming. According to the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) report, between 1990 and 2015 the rate of degradation has left only 11 per cent of forest coverage from 24 per cent. If this is Uganda’s current consumption rate, what happens when we export charcoal to Kenya and Rwanda? What will the rate of degradation be and why don’t we put an end to it? 

This is a serious matter that we have often talked about without action being taken. What are the National Forestry Authority (NFA), NEMA and the Ministry of Water and Environment doing about it? Mr Speaker, I would like to bring this issue to the attention of this House so that we deliberate on it to its logical conclusion. Thank you.

2.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ayaka for having raised this important information regarding our environment. 

It is not that we lack regulations or laws regarding the cutting down of trees and burning of charcoal, but we lack serious implementation. At one time, Kiboga and Nakasongola districts were top on the list in supplying charcoal. However, my district devised means of ensuring regulation. We lack commitment at the implementation level. 

I take it upon myself to draw the attention of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to invite all the concerned ministries to plan on how we can work with the district leadership to make sure that we regulate the cutting down of trees. I am aware that some people who are involved in cattle keeping on large farms get people from different areas of the country to clear their farms and the payment is the charcoal that they burn from the trees they cut while clearing the farms. There are also people who invade forests, whether Government or privately owned ones, to cut down trees. 

Therefore, I take it upon myself to involve the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to cause a meeting between the ministries involved to come up with a more vigorous implementation mechanism. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the VIP gallery this afternoon, we have the Auditor-General, Mr John Muwanga, who has been accompanied by officials from the office of the Auditor-General. They have come to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have a delegation of development partners who support the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government). They include Ms Harriet Muwanga, Ms Christian Raitz Von Frentz, Ms Joyce Ngaiza, Ms Eva Matsiko, Ms Einar Foth and Mr Oduman Okello. They are here to observe the proceedings. I think that gentleman used to be part of us in the building. You are welcome again, this time from a different place. Please join me to welcome them. (Applause)

2.24
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance that is greatly affecting Kamuli District but could possibly be affecting some other areas as well. 


There is an outbreak of measles in my area and the children are suffering. I was in a meeting with the District Health Officers (DHOs) last week who told me that they had written to the ministry requesting for support. When we discussed on Monday, the feedback was that they had requested for not less than 40,000 doses to see whether they could avert the situation but they received 10,000 doses. That is a shortfall of 30,000, and yet the 40,000 doses were just to see if they could avert what was happening. Nevertheless, they have told us that they are going to carry out the immunisation process in at least seven sub-counties out of the 15. 

Last week, we reported three cases of measles deaths. Unfortunately, two came from the neighbouring district of Buyende and one from Kamuli, given that the hospital was in Kamuli. Out of the 10,000 doses, the health officer was also supposed to remove 1,500 doses and send them to Buyende to at least help them. Now the situation is worse because Buyende – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much money was supposed to be sent? 

MR KIBALYA: It is doses. They requested for doses of not less than 40,000 but they received only 10,000. Out of the 10,000, they were forced to remove 1,500 and send them to Buyende District because two out of the three that died had come from there. 

Our worry is that they are not going to do the mass immunisation. Out of the seven sub-counties they have earmarked, they are just going to sit in one place with one officer and ask mothers to bring their children for immunisation. So, they have a shortage of officers and immunisation doses to help in the immunisation process. 

We are worried about the rate at which measles could be affecting the area because even the doses received may not do anything in the area. That is why I rise to seek your intervention and that of the Executive to see that we save the lives of these children in Kamuli District. 

2.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, the Minister of Health will have to come here tomorrow and tell us how far they have gone in making sure that they curb the spread of measles. 

What I know for sure is that the Minister of Health is on record when it comes to handling such cases. I would like to hope that probably, something is being done but tomorrow the Minister of Health will have to come here.

2.28
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the death of our gallant soldiers in Somalia. 

On 30 March 2018, there was an attack on Ugandan troops in Somalia. It is reported in the media that there was an attack on Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) in the Buulo Mareer District, about 150 kilometres, which is about 92 miles, south of Mogadishu that led to the death of Ugandan troops. This attack is alleged to have been committed by the Al-Shabaab militants.

Mr Speaker, the press briefing given by the UPDF spokesperson, Brig. Richard Karemire, asserts that the officers, serving as part of the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), were killed during a double attack on an AMISON military base in Buulo Mareer and Golwen in lower Shabelle Region of Somalia. As we talk now, the exact number of UPDF soldiers who died in the attack remains uncertain, and this has led to much speculation over what the motive behind the secrecy is.

The country so far is faced with conflicting reports. The army spokesperson on Saturday informed the country that we had lost only four soldiers. Later, the President of the Republic of Uganda tweeted and reported that eight soldiers had died. Neither the President nor the UPDF spokesperson ever reported on any injured soldiers and their status. 

The Observer newspaper on 2 April 2018 reported that about 46 soldiers were killed and dozens of soldiers injured. This information to date has not been disputed. Our own investigations indicate that at least 10 soldiers lost their lives and 14 are seriously injured. All the affected ones are from the 37th Battalion. 

Ugandans deserve to know the following: 

1. 	The number of soldiers lost in this attack. We need the Government to come out very clearly and tell us this. 

2. 	The names of the soldiers so far lost and when we expect their remains to reach the country and their families.  

3. 	The number and names of the injured soldiers, the nature of the attention being given to them - the treatment and where they are being treated. 

Finally, as a country, we considered withdrawing our soldiers from Somalia by December 2017. Therefore, we would like the Government to tell us what plans they have to bring back our gallant sons. They have sacrificed for other people; what plans do you have to bring them back to the country? 

As I wind up, allow me to read the names of the 10 soldiers who died – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what would your source be? Please, just leave it the way you have raised it and let the minister respond. 

MR OLANYA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. That is the concern that I felt like bringing to the attention of the country. Let the Government inform the nation about our gallant sons in Somalia. 

2.33
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member, hon. Olanya, for raising this matter of public importance. 

Mr Speaker, this is a brief account from the Government position of what transpired on 1 April 2018. Al-Shabaab elements simultaneously attacked forward operating bases of AMISOM forces in Sector 1, which is where the Ugandan contingent operates, in the areas of Quoroyole, Golwen and Buulo Mareer. They were using vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices. 

During that clash, the following happened: 
On the side of the enemy (the Al-Shabaab), the latest report we have, as of this morning, is that UPDF was able to put out of action 130 Al-Shabaab terrorists and the following fighting equipment was recovered from them:
    a) Four Rocket Propelled Grenades (RPGs) with 21 bombs;
    b) Four B-10 recoilless guns;
    c) Two PK guns with three chains and 354 loose ammunitions;
    d) 22 Submachine Guns (SMGs) with 76 loaded magazines;
    e) 33 empty magazines and 754 loose ammunitions;
    f) One walkie-talkie radio and two batteries; and 
    g) Three body armours and six vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices were destroyed by UPDF.

On the side of the UPDF, four UPDF soldiers were instantly killed and six were injured. Out of the six who were taken as causalities, four of them have since died. This brings the total of our soldiers lost to eight. On the side of the UPDF, no equipment was lost to the enemy. 

I wish to report that His Excellency the President and Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces has already extended the Government’s condolences to the bereaved families. In addition, he has saluted our soldiers involved in the African Union Mission in Somalia on the good work they did in degrading the military capacity of Al-Shabaab in Somalia, which they have done before.

The withdrawal of UPDF AMISOM troops had been discussed at the United Nations Security Council (UNSC). Mr Speaker, last month you know we had a summit of the troop contributing countries here in Kampala. It was attended by, among others, representatives of the UNSC, African Union and European Union which fund AMISOM. It was unanimously agreed that because the threat of Al-Shabaab in Somalia continues to persist and because the capacity of the Somali National Forces is still developing, the countries should stay on in Somalia. 

This was resolved by the troop contributing countries and their resolution has now been adopted by the UNSC. Their presence in Somalia will be reviewed in the middle of 2019 when more work has been done in fighting terrorism in Somalia. That is the furthest I can report. Thank you very much for your kind attention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have any supplementary concern?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Much as the minister has talked of eight soldiers who died, as I told you earlier, from our investigations we have 10 soldiers who died and their names are here, and currently, we have 14 soldiers undergoing treatment in the hospital.

Mr Speaker, if I may be allowed to read the names of the 10 soldiers who died and those that are being treated; it is better for the country if we tell the truth, because you may talk of eight soldiers but Ugandans will receive 10 bodies and this may not augur well with them. 

Mr Speaker, if I am allowed -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are not allowed because I cannot verify your source.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure on this issue raised by hon. Olanya and responded to in a pre-prepared statement by the minister.

Mr Speaker, I believe under our Rules of Procedure and in particular rule 51, the response by the minister is deemed a ministerial statement. Also, this particular matter is of paramount importance because not only does it touch the lives of our brothers and sisters but it also touches the security of this country and her neighbours.

Mr Speaker, the issue of Somalia has dragged on and Parliament has never been comprehensively briefed about the progress so far and the cost both in terms of our human capacity and our financial resources. Some of us have information and we do not know whether is true or not: one, the number of our gallant sons and daughters who have died as portrayed by the Government is far less than the official accounts of those who have died. Two, actually the Government is paid -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which one is official? I thought the official one is the one from the Government.

MR NIWAGABA: That is why I am coming to that final position. Two, Government is paid money in form of equipment rent and yet Parliament has never had any knowledge that indeed there is money that accrues to Government in form of equipment rent.

Therefore, the point of procedure I wish to raise is: shouldn’t the minister be directed to come up with a comprehensive statement on this Somalia mission so that Members of Parliament adequately debate and come up with positions and resolutions that will help the country? This is because whatever we get seems to be in piecemeal and it would not be in the interest of Uganda to always feed on rumours. 

Mr Speaker, I therefore, invite you to direct the minister or to find that his pre-prepared statement is in itself a ministerial statement that requires debate. However, since it is not comprehensive enough, I beg he be directed to come up with a comprehensive statement that would enable all of us to debate from a point of knowledge.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to guide us on this?

MR MWESIGE: Mr Speaker, I rose to respond to a matter of public importance, which I could not have foreseen. Therefore, I had to respond the way I did. However, I also had to refer to my notes. This matter is in the public domain, so no one can pretend that it is an issue that would not come up on the Floor of the House. I, therefore, referred to my notes, which are drawn from accurate sources, and I answered the question of public importance the way it was asked.

However, as far as this Parliament is concerned, Mr Speaker, we constantly appear before the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. The committee members have consistently raised this issue of Somalia and we always give both oral and written answers to the committee every other session of Parliament, and the committee reports to this House. Even in all our policy statements, Somalia is comprehensively covered. 

Therefore, it is not that the issue of AMISOM has not been brought to the attention of Parliament. However, if it is the wish of Parliament to have a statement, we will bring the statement.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now that you have a written response and reports to the committee, would you like to come back to Parliament tomorrow with one of them?

MR MWESIGE: I am afraid, Mr Speaker, I cannot produce a comprehensive statement tomorrow because that would not –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You said that you already have the written ones.

MR MWESIGE: Yes, they are there, but we have to put them together. I cannot be in this Parliament this afternoon and at the same time prepare a statement which, in the terms of Parliament, is comprehensive.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How much time do you need?

MR MWESIGE: Perhaps up to next week. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next week on Thursday, we will come back to this matter and see how we can have a debate on this issue. Thank you. 

Honourable members, I have caused an alteration on the Order Paper to bring forward item No. 9 to come in as item No.5. Let us proceed with the rest of the matters.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE FINANCE (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2018
     
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am advised that that Bill does not exist. Proceed. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 26/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the honourable member for Ajuri. Is there any Member standing in for him? I received notification that hon. David Abala was supposed to stand in his place but I do not even see hon. Abala [HON. MEMBER: “He is here.”] then you should rise, honourable member – (Laughter). 

Please, honourable minister, proceed with the response.

2.46
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): “Can the hon. Minister explain to the House why the National Planning Authority (NPA) has delayed to give feedback to Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and local governments on the consistence of their Sector Strategic Plans and District Development Plans with the National Development Plan II ever since the MDAs/local governments made submissions two years ago?”

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, hon. Denis Obua wanted to know why – (Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, you are receiving response to an oral question whose mover is not in the House. You rightly referred hon. David Abala to stand in for him, wouldn’t it have been procedurally right that he reads the question for the record and then the honourable minister responds?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are proceeding correctly. You need to review the rules and see how they provide for this now. Those ones were changed a few years back.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, broadly speaking, we have had a challenge of receiving sectoral plans from the spending agencies. We have been doing our best to ensure that these come in in time. 

However, what is not true is that when we receive these plans, their review is delayed. This is because every time we receive a plan from the spending agencies, we review it to ensure that it is aligned to the National Development Plan II and we give feedback to these new institutions. This is also demonstrated with the Certificate of Financial Compliance to the National Development Plan. 

Therefore, the Member’s question is not really reflective of what is on the ground. We are timely in ensuring that we respond to the plans that we receive from the sectors. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Do we have any supplementary question from hon. David Abala? No question. (Laughter) Let us go to the next question.       

QUESTION 39/01/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member for Bunya East is not in the House. Did he delegate any other Member? Honourable minister of Works and Transport, you are supposed to respond to this issue today. The minister is not in the House. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE CONSOLIDATED REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (LOCAL GOVERNMENT) ON 139 REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND MUNICIPAL COUNCILS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a huge effort coming from this committee and I would like Members to acknowledge what this committee has been able to do. (Applause) 

We have had a problem with backlog of reports from this particular committee. However, for the first time, I would like to say without any fear of contradiction, that in the history of this Parliament, this committee has been able to bring up to date all that they have been handling over the years. (Applause) That is why I thought I should take this moment to congratulate the chairperson and the members of this committee for having done this. 

This should apply to other committees that deal with reports that come from institutions that are outside this Parliament - Human Rights Commission reports, Inspectorate of Government reports and public accounts. The chairperson is smiling at me - If we could bring all these, it would give us more relevance because we would be up to date and when matters come from the Auditor-General, we are right on them in time. We know we deal with post-mortem things but some post-mortems are done too many years after the events and they cease to have the effect they should have.

I once again congratulate you, chairperson, and I am advised that you have a video clip that will be shown. You are requested to present in five minutes and have your video speak the rest.

2.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Mr Reagan Okumu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before we proceed, I would like to take this opportunity to thank our committee members for the work done. I would like to lay on the Table the minutes as evidence that we met on this report. If there is any doubt, you can look at the minutes. There are two files and I wish to lay them on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is being laid from the other side of the House - (Laughter) - you are also in blue. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I chose the colour of the Government Chief Whip. I actually changed the file when I saw her in blue. 

I would also like to lay on the Table the consolidated reports or backlog for the financial years 2010/2011 to 2013/2014. I beg to lay. We covered the previous financial year last year and so, it is complete. 

I also wish to lay on the Table the volume report - consolidated report - of the Committee on Public Accounts and Local Government on 139 reports of the Auditor-General on district local governments and municipal councils for financial year 2015/2016 to-date.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let the records capture the minutes of the proceedings of the committee and the consolidated reports for the financial years mentioned.

MR OKUMU: Finally, I wish to lay on the Table a short documentary of the events in the field. We moved throughout the country in the nine audit zones and sometimes, it is good to see and hear this together so that we appreciate the circumstances. I, therefore, beg to lay on the Table a video documentary summary of 10 minutes, showing what was covered. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I will have a very brief presentation. All this has been uploaded on your iPads. I will have a summary presentation of that volume of the report. 

However, before that, I would like us to watch a nine-minute video documentary and the rest will take us about five minutes and we conclude the presentation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Alright, let us proceed that way. Play the clip and we see what the committee saw.

(A video presentation was made.)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, that almost summarises a lot of these issues. I would not like to go into much detail. Our report is composed of two components. The first component is on general issues that touch everybody, and we went for specific districts. Therefore, I will just add a few because the rest is a repetition of what has been said, like in the health sector or education sector, as we have seen.

The Committee on Local Government Accounts considered these reports. The committee handled 139 reports and we did our assignment as stated. A summary of this report has partially been presented in the video documentary and I just want to add a few issues.

Budget Allocation and Performance

Share of National Budget to Local Governments

Parliament appropriated a sum of Shs 23.97 trillion for Government expenditure and this included Shs 2.5 trillion (10.4 per cent) for service delivery at local governments. At the end of the financial year, Shs 2.16 trillion (86.4 per cent) was released to local governments, leaving a balance of Shs 332 billion (13.6 per cent), which was not released to local governments. This is a problem because, first of all, local governments get very little money and when it comes to the final release, it is not 100 per cent.

Local governments’ share of the national budget was low and this undermines the principle of decentralisation and service delivery, which I think Government should improve. If you want services to be delivered, I think it is not fair to allocate these people a certain amount of money and when it comes to releases, you release less.

Local Revenue Shortfalls

Mr Speaker, a sample of 69 local governments showed a total projection of Shs 39.7 billion in local revenue collection. However, only Shs 28 billon was collected, leaving Shs 10 billion uncollected, which translated in underperformance of 27 per cent.

Least Performing Local Governments

As a committee, we thought that we should also name those districts that are not performing well. Kamuli District is performing at only 17 per cent of revenue collection. How do you run your district if you can only collect 17 per cent? Abim District is at 30 per cent; Tororo District is at 38 per cent.

However, there were also outstanding local governments that did their best. Kasese Municipality managed to collect 96 per cent of their projection. Mbarara Municipality collected 93 per cent. This does not mean that these were the best districts; perhaps they underestimated. Those were some of the problems. 

The Ministry of Local Government also continued to interfere with the sources of local government revenues. They now want to manage the bus operations. They also want to manage the taxi operations of all the districts and municipalities. They also want to manage the markets. This leaves the hands of the districts tied because the centre is interfering and that must stop. We should give them the little area of revenue collection. 

I think the confusion in Kampala should not spread to other districts and municipalities. Leave Kampala alone; Kampala is under KCCA. They should not take their confusion of Kampala to other municipalities and districts because this is undermining growth at the periphery and it is going to create a bracket of the most vulnerable at the periphery because they cannot collect revenue. 

A number of districts also showed a lot of laxity in revenue collection. There is a big problem here. Law enforcement is a problem. Generally speaking, there is underestimation, under-collection and under-projection of revenue in these districts and, therefore, we would like to request the centre to support the districts to be able to project, collect and estimate these revenues. What they are collecting is actually less than half of what they should. 

The other cause of shortfalls is corruption. In Gulu, for example, the Town Clerk told us that when he went with the law enforcement officers, they had duplicate licences and when they went to crosscheck them one by one, they were abandoned on the streets. Therefore, even the revenue register remains a big challenge. At least the districts and municipalities would be able to get some good money but that has not been so.

We gave recommendations. I do not want to get into details because it will take us a lot of time. However, they are uploaded on the iPads.

Understaffing

Mr Speaker, the average staffing level in local governments stood at 68 per cent. For the sampled districts, Kalangala stood at 14 per cent while Kibuku stood at 9 per cent. Understaffing at local governments constrains service delivery and we think the biggest challenges lie in a number of areas such as health officers, district engineers and finance officers.

The committee noted that there is also a practice of ring-fencing jobs by the districts. They will want somebody to first go for studies and they do not advertise those jobs until somebody has qualified. In Apac, it was quite an interesting thing. We were quite disappointed that a person who has retired more than four times as the Chief Finance Officer was recycled four times to remain in the district. Apac has a big problem and as I speak, this gentleman is still there. He has been recycled despite the orders of Public Service denying him that same opportunity. The district has not listened because I think he must have sponsored the chairman during the campaigns. 

Mr Speaker, we therefore recommend that the Ministry of Public Service, the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should sit together to come up with guidelines aimed at equalising staffing levels among the different local governments. When you watched the video, you saw what was happening in the different districts. Honourable members, you will find all these details in Appendix 2, which has all districts with all the statistics on the staffing levels.

Payroll Anomalies
Payroll anomalies remain a big problem. There are unsupported pension payments which still exist in the districts. We have a problem of the drugs supply chain in health centres. There are discrepancies between orders and delivery of medicines. What is ordered for, including even the amounts, is not what is delivered. Sometimes you order for something and they bring for you condoms; you order for malaria drugs and they supply you Panadol. 

Therefore, we recommend that if it continues like this, the monopoly of National Medical Stores (NMS) should be broken. (Applause) This is because districts cannot order for drugs and you supply them something else or you do not supply them and say the drugs are not there yet you have not returned their money.

We also found that there are expired drugs and they have continued to remain on the shelves. Kagadi is one such example. Sometimes this is connivance – either the drugs are supplied when they are about to expire or they supply fresh drugs and when sorting, they sell the fresh drugs and leave the old drugs to expire. No one seems to bother yet it is a danger to our people.

We also found problems with the disposal of expired drugs; nobody seems to be responsible. We recommend that National Medical Stores takes up the responsibility of delivering the new drugs and taking out the expired ones. That would make it safer than leaving these drugs in the countryside because they pose a big danger. As such, the mandate of National Medical Stores should be amended to include disposal of expired drugs.

Low Recovery of Youth Livelihood Project

Mr Speaker, this is a big problem. This project needs to be re-organised. The committee recommends that everything should be re-organised since there are many ghost groups and groups are not paying. Even identifying these groups to pay the loans remains a big problem. 

Lack of land titles has remained a big issue in the local governments. Therefore, the committee recommends that the central Government supports local governments in acquiring land titles because this is Government land. If Government fails to get land, there will be no development. Tomorrow you may take a project to a district and the district does not have land. 

There is also a lot of encroachment, especially in Mbale. There is actually no land in Mbale. The municipal officials are feeding themselves on the available land that belongs to the public because they do not have titles. The problem is the same even in Mbarara Municipality.

Payables and Receivables 

The issue of payables and receivables remains big in local governments. 

Education

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Education and Sports has failed to facilitate the attainment of the standards they set. The ministry sets standards of how a school should be but they cannot facilitate the schools to meet the set standards.

The budget for the capitation grant of Shs 7,100 per child a year is provided under Universal Primary Education (UPE). However, what can Shs 7,100 do? That is why there is going to be a gap and that is why some schools in the central region do not want UPE. Unless you wish to divide this country into two where the poor suffer with UPE and the rich reject UPE - I think this would not be fair for our country.

When you look at the transition rate of pupils enrolled in primary one, 90 per cent of the learners drop out before completing primary seven. This is a disgrace and these are some of the issues raised in the Auditor-General’s findings, which the committee was able to confirm. 

Schools in refugee hosting districts were congested. Mr Speaker, I think Uganda should come up with a clear policy of involving local governments in hosting districts to be part and parcel of the refugee programme. Sometimes the Office of the Prime Minister runs parallel operations. They do not involve the districts in the planning and when these refugees come, they infringe on the little resources available. As such, the money given to them does not meet the services required.

The committee therefore recommends that the budget for districts hosting refugees should be supported by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and all the programmes, especially in service delivery, should be integrated. More primary schools, for example, should not be built where there are existing schools. Rather, gaps that exist in the schools such as lack of teachers, pit latrines and enough classrooms can be identified and filled. This is better than building schools for refugees that will remain white elephants when all these things are gone. The committee therefore recommends that there should be integration of local service delivery with support from UNHCR. 

The same applies to health, which you have just watched in the video. Kiboga District is among those that are not doing well.  It is a big problem everywhere. I will not talk about health because we covered this in detail in the video that was played. Of course, these refugees continue to infringe on some of these services and the committee has given similar recommendations regarding health like it did for education.

There is total failure to meet minimum standards in production services. We have some details here, which you can be able to read. However, we urge the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to engage the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide sufficient funds to local governments to enable them meet the production services set standards. In fact, ministries should not be setting standards for local governments and they fail to comply. Rather, the finance ministry should facilitate the process.

Lack of an Information Technology Policy 

This has remained a big problem. I wish that the Minister of Information, ICT and Communications could take this very seriously. We have recommended that you cannot create the information technology policy and leave the districts to operate it. The districts have no facilities and capacity to operate it. How do you expect a district to become ICT compliant if ministries do not support them? 

Non-compliance with procurement laws remains a common phenomenon in the districts. Delayed completion of civil works and shoddy works, which you have just seen in the video, also remains a big problem. The funds are there but people delay them deliberately. Sometimes they blame the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which is not true because we have been able to crosscheck with the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) as to the time when money is released to cater for some of these debts. We met all the ministries and we found out that the districts had their own problems.

Non-compliance with statutory obligations has remained a big problem, for example deduction of Pay as You Earn (PAYE). Most districts do not remit PAYE and that is a big challenge.

Fixed assets registers are completely lacking. Therefore, some Government properties at the districts may not be accounted for. This is already happening. Weaknesses in the internal audit section in local governments also remain a huge problem.  

Lack of Financial Statements in UPE Schools 

Mr Speaker, we give money to head teachers who have no knowledge of accounts but we expect them to account. How will they perform if they have no knowledge? That remains a big problem continuously. 
 
Risk Management Policy

This policy is completely lacking in all the districts. 

Road Fund

The Uganda Road Fund was highlighted in the video. However, I would like to say that some districts do not have functioning road fund committees, like in Mayuge where the district chairman and the works engineer sat somewhere and wrote minutes. It was only when the committee forced them that they finally met at Hotel Africana, a neutral zone. 

I think that is not fair. These committees were put in place to plan and agree on priorities and what should be done. No individual should go and write minutes of a committee and then submit them to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for funding.

The allocation of road funds to local governments is said to be premised on the length of road networks. However, according to the allocation made by Uganda Road Fund, this criterion is not being followed. Ntungamo District, for example, with a road network of 34 kilometres only, was allocated Shs 586 million, translating to Shs 17 million per kilometre while Ishaka-Bushenyi Municipality, with a road network of 71 kilometres, was allocated Shs 780 million, equivalent to Shs 10.9 million per kilometre. This is a gap of Shs 7 million.

Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, with a road network of 120 kilometres, was allocated only Shs 159 million, equivalent to Shs 1.3 million per kilometre, for routine maintenance. It is the same elsewhere but we have the details in the report. Therefore, I think there is a problem; there is actually influence peddling in some places, which is not fair. We gave our recommendations therein on how this road issue should be handled.

Mandate of the District Public Accounts Committees

We have also indicated this in detail; I do not want to go there.

Performance of Accounting Officers

Mr Speaker, the committee cited a number of cases where accounting officers have flouted regulations and mismanaged resources of local governments. The audit reported misused funds amounting to Shs 13.58 billion that were accrued for various reasons, including unaccounted for funds amounting to Shs 2.3 billion, non-recovery of funds under the Youth Recovery Programme amounting to Shs 8.6 billion, irregular procurement amounting to Shs 1.3 billion, and payment anomalies amounting to Shs 1.35 billion. These are monies that are lost.

Observations

The Ministry of Local Government is slow in enforcing disciplinary measures, however much recommendations are given. I think Ministry of Local Government should pull up their socks. The worst accounting officers we came across were the following, and we have followed them from where they were before to where they went:

    a) Mr Onzu M. Ismail who comes from Zombo. He is completely derailing Zombo today, as we can see. We have a specific recommendation for him in the report and we hope that the respective ministries will act.
    b) Mr Kizito Mukasa Fred is another bad performer.
    c) Mr Mbaagwa M. A. is another bad performer. 

These have been perennial bad performers and wherever they are, they are just the same.

On the other hand, there have also been outstanding accounting officers that have excelled. They have confidence and have done their best. Notable among them were the following:

    a) Mr Nkata B. James
    b) Ms Unzia Martina who is the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Maracha
    c) Ms Edith Mutabazi
    d) Mr Felix Esoku
    e) Mr Elias Byamungu.

Some political leaders also impacted positively and negatively on accountability and we would like to name them because we think that they have contributed. The Mayor of Rukungiri and the Chairman of Apac District stood above self and they have been very effective in trying to push for accountability. Actually, the Mayor of Rukungiri and the Chairman of Oyam came and attended all the meetings and were able to call their people to order where there was a problem.

Nevertheless, we also have terrible people who have not helped the districts and they are political leaders. They interfere with the accountability process and they include the following:

    a) The chairperson of Mbale
    b) The chairperson of Apac
    c) The chairperson of Pader
    d) The chairperson of Mayuge.

They have performed badly and have not been helpful.

There are local governments that have continuously exhibited failure to adhere to accountabilities, making the work of accounting officers complex. These districts are very difficult and I would like to name them. The problem is that they make the work of accounting officers and even the neighbourhood very difficult. They include:

    a) Wakiso, which is terrible.
    b) Amudat is terrible. We invited them to Soroti and they refused to come; I understand they had crossed to Kenya. We then invited them to Mbarara and they went. They are very difficult people.
    c) Nakapiripirit is another terrible district.
    d) Mayuge is another terrible district.
    e) Abim is another terrible district
    f) Lamwo is a terrible district.
    g) Agago is another terrible district. (Laughter)
    h) Zombo - those civil servants have really ravaged Zombo.
    i) Bundibugyo is a big problem. They even do not want to accept the Chief Administrative Officer. When you go there, they ask, “Who are you? Are you with us or not with us?” The Chief Administrative Officer of Bundibugyo had to be put under guard. The security committee guards his home and escorts him wherever he goes because he was not accepted by the local staff.
    j) Budaka is another big problem.
    k) Jinja District is a big problem.
    l) Butaleja is another problem.
    m) Mbale is the same.
    n) The municipalities of Bushenyi-Ishaka and Mbarara remain a big problem. 
    o) Another one is Iganga municipality.

These are some of the districts that are difficult and we have given appropriate recommendations. 

We have made recommendations on misuse of Government vehicles as they have been abused. We found the following persons involved in abuse of Government vehicles:
    a) The district chairperson of Nebbi ravaged a Government vehicle.
    b) The district chairperson of Apac and his deputy ravaged two vehicles, and they were driving themselves.
    c) The district chairperson of Pader destroyed a brand new vehicle. He parked it at his residence and refused the engineer to go and pick it.
    d) The chairperson of Mbale also damaged a Government vehicle.

Therefore, the committee recommends that these chairpersons should bear the cost of repairs for the damage caused to official vehicles as individuals. We have accordingly ordered the accounting officers to do the needful and repair these vehicles to instil some discipline. 

In conclusion, the revelation of the audit reports shows that the management and lack of adherence to set standards had huge financial implications on the country. In real terms, for example, with the simple illustration of staff wages at an average of 68 per cent staffing level, a total expenditure of Shs 1.467 trillion was incurred in salaries for local governments. This would translate to Shs 2.147 trillion if the structures were filled to 100 per cent staff enforced. 

This net effect would imply that the economy lost Shs 687 billion in terms of unrealised expenditures on salary. If the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for the financial year 2015/2016 was Shs 55.760 billion, it can be deduced that this slowed down by 1.2 per cent. In total, the cumulative sum of Shs 30.341 billion, inclusive of unrealised revenues, can be concluded as the sum of money lost during this financial year that we looked at. We lost Shs 30.347 billion, which we should not have lost. 

Mr Speaker, this is the end of the summary presentation. However, I would like to add that the Public Accounts Committee worked together with the Criminal Investigations Department (CID) and a number of referrals were made. I would like to lay on the Table the referral cases taken up by the CID. Fortunately, some of the cases are now at the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) level, according to the detailed report here. We hope they will do the prosecution. Most of the cases still require a lot of further investigations but it is now out of the hands of Parliament; we just made mere referrals. There were a total of 79 referral cases to the CID. I beg to lay on the Table the referral cases to the CID. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for this very comprehensive report. I let the chairman finish because he had said he would take five minutes. However, looking at how they were measuring the roads in the videos, there was a gentleman who looked at the tape measure and thought it was not enough so he decided to –(Laughter)– I thought the chairman was using the same standard of ignoring the clock and using some other methods. (Laughter) 

However, the report is well received and honourable members, I think we should thank the chair and the committee who have been able to put this together. (Applause) We should also thank Ms Alice Nyamwenge who led the team of the clerks who work for this committee for the job they have done. (Applause) They have done a good job so we should be able to thank them. Today, Alice Nyamwenge is at the table and I think she is properly positioned to be recognised for this enormous job they have been able to do.

Honourable members, this is a very big report and we can hardly begin the debate now. Therefore, I am going to ask you to look at the report and internalise it. We will fix a date when we can have a comprehensive debate on this matter. 

I lay a charge on the other accountability committees and all other committees that deal with reports that come from outside this Parliament to help those institutions feel the value of their work by finishing them. I have the commitment from the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee that they have also done a similar thing and they are going to bring reports very quickly. 

Thank you, honourable members. Let us pause this but the question that I propose for your debate, and when debate resumes that is how we will start, is for a motion that the consolidated report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments) on 139 reports of the Auditor-General on district local governments and municipal councils for financial year 2015/2016 plus all the others be adopted. That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate will start when we agree it should start. Thank you. 

3.35
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Mr Speaker, thank you. In a space of two minutes, decentralisation begun -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to know on what matter you are rising, honourable member.

MAJ. (RTD) GUMA: Debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is no debate now. (Laughter) However, since you are already up, please say what you wanted to say. 

MAJ. (RTD) GUMA: Mr Speaker, it was in 1997 when I was in the Sixth Parliament, with you I think, when decentralisation begun. The Minister of Local Government then was Mzee Bidandi Ssali. The import of decentralisation as a policy was to devolve powers to the lower units of local government. However, overtime, I have increasingly observed Government withdrawing some of these powers, both in word and letter, and more significantly even financially. 

The amount of money that goes to lower local governments has, overtime, been dwindling. I would like to call upon the Government, particularly the finance minister, to reinstate the spirit of decentralisation. We are now in the budget cycle and the matter should be looked into seriously so that local governments countrywide get the money that they deserve, sector by sector. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That ends our debate on this matter; debate is deferred. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE ACQUISITION AND UTILISATION OF US$ 200 LOAN FACILITY FROM THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICAN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT BANK

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this matter came from the Committee on Public Accounts and it was debated. At the conclusion of the debate, this matter was referred to the Office of the Auditor-General for an audit and that audit report was submitted to Parliament and laid before the House here.

This matter had already been debated and we could not send the audit report back to the committee so that they come back with it. Therefore, we have taken a decision that reports from the Office of the Auditor-General should inform that debate because there were some aspects that needed clarification. Now, the Auditor-General has clarified on this.

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I tend to think that rule 171 (2) to (5) would still guide this House in respect to that specific audit report that was made following the debate of the major report. For that matter, if you considered rule 171 (2) to (5), we would find that this House cannot debate the Auditor-General’s report on its own, apart from when it has first undergone surgery from the committee. This is my thinking and the interpretation of particularly sub-rule (5).

Therefore, the procedural point I would like to ask is: is it not procedurally right for that particular audit report, which was laid on the Table following the debate on this report, to be forwarded back to the committee to come up with its summarised version to enable us debate fairly, other than debating the report on its own when it has not gone to the committee?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is not the motion before us. The motion before us is for adoption of the report of the Committee on Public Accounts on the acquisition and utilisation of US$ 200 million loan facility from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank. That is the motion before us; we do not have any other motion. 

However, in the process of debating this motion, we sought further guidance from other institutions to facilitate our conclusion of this motion. If you send this to the committee, that will require a separate motion because that motion would be to look at the report of the Auditor-General. What would the committee be reporting? It would report on its findings on the audit carried out by the Auditor-General. That would be a separate report and would therefore require a separate motion.

If honourable members have read the report of the Auditor-General, it was dealing with specific questions that were posed to this House in the course of the debate. In the course of the debate, matters arose that required guidance from the Auditor-General and that guidance was sought and was given to the House. Therefore, if honourable members say they have not read the report of the Auditor-General, I would understand that. However, saying that this same report should be sent back to the committee again would not make even ordinary sense. 

That is what I have guided on, if it is on same matter, please I have already guided on that so you cannot ask me to guide on the same thing. If Members want time to look at the report of the Auditor-General on the specific issues, because the issues were specific - The committee already recommended what actions should be taken, what their findings were and they said, “Can you help us look at this particular aspect and advise us how to proceed?” They have done that, so why do we send it back to the committee? To achieve what? So, are we ready to proceed with this debate?

MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. You are right in one way or the other because in a report-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It can only be one way.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, maybe English is a problem. However, before we debate, I do not see the finance ministers -(Interjections) - I wanted hon. Bahati because this gentleman has not always been around. On the day they came for that money, it was hon. Bahati who came. Hon. Kasaija is being crucified because the law refers to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In that perspective, hon. Kasaija might jump the hook but hon. Bahati may not jump.

I was saying this because we need these two ministers. Hon. Bahati is the one who pushed for this request thrice. Hon. Kasaija is being crucified because the law refers to the finance minister. I know, according to the Auditor-General’s report, which I have already seen, that hon. Kasaija is more or less off the hook. However, the person who is on the hook is hon. Bahati because he brought these requests changing the language every minute, and we want him to tell us why he was changing the language every minute.

In that perspective, the finance minister must first respond to the allegations we made. After that, hon. Bahati must also answer and tell us why he told us that. From there, we can now start to debate from a well-informed point of view.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is precisely what was going to happen. However, I needed to guide on the issue of this audit that arose from the debate. Since that is settled, I will ask the finance minister to deal with the matters that were raised and then we see how to proceed. If you are ready sir, proceed.

3.47
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issues that were raised, particularly the ones referring to me, were that I lied to this Parliament, we obtained money by false pretence and therefore, I should be censured. 

I stood on this Floor of Parliament and said that for someone to damage my name and reputation that I have built over the last 50 years to appear like I misappropriated funds, we should get an audit report to find out what wrong we did or I did in particular. The auditor’s report factually, without opinion, has laid the facts as they were. He did not conclude, and I am glad that he did not. It is this House to conclude. 

Is this man called Kasaija Matia, who is approaching 75 years -(Interjection) - He is  saying “only”; I wish you could look like me when you are 60. Is there any fault that would deserve this serious recommendation of the committee? To me, the recommendation was unnecessarily harsh, particularly to me. Therefore, I urge this House to have that part of the report expunged from the record of Parliament because I do not have any fault on my part. I thought I should say this, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why should it be expunged? What are you saying about what they have said, apart from asking us to expunge?

MR KASAIJA: The Auditor-General has found no fault whatsoever in the procedures that were carried out - the way the money came in and the way it was spent. Therefore, for somebody to say that I should be censured - that is the point I am emphasizing - for having carried out my duties, which has been confirmed by the record of the Auditor-General, should not be part of the records.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you could help us because there are facts within your knowledge. Those are the facts that were brought to the House. Would you like to correct those facts before you come to the conclusion? What is your response to the factual issues raised?

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I am assuming we have all got a copy of the Auditor-General’s report. The facts are in the summary of the key findings on the acquisition and approval of the loan. This loan request was tabled before this Parliament and then the House said, “No, we shall not permit it” and they dismissed the request.

Meanwhile, there were other expenditure pressures and yet there was still this window that we could still borrow this money. We came back to this House and said that we had withdrawn the reasons we had advanced at the beginning. We then asked that this House approves this request because now there were revenue shortfalls, there were building expenses of Government that we had to meet and they were crucial in various fields including the road sector, water, medicine and so forth. We carried the day and this House approved and said “Yes, you can have that loan.” Therefore, it was approved.

We went and started making the necessary arrangements for the money to flow in. The money came in batches and we transferred it from the collective account in Bank of Uganda into the Consolidated Fund. That money in the Consolidated Fund was spent in accordance with the appropriation allocations that this Parliament made. That is all I can say. I would not like to add anything.

3.54
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would be more comfortable if the minister came and told us - First of all, when the money came to the Consolidated Fund, that means it was done with the approval of Parliament, you are right. 

However, I would like you to confirm, since the issue was drugs, whether National Medical Stores (NMS) received money from the Consolidated Fund. If yes, how much was it and was it applied for the purpose? This is because you have been accused of not giving National Medical Stores money and therefore they never procured drugs. 

We can discuss the roads later because in our area, for example, when you ask for where the road is, they will tell you that the rain came and swept it away. However, for the drugs, they can be tracked from when they were procured and then delivered. I look at it in that way because National Medical Stores is accusing you for not giving them money for drugs. That is how you should have responded to that because all the money which came to the Consolidated Fund was approved by Parliament.

Secondly, the minister should confirm that indeed the request, which they presented here, was the one that was followed when they went to the Consolidated Fund. If they came here asking for Shs 100 billion for medicine but instead you gave them Shs 50 billion, it means that you did not do your part. If they came saying that instead of Shs 100 billion you gave Shs 120 billion, we would think that you got part of that money from our tax collections. Please, confirm whether the money that you gave to the National Medical Stores was either equal to what they requested or more. 

Finally, you came to borrow money in May and said that you wanted it urgently, but the money started flowing in the next financial year. Why did you claim that it was very urgent and yet you started receiving it in the following financial year? How are we sure that the money you are giving in the next financial year is not what had been planned for from day one, and the one you wanted in the previous year is not the right one?

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and hon. Nandala. I will begin with the last point. The loan was approved in April and the first disbursement came in October because there were processes to be followed. 

Would you allow me to read this report verbatim, now that he has raised the question of National Medical Stores? 

“In a letter dated 15 August 2015, referenced NMS 12/1 to the Minister of Health and copied to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, NMS requested that they be provided with an additional Shs 68 billion to restore the health facility quantities of expected budgets and medical supplies that should go to the health centres.

In a letter dated 19 November 2015, NMS brought this matter to the attention of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and requested for a sum of Shs 68 billion to cover the gap created by the depreciation of the Uganda shilling. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed NMS that Government of Uganda had initiated a financing facility which was before Parliament for approval, which would be used to address the issue raised…” This loan request was brought here for the first time in January.

“In the letter dated 17 August 2016, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, while referring to the earlier letter dated 10 March 2016, acknowledged the submissions of NMS’s foreign exchange requirements of US$ 82,569,843 for the purchase of medical drugs and equipment.

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed NMS that the Government of Uganda had acquired a loan from the TDB…” - that is the PTA Bank - “…which was ready for disbursement subject to the provision of supporting documentation. On this basis, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requested NMS to submit copies of procurement contracts for items in the foreign currency requirements for the FY 2016/17.

As part of the accountability for the funds, NMS was expected to provide on a quarterly basis copies of invoices and telegraphic transfers for any foreign payments made for the previous quarter to enable the TDB reimburse the Government of Uganda. 

In a correspondence dated 13 September 2016, NMS submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 31 three year framework contracts totalling to US$ 42,880,625.09. National Medical Stores indicated that call off orders would subsequently be drawn from the said contracts.

In a letter dated 20 September 2016, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted copies of the framework contracts in foreign currency, totalling to US$ 42,880,625.09 to the PTA Bank in support of the drawdown request.

The TDB confirmed receipt and verified the framework contracts and a total of US$ 42,752,486.69 was subsequently disbursed to the collecting account in Bank of Uganda in two instalments of $30 million on 7 November 2016 and US$ 12,752,486.69 on 15 November 2016 and transferred to the Uganda Consolidated Fund. 

I observed that -
    a) the approved budget and releases to NMS indicated that the entity received the entire budget of Shs 218 billion in FY2015/2016 and Shs 264 billion in FY 2016/2017. By February 2018 (FY 2017/2018), NMS had so far received Shs 269 billion out of the approved budget of Shs 258 billion.

    b) To enable NMS to finance its budget shortfall, the entity requested for a supplementary funding totalling to Shs 68 billion in the financial year 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 to facilitate procurement of blood collection/testing as well as malaria drugs by NMS. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development availed NMS with the supplementary funding of Shs 27 billion in FY 2016/2017…” 
There is a table here, Mr Speaker. Let me go through it because it is very important. For FY 2016/2017, the amount released was Shs 7 billion and the date when funds were released was 6 March 2017. Again on 6 March 2017 in the same financial year, the amount released was Shs 20 billion. In the FY 2017/2018, Shs 41 billion was released on 28 September 2017, when the first disbursement by the bank came in November. 

“Out of the US 42,880,625.09 million worth of frameworks submitted in support of the drawdown request, NMS had placed and executed orders amounting to US$ 24,468,897.22, which were paid in the FY 2016/2017 and are still being settled in 2017/2018 through their appropriated budgets as the contracts perform as indicated in Appendix 4. 

Conclusion 

Based on the copies of submissions made to the bank, documentation received from the NMS, and interactions with NMS, the bank and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I established that all funds appropriated to NMS in the FY 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 were received fully by NMS including approved supplementary funding of Shs 68 billion. 

In addition, in February 2018, NMS had received the bulk of its appropriated budget. Out of the US$ 42.8 million worth of framework contracts submitted in support of the drawdown request, NMS had placed and executed orders amounting to US$ 24.5 million, which were paid in the FY 2016/2017 and are still being settled in the FY 2017/2018 through their appropriated budgets as the contracts perform.”

In summary, you approved the loan in April and the first disbursement came in October. Many times, we were giving money to NMS. Subsequently, as the year progressed, all the requirements that they needed were catered for. Indeed, in FY 2015/2016, even their budget over performed. We gave them more money than they had actually budgeted for. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I do not think that I can say more. As far as I am concerned, all the money that NMS requested for was given to them in FY 2015/2016 and even beyond what they budgeted for. As regards the money from the PTA Bank, to prove that we have been doing what we are supposed to do, it started coming in October in the following financial year. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Honourable minister, please clarify to me some few facts. When did the Government of Uganda obtain the first disbursement of the PTA loan? Secondly, when did you disburse the money from that loan in its entirety to NMS?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you for raising that question. Let me clarify that the acquisition of this loan was not specific to a sector. It was what we refer to as “budget support”. With this, money comes to a pool, and that is what happened in this particular case, it is appropriated and thereafter, the funding of the budgets of the various sectors begins to take place. 

This money came into the Consolidated Fund and we spent it in accordance with the demands of the sectors at that time including NMS. What I would like you, colleagues, to keep out of your minds, which I heard you saying during the debate, is that this loan was acquired to specifically fund drugs. It is not true. This loan was acquired to help us as budget support because two things were happening; first, the revenue collection was coming down and secondly, there were building expense pressures. One alternative would have been either to cut on the expenses or to look for other means of raising revenue. The other alternative would have been to borrow from the open market so that we could get that money and give the sectors that were in need at that particular time.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable minister, I seek clarification from you. Yes, it is true that you borrowed the money for specific projects. However, you started spending money on NMS for drugs before you got this money. Were you spending in anticipation that after creating the gap, you would make good when you get money from the PTA Bank? The first tranche came in October 2017, but you had already spent money in July 2016. Did you spend in anticipation of this money?

Secondly, when you made a request to Parliament, you said that you urgently needed that money because you had run short of drugs, and that was in April. We approved it knowing you were going to get the money immediately. However, you received the money in October the same year. How was NMS operating for the eight months before you got the money yet they had indicated that they were not doing well?

Thirdly, have you looked at the performance of NMS since after giving them money you were supposed to receive performance reports? Have you also done due diligence on NMS?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, my job as the Minister of Finance is to look for revenue and give it to spending agencies as per appropriations by this Parliament. The task of whether you have got value for money is not for my ministry. There is another arm of Government that will go to check whether you have done the job that is equivalent to the amount of money given. Is the job that you have done reflecting the true value of the money? That is for a different arm of Government to ascertain. 

My job is to look for money from whatever sources. There are many resources for borrowing internally and externally. Thereafter, I appropriate the money in accordance with the sectors’ budgets and as appropriated by Parliament. Therefore, I cannot answer the question whether the money I gave really reflects the true value of what NMS did. It should be answered by another sector and not me. 

There was a question on how I was advancing money to NMS but the first disbursement came in October. As I told you, in Parliament here we said, when we were making that request – my colleague here, hon. Bahati, can speak for himself - that we needed that money because we were seeing our revenue collection going down and yet the spending pressures were going up. Therefore, there was urgency; there was no question about it. 

We talk more of NMS but there was pressure from works; there were certificates which were supposed to be paid. There were pressures from water; they wanted money badly. We could see that the flow of revenue in the Consolidated Fund was getting down, therefore, we would reach a point when we would be unable to make payments and that would bring these sectors almost to a standstill. 

Lastly, I would like to make this position very clear: As I have said, this was a budget support facility not tied to any specific project. It was not a project specific loan but budget support. With budget support, money comes into the pool and we pay this money out to the sectors in need in accordance with what Parliament has appropriated. 

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just came in and found my elder brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, speaking and I thought he was really unfair to me. 

I came to this House and moved a motion from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on behalf of Government. That motion stated that we were borrowing US$ 200 million for budget support. This meant that when this money came, it was supposed to go into a consolidated account to implement what Parliament had appropriated. 

The Committee on National Economy looked at this issue and approved it. The Public Accounts Committee looked at it and made some comments. The House decided that these issues should be referred to the Auditor-General. The Auditor-General has confirmed that the US$ 200 million we borrowed from the PTA Bank was received and it went into the consolidated account, as I told the House.

Mr Speaker, I thought that it is unfair for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to say that I came to the House representing Government and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and told the House lies. I said it is for budget support to go to the Consolidated Fund. The Auditor-General, Mr John Muwanga, has confirmed that the money came and went into the consolidated account. You all know that the implementation - how it is used by different departments - is a separate issue. Our job is to raise money to implement what Parliament has appropriated.

Concerning the expenditure, if somebody does not spend well, we have the Auditor-General, who they are accountable to. There are different institutions and ministries. That is what I said and even the Hansard is very clear. Therefore, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, probably it is because I have not spoken to you in a weeks’ time, I do not know what has happened. 

4.18
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Ms Angelline Osegge): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. It is not in the interest of the Public Accounts Committee to witch hunt or demean anybody but we looked at facts.   

Mr Speaker, what both ministers have said has fallen short of giving the exact date. I actually have taken the trouble to look at the special audit report of the Auditor-General and there is Shs 57.4 billion that is unaccounted for. 

Even before we go into the other issues, the ministers are emphasising the final recommendations of the committee. The committee came from the angle of the moral aspect of having borrowed this money basing on the advice of the different offices of Government. That was ignored. For us, it is not about persons; it is about the process and the benefit to Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I would like to say, without seemingly having issues - I do not have any personal issues with any minister - that accountability is not delegated. The minister works on behalf of Government and that is true. When you look at the report, indeed, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has confessed here on this Floor this afternoon that they are still in the process of fulfilling the demands of NMS. If you realise, even some of the money was disbursed to NMS after this report was produced, Mr Speaker. We produced this report in July and a portion of the money that was given to NMS was in September, which means our report still stands given the period and what was obtaining at the time. 

Mr Speaker, I do not want us to confuse this by stretching and emphasising what we are still doing and what we did. What was the period during which we produced this report? I would implore this House to look into that. It is about time –(Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification. Is the Shs 57.2 billion missing from the Consolidated Fund or it was never disbursed into the fund? 

MS OSEGGE: This is from the disbursement according to the Auditor-General’s report. It does not account for the whole amount. That is why I would propose that it is very important for this House to probably allow the committee to harmonise these two reports for purposes of getting the correct position. 

I would not want us to seem like we are disregarding anything but it is important to come to a realistic conclusion of this matter. We just looked at the figures that were presented by the Auditor-General defending what was done by the ministry and Shs 57.4 billion is nowhere to be seen. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I think there is a difference between project financing and budget support. If we understand that, then it becomes very easy for us to understand this issue. If we had come to borrow for a specific project, then you would be talking about whether this project has received money or it has not. However, this was budget support, which means it was going to come and be put in a consolidated account and then finance the activities appropriated by Parliament. Therefore, we cannot spend this money beyond appropriation of Parliament. 

If at the end of the year this money has not come from the PTA Bank, it has not been received by Government and it comes in the following year, it is accounted for through another appropriation of the following year. Therefore, if you state here on the Floor of the House that this money is missing, it can send a wrong signal as to whether it is still with PTA or it went into the consolidated account and was taken somewhere else or it is not there.

However, as far as the minister’s report is concerned, he can read how money came in. In addition, coming in means it comes and goes into a consolidated account. It can only come from the consolidated account according to the appropriation by Parliament. Appropriation by Parliament is in two ways. The first is the main appropriation and the second is through supplementary appropriation. There is no other way money can come out of the consolidated account of the Republic of Uganda without the approval of Parliament, unless you are doing something else. That is not there at all. The Public Finance Management Act resolved that. You cannot even get it out physically- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, hon. Bahati, but I just want to ask you one question. We requested for a loan from the PTA Bank. The money has to come from the PTA Bank to Bank of Uganda and from Bank of Uganda to the Consolidated Fund. The clarification I would wish to seek is: Has PTA released all the money? If yes, has all the money been credited to the Consolidated Fund? The moment the money is credited to the Consolidated Fund, then there is no way we can say money is missing because it is Parliament which has appropriated and then the money goes there.

If money came to the Consolidated Fund, it is no longer project support. If it were for a project, we would have opened a project account to deal with it. Therefore, I want you to clarify whether PTA has given us all the money. Has all the money been credited to the Consolidated Fund? Where is this Shs 57 billion we are talking about coming from? That is when we can move on.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank hon. Mafabi for raising this question. Can I refer those of you who may have this report on your iPads to page 9 of the report. There is a table indicating disbursement by TDB, that is, PTA Bank, to Government of Uganda. As I have said, the first disbursement was done on 19 October 2015. I do not know whether I should read the entire disbursement, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The question is: Was all the money disbursed from PTA Bank?

MR KASAIJA: All the US$ 200 million was disbursed to the Government of Uganda through Bank of Uganda. The last disbursement, which was only US$ 400,086.52, took place on 21 July 2017. Mr Speaker, do I have to lay this on the Table?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was money sent to the Consolidated Fund from Bank of Uganda?

MR KASAIJA: This money was all sent to the Bank of Uganda and transferred to the Consolidated Fund. Mr Speaker, if you allow me, let me refer you to the table immediately below on page 9. The top table shows that money came in US dollars, the table following shows the amount of money, which was transferred in Uganda shillings, and it totalled Shs 711,450,329,034. The exchange rate varied from time to time, depending on when the disbursement came in.

The auditor says a total of US$ 200 million was disbursed by TDB between October 2016 and July 2017 and deposited in the Bank of Uganda and subsequently, transferred to the Consolidated Fund account. The facility and drawdown fees were also paid by the Government of Uganda and received by TDB in compliance with the terms and conditions of the facility agreement.

4.29
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter we are handling is very sensitive. I wanted to request the House, as the chair of PAC proposed, that we give her time to look at the Auditor-General’s report and harmonise it with theirs. This is because if the Auditor-General is saying there is Shs 57 billion not accounted for or missing, and the minister is saying the money was sent- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I never wanted to raise a point of order against Engineer Waluswaka. However, the point of order I am raising is that as he sits here, he does not even have a copy of the report. He is saying Shs 57 billion is missing but he does not even know the page we are at. Is he in order to come and tell us that it is true that Shs 57 billion is missing, that we should allow the House to adjourn and then we come tomorrow, as if that should be the basis for us to send the report for harmonisation? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report had its scope. It was dealing with how the US$ 200 million was acquired. The first complaint is that it was acquired by false pretence in the sense that it was first brought and rejected by Parliament, then they came back later with the same loan and Parliament approved it. Therefore, we are dealing with the US$ 200 million. Whether it was procured by false pretence, that matter I suppose has been resolved by now. 

Whether the money that was now finally brought to Uganda was mismanaged, we have been told and the evidence is there that when this money came from PTA Bank, it hit an account in Bank of Uganda and all of it was transferred to the Consolidated Fund. If there is any amount of money missing, which came out of the Consolidated Fund, it is not part of this investigation. That should be another report of misappropriation of money appropriated by Parliament. That is not part of this report.

What we are tracking is the process and the handling of the money - the US$ 200 million. Was it procured by false pretence? When it came, did it go where it should have gone, to the Consolidated Fund? If the answer is yes, then it is yes. If it was mismanaged after coming out of the Consolidated Fund, it is not part of this investigation. That is another matter for another day possibly. 

MR KAHONDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this loan was brought here for the first and second time and it was rejected, the third time -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was brought twice not three times.

MR KAHONDA: Yes. When it was approved, the justification, among others, had procurement of medical supplies and yet the minister has informed this House that the medical supplies were not among the issues when the loan was acquired.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No; it was not the only matter.

MR KAHONDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to zero down on the advice of the Governor of Bank of Uganda to the minister. I would like to request the minister to refer to that letter and read it verbatim to this House. When he was responding to the letter written by the Governor, Bank of Uganda, it was specific that, among other things, the loan was acquired to procure medical supplies. I would like the minister to refer to that specific response.

Mr Speaker, among the requirements for the loan was to attach the invoices. In this respect, documents from NMS were attached to requisition for the money from the TDB. Can the minister justify that? Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. We had an extensive debate of the report from the Committee on Public Accounts. Like you have guided, the major issues in the debate were whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development told a lie to the House when he was presenting the request for this loan and also whether NMS received what was due to it. 

When we could not resolve this matter, we did request the Speaker, and the Speaker agreed, to have the Auditor-General, a competent authority, study this matter and advise the House. This report has been brought to the House and the Auditor-General has clearly indicated that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not tell a lie to the House. This was a loan for budget support and what was supposed to go to the different entities, including NMS, was given –(Interjection)- Yes, it is here and I can read it. 

National Medical Stores was a major issue in the debate and the conclusion of the Auditor-General says: “Based on the copies of submissions made to TDB, documentation received from the NMS, and interactions with NMS, TDB and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I established that all funds appropriated to NMS in the FY 2015/2016 and 2016/2017 were received fully by NMS including approved supplementary funding of Shs 68 billion.” That was the contention.

Mr Speaker, you recall I was the Minister of State for Health when this loan request was made. Therefore, I had fair knowledge about what was going on. Given the fact that the Auditor-General has clearly answered the questions which Parliament had put to him, is it procedurally correct for us to continue debating and going into issues which we had already debated? When we referred the matter to the Auditor-General, the issues were very specific. Therefore, is it procedurally correct for us to start the debate afresh even when we have the answers from the Auditor-General?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the reason that there is a small point of clarification is because up to the point when this matter was referred to the Auditor-General, the minister had not responded. As a result, it is the response of the minister that is probably bringing up the issues of clarifications. 

Substantially, the matter had been debated and that is why we are not debating it now. However, if the minister said something that leaves a little gap, that is why Members are seeking clarification so that we can finish this matter in one way or the other. Are we together on this?

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving guidance. I was wondering whether we should proceed with the debate on this issue because I am one of the people who contributed in the previous session.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have just guided on that. Why are you raising the same point I have ruled on?          

MR NIRINGIYIMANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you and say that since the Auditor-General has brought the report - I respect the committee for having done good work but since the issue of contention has been resolved by the Auditor-General, we have harmony and we can move on. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, we do not want to focus on a different issue – the reasons for which the committee produced this report. I stated here that the minister confessed and said that they were still handling it. National Medical Stores asked for Shs 68 billion and in the process of doing this report, by July when the committee produced this report, the ministry then gave NMS Shs 41 billion which was not complete by the time we produced the report. This means that by the time the committee started investigations, the money was not given to NMS and that is what prompted this investigation. 

Our interest is in the fact that the money was not given at the right time. If this House would see it fit, it should encourage the minister to do things at the right time. Money was got much earlier and they used vouchers from these entities to draw the money. What does that mean even to a laywoman like me? If you tell me that you want Shs 68 billion, bring vouchers so that we can draw the money and at the end of the day, that money comes to the Consolidated Fund but it does not come to me as an entity, what does that mean?

After July, NMS only got Shs 41 billion. If it got any other money, it was after the report was done and –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Chairperson. Mr Speaker, I would like to concur with the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts to the effect that what is in contention is not whether NMS finally received the money as appropriated. We are talking about propriety of the procedures of the ministry. When we interacted with these entities that were supposed to receive this money, clearly at the time of making the report they were very unequivocal in submitting that they never received money and invoices were taken from them. 

In whichever way this matter is settled, we have definitely seen a frog in the middle of the road on a sunny day. Something must have been chasing it. As Parliament, this is where we need to raise our game and see whether you are going to allow ministers to do things as they please because they will come and offer a flat explanation and we move on. 

The problem now is on the dates. If you heard the minister submit, definitely he has the dates but they contradict with the timing of what we had needed this money for, and this is where the problem is. The chairperson of the committee asked for harmonisation. I think if harmonisation is settled, it will even help the minister to clarify on their own procedures, and this is something we can do for the good of the House and posterity. Let us harmonise the movement of these funds from where we got them together with what the minister was supposed to do, so that we can have a proper position of how we work. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. Thank you for the space, chair.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I am friendly to everybody and to everything that is true and right. In the interest of getting the right position, allow the committee a few days to go and harmonise their position. I have just said here that we have seen other discrepancies. The basis of this investigation was about the timing because NMS wrote to this House. It is not about the fact that they were given money after one year; no. Why was the money acquired, received in accounts and not finally given to NMS at the time they needed it? Remember that these were arrears for two years back, which NMS was demanding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, let us not invent a new situation. The recommendations are in this report. I thought that is why we were here. We either adopt the recommendations of the committee or not. What are the recommendations:

1. 	For misleading the House to believe that the most critical funding objective was medical supplies, lying to Parliament in writing that NMS never provided the needed supply contract to enable the disbursement of funds and further duping Parliament by re-packaging the same loan, thus obtaining money by false pretence, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, should be censured.

2. 	The Committee on National Economy should adopt, as part of their procedure, a requirement to interface with the Governor Bank of Uganda while considering loan proposals.

3. 	For lying to Parliament and for superimposing his authority portrayed by insisting on the loan acquisition against strong advice in writing by the Governor Bank of Uganda, the Accountant-General and the Director of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and superintending the gross diversion of public funds, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, PS/ST, should be relieved of his office. 

4. 	The IGG should further investigate the PS/ST for possible conflict of interest, collusion and connivance considering that he aggressively insisted on acquiring the loan with the prior knowledge that he was a former board chairman of the PTA Bank. A report on the findings should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the date of the adoption of this report.

Should I read all the recommendations? Honourable members, this is it. How is harmonisation going to help us with dealing with the first issue of whether hon. Matia Kasaija should be censured? Is it necessary? We have the facts of what we require to censure him. It does not require harmonising anything. The issue is: Did he lie to Parliament? Did he dupe Parliament? If he did, censure the honourable minister. That is what we are dealing with here.  

Going back to the committee to harmonise this and that, how will that help Parliament in dealing with recommendations 1,2,3,4 up to 7? I would like us to be realistic about what we are doing. If there are pending matters, this is not the end of the investigation. This cannot be. As you said, this was ignited by the cry from NMS. It does not mean that by finishing with this report, we have finished with all the accountability issues relating to the US$ 200 million borrowed. There could be gaps. Those gaps can be handled separately. Isn’t that the way to go, honourable members? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. To begin with, the Auditor-General’s office is under Parliament. The audit report of 2016/2017 is not yet out. It should have come out by 30th March. I am sure this report would have raised some of these issues. 

Basically, the financial year we are looking at is 2016/2017. If the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament, the Public Accounts Committee should have been the first to direct the Auditor-General to look at the issue of the US$ 200 million that has been raised and should have asked for a report. That would have been their number one basis of coming to the House.

Since they did not do it and they came here with figures, in the wisdom of the House we directed the Auditor-General to audit. Now he has audited and has brought out the fact that the US$ 200 million was received and it was taken to the Consolidated Fund. Any money which leaves the Consolidated Fund is by appropriation. The body that appropriates is Parliament. 

Before the money came in, that is, starting in October 2016, I am sure NMS got money within the first quarter. If it never got, that would also be an issue. If we assume that they got US$ 40 million sometime, what about the money they got earlier on before the money from PTA Bank was received? Where did this money come from? We must also reconcile this. From this, I am not saying that we have closed the matter. 

My proposal, Mr Speaker, if the House would agree, is that we have seen US$ 200 million came in and now the next step is to find out if the US$ 200 million was used as it should have been. That is the next step, whose specifics we are waiting for in the Auditor-General’s report for the year ending June 2017. 

Now, if there was stealing of money by the Ministry Of Finance by first bringing the money to the Consolidated Fund and eventually stealing it, the Auditor-General’s report will reveal this. It will show that hon. Kasaija brought money – We are not so sure he only stole PTA money; he may have stolen the one for taxes. That is what I am saying. All the money came into the same pot, so how do you differentiate between the PTA money and other money? The US$ 200 million has come, but we may now look at another question: Was the budget well performed?

Finally, NMS complained to the Committee on Public Accounts. I think it should have complained to the Committee on Health because that is the sessional committee which handles such issues. The Public Accounts Committee is the one which handles the Auditor-General’s reports. For it to have been certain of what they were doing, they should have directed the Auditor-General to help them with the audit. I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: My proposal is that for now, we can deal with the issue of whether the money was requested rightly. The person who requested the money was not hon. Kasaija, it was hon. Bahati. (Laughter) Yes, I must be realistic. The acting minister of finance then who asked for the money was hon. Bahati.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mafabi, I think your issue with failing to have talks with hon. Bahati in the past should be sorted out elsewhere.  (Laughter) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, we shall sort our problems elsewhere with hon. Bahati. Mr Speaker, the reason I raise all these is because we worked on the Public Finance Management Act with hon. Bahati, but when he went to Ministry of Finance, he was the first one to bring quicker amendments, which are bringing us this problem – (Interjections) - You! (Laughter) That one we shall handle when we are out.

Mr Speaker, what I want us to conclude is, is the $200 million on the Consolidated Fund? I think the Auditor-General says the money is on the Consolidated Fund. Was it first taken out as we appropriated? I think for that one we are waiting for the Auditor-General’s report to say the appropriation was done well. However, according to what I am hearing from the National Medical Stores’ budget, they got all the money they wanted. 

Mr Speaker, you are in your house and you have a Shs 100,000 budget for Yaka. When you are about to pay Yaka, your kid falls sick. You pick Shs 30,000 and take the kid to hospital and pay Shs 70,000 for Yaka. The day you will get money for medical, you will replace the one for Yaka. I think that is allowed in your house. I am sure Kasaija was doing “cash engineering”. That is what I am suspicious of. Therefore, we are only going to hold you on “cash engineering”. Did you do it well? That is what you will answer. As for now, I do not see anything in this. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we conclude this matter? Can we go through the recommendations, one by one? Can I start from no.1: For misleading the House, hon. Matia Kasaija should be censured; Honourable members, I put the question to this.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Committee on National Economy should adopt, as part of their procedure, a requirement to interface with the Governor Bank of Uganda while considering loan proposals. Is it a good recommendation? - Why not? The Bank of Uganda is the one in charge of monetary policy. Isn’t this a good proposal? Can I put the question to this recommendation? Honourable minister, is it a good proposal? 

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, Parliament has very wide powers and we cannot limit them. If they wish to interface with the Governor Bank of Uganda, I have no strong objection. The only point which maybe I wish to clarify here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can I put the question? You have said there is no problem. In fact, it is just encouraging the committee to do so. Otherwise, the committee has the latitude to interface with anybody. It is now saying make it formal. “Please, interface with the Bank of Uganda when you are dealing with the loans”. That is the recommendation. I put the question to this.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are voting after I have announced the results. How can you vote after the results have been announced? (Laughter)

For lying to Parliament and for superimposing his authority portrayed by insisting on the loan application against strong advice in writing by the Governor Bank of Uganda, the Accountant-General and Director Economic Affairs in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and superintending the gross diversion of public funds, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the PS/ST, should be relieved of his duties. I put the question to this.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The IGG should further investigate the PS/ST for possible conflict of interest, collusion and connivance considering that he aggressively insisted on acquiring the loan with the prior knowledge that he was a former board chairman of the PTA Bank. The report on the findings should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the date of the adoption of this report. 

How do we handle this, Members? I put a question to this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I just want to find out from the committee before I make my recommendation on the conflict of interest. When Mr Muhakanizi was the chairman of the board, was he supposed to be promoted when he lent money? If you are a loans’ officer, you are promoted according to how much you have lent. (Applause) Therefore, did he want money to be lent to Uganda so that he gets promoted or - what is his conflict of interest in this matter? If I get it clear, I will make a decision. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question, honourable members.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Parliament directs that the $200 million be recovered, re-consolidated and applied for the sole and full purpose for which Parliament approved the loan. A report to this effect should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the date of adoption of this report. 

Is it clear now? I put the question to this.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Executive should be more systematic while processing the presentation of loan requests to Parliament to avoid the embarrassing recall of some of them as Parliament witnessed on Tuesday, 11 July 2017. 

Members, you remember there is a background to this recommendation about what the House has said. I put the question to this.
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The committee further recommends an amendment of the Public Finance Management Act 2015 to include that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should quarterly report to Parliament on the financial and physical performance of the public debt. 

Honourable minister, can we agree on this? This issue of the public debt has been bothering us.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Speaker, I think the law is already there. Therefore, as far as I am concerned, this recommendation is redundant.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is already there but do you do it?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, as you recall, every quarter we come and lay these reports as required by the law and actually the committee normally debates it. Even this afternoon, we have a report on this issue.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, recommendation No.7 is a provision of the law. We do not have to take any further decision on it. Is that correct? Okay.

Honourable members, the report is now here. The recommendations have been decided. Can we now adopt the report, as amended? I now put the question for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Public Accounts on the acquisition and utilisation of $200 million loan from the PTA Bank.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ECONOMY DURING THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

5.02
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Mr Speaker, I am here to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the performance of the economy during Financial Year 2016/2017. Before I proceed, I wish to lay at the Table the following documents: signed minutes of the committee meetings that considered the performance of the economy and a report from the Parliamentary Budget Office on the performance of the economy for financial year 2016/2017. The report has been signed by 29 members and so, it is by consensus. I beg to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes and a copy of the report of the committee. 

 MR BATEGEKA: Mr Speaker, the methodology used –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, are you going to use limited time like 30 minutes?

MR BATEGEKA: I am trying to use limited time but this being a very important document; I beg to report on some few important matters.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the next item is also important. So, can we see how to balance the time? (Laughter)

MR BATEGEKA: Mr Speaker, it is not possible to go straight to the summaries. I will leave out the methodology but go straight to the performance of the economy during financial year 2016/2017 and look at both the domestic events that occurred and the global and regional economic developments during the period under review. 

Mr Speaker, permit me to slightly touch on the global and regional economic development during the period under review.
The performance of the global economy during the period under review was better but not good enough as witnessed by an estimated World economic growth rate of 3.5 per cent (OECD Economic Outlook June 2Ol7). Furthermore, there were political developments of inward looking policies especially in the United States, which is the biggest economy in the World. Inward looking economic policies, as championed by the United States, raised concerns about the likelihood of diminishing foreign aid. 

The impact of exit of Britain from the Euro zone on the African economies in general and the Uganda economy in particular remained uncertain. China, which is increasingly becoming one of Uganda's major trading partners, witnessed a slowdown in economic growth; Japan too, recorded a slowdown in economic growth. Generally, the global economic environment remained unfavourable to Uganda's economic growth during financial year 2016/2017.

Mr Speaker, there were also many concerns. As a consequence of unfavourable global and regional economic developments as well as natural factors and internal weaknesses in economic management, Uganda's economic growth during the financial year 2016/2017, as measured by output, slowed down to four per cent, lower than the initial projection of 5.5 per cent and below the 5.l per cent National Development Plan (NDP) target. 

The long drought, which adversely affected agricultural production and productivity, is one of the factors that explain the slowdown in economic growth during the period under review. Other factors that adversely affected output include a plethora of constraints that adversely affected the industrial and the services sectors. More specifically output was affected by many factors as identified as follows:

Under agriculture, risks and uncertainties affected the agricultural production and these included among other, drought, crop diseases like armyworms that affected maize, weak access to land, poor quality of planting and stocking materials, late distribution of planting and stocking materials under Operation Wealth Creation (OWC) and distress sale of agricultural products due to lack of storage facilities and weak marketing channels.

Manufacturing also faced several constraints including poor supply of electricity, high price of electricity, poor water supply for industrial use, high price of water for industrial use, high transport costs, lack of functional railway services to port of Mombasa and lack of markets, among others and the weak implementation of the Buy Uganda, Build Uganda Programme.

Services also had a plethora of constraints including; high inequality in participation of provision of services. The big category services include banking, telecommunication, and tourism services, which are a preserve of a few foreign firms. 
Participation of Ugandans in provision of these services is limited to the retail segments of the services, which are hardly profitable. Majority of people engaged in provision of informal services such as boda boda services, small restaurants and retail transport and so on.

In addition to the above, slow recovery in the provision of credit to the private sector by the banking system and disrupted trade with South Sudan. Further, engagement in informal services was reported to have increased urban poverty. 

Mr Speaker, in the interest of time, let me quickly talk about the financial sector.

Financial Sector Developments

The main issue here is always inflation. The committee notes that the annual headline inflation average of 5.7 per cent in the financial year 2016/2017 was lower than 5.9 per cent recorded in the financial year 2015/2016. This resulted into monetary easing by Bank of Uganda lowering the Central Bank Rate to an average of 12.33 per cent in the financial year 2016/2017, from an average of 16 per cent, in the financial year 2015/2016. So, inflation was kept under control and interest rates still remain stable but quite high especially the lending banking interest rates.

On the fiscal performance fronts, during financial year 2016/2017, Government revenue increased by l3 per cent to Shs 12,946.8 trillion in financial year 2016/2017, from Shs11.059 trillion, registered in financial year 2015/2016. The rise was due to an increase in tax revenues from 13.3 per cent of GDP to 13.6 per cent of GDP, which is very small but was still an increase. Tax revenues remained at 13.6 per cent of the GDP.

Mr Speaker, compared to other countries in the East African Community, Uganda still lags behind. I hope I am very clear on the revenue front because there was an overall revenue shortfall. Revenue and grants registered a shortfall of $783.45 billion due to the poor performance of grants, which registered a shortfall of $815.26 billion; Grants really performed very baldy. May be that could be attributed to the global economic outlook I alluded to earlier.

The total domestic revenues and grants were 0.6 per cent of GDP, below the programmed levels due to the lower performance of tax revenue, which registered a shortfall of 16.56 billion in the financial year 2016/2017, and a significant deficit in grant receipts of $815.26 billion, which was as significant under performance in revenue.  

Expenditure Performance

Mainly as a consequence of weak performance of grants, total expenditure was below the budgeted levels by 16 per cent, equivalent to Shs 3.356 trillion, hence a decline in the expenditure to GDP ratio to 19.1 per cent, during the period under review, compared to 20.2 per cent for financial year 2015/2016. 

The expenditure reduction as a percentage of GDP was due to under execution of the Government investment programme by $2.507 trillion. Despite this, the recurrent budget exceeded the programmed levels by 4.1 per cent, equivalent to Shs 393.70 billion.

With the construction of two large energy projects, namely Karuma and Isiimba Dams taking off, the execution of the development budget was below expectations by 27.2 per cent even though there was overspending in the recurrent budget by 4.1 per cent.

Mr Speaker, expenditure was above and the overall balance - I will leave out the overall balance because the report has been uploaded on the iPad. In the interest of time, I will also leave out the external sector performance.

However, the story on the external sector remains the same of a worsening trade balance with exports falling very far behind imports. That is the story. I would rather quickly move to observations and recommendations of the committee, which are also not very few.

Mr Speaker, the committee made the following observations and recommendations:

    1. Economic growth momentum has weakened to four per cent lower than the initial projected 5.5 per cent, during financial year 2016/2017 and below the National Development Plan target of 5.7 per cent. The major factors were drought and slowing private sector credit which impacted on this growth.

The committee recommends that Government should accelerate structural reforms aimed at facilitating private sector activity, including further improvement of the business environment, governance and the education system for stronger growth. 

Further, priority should also be given to increasing the resilience of agricultural sector. There is need to review the role of the State in ensuring inclusive, private sector-led economic growth. By inclusive growth, we mean majority of people are just spectators in the economic growth process.

    2. Given the growth projections envisaged in the financial year 2017/2018, in the medium term, population growth rates have denied Uganda to achieve the middle income status. In addition, regional political uncertainty and volatile global environment will hinder stronger rebound of economic growth.

The committee recommends that to mitigate these risks, Government should intensify public sector project implementation to stimulate growth, while at the same time invest in the social sector to ensure participation of majority of the people in the economic growth process. Deliberate policy actions are needed for Uganda to reap from the demographic dividend and use the human resource as a driving force for the country's economic growth process, rather than remaining heavily dependent on natural resources and foreign aid.

    3. Uganda's growth prospects are centred on weather conditions to boost agricultural production, while providing minimal investments in irrigation technologies. In real terms, there was a deceleration in the growth rates of sectors in financial year 2016/2017. Agriculture, forestry and fishing sector attained minimal growth of l.3 per cent, registered in financial year 2016/2017, compared to 2.7 per cent registered in financial year 2Ol5/2016. 

An increasingly unpredictable and drought-prone climate; increased pest attacks; limited investment in irrigation; soil depletion resulting from limited fertilizer usage and rising population pressures are exacerbating the challenges faced by the agriculture sector.

The committee recommends that Government focuses its growth strategy and plans towards agricultural research and intensive extension services to spur agricultural production and productivity. The budgets for the productive sectors including agriculture, industry and services including tourism should be protected from budget cuts.

    4. The industrial sector registered lower growth rate. Remember we have said agriculture was lower, industry was lower, services were fair but the participation in services for majority of Ugandans is at the lower tail end. The industrial sector registered lower growth of 3.4 per cent, in financial year 2016/2017, compared to 4.7 per cent registered in financial year 2015/2016. The services sector growth rate of 5.1 per cent, in the financial year 2016/2017 was slower than previous financial year 2015/2016 growth rate of 5.9 per cent. 

A deceleration in the growth of the services sector could have significant negative implications for poverty and employment, given the increasing number of people employed in the sector, as experienced in other developing countries.

The committee recommends that Uganda should implement deliberate measures to cause economic transformation. The country needs to implement structural reforms and review the role of the state in promoting economic transformation. Government must put in place measures that promote savings and investment to enhance economic growth within a framework of productive work. 

Securing export markets, hand-holding private sector to produce tradable goods and services and provision of key economic infrastructure are some of the major issues in this regard.

    5. Manufacturing experienced a higher growth of 2.5 per cent, in financial year 2016/2017, as compared to O.6 per cent registered in financial year 2Ol5/2016, due to a rebound of private consumption, which grew by 2.9 per cent in the period under review. Operators within the manufacturing subsector, including those involved in food processing and production of industrial materials started to recover from the effects of the trade disruptions between Uganda and South Sudan.

To ensure sustainable growth of the manufacturing sector, Government should review its tax policy on local enterprises – the opinion of the committee is that taxes are killing business start-ups - while at the same time it should improve regulatory services in all sectors with an aim of lowering production costs and expanding productive capacity for export. 

    6. In the East African Community (EAC) region, there was a temporary pickup in inflation in early 2OI7, following drought-induced spike in food prices. In Kenya, food price inflation increased from ll.2 per cent, in December 2016, to a peak of 2l.5 per cent, in May 2017 and headline inflation stayed above the 7.5 per cent target range through June 2017. A similar pattern occurred in Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda. Subsequently, inflation fell in the EAC region. In Kenya, Government measures aimed to increase maize imports helped bring down inflation below 7.5 per cent, in July 2O17.

In Uganda, the annual headline inflation for the year ending 2Ol7 increased to 6.4 per cent compared to 5.9 per cent, was recorded for the financial year 2016. This was largely attributed to annual food inflation, which jumped to l8.1 per cent for the year ending June 2017, from minus 2.l per cent for the year ended June 2016. 


The rise in food prices occurred because of unfavourable weather conditions, characterised by extended drought and high infestation of pests (armyworms) and diseases that affected supply of food-related products.

The committee recommends that Government investments in the agriculture sector should be geared towards provision of improved quality farm inputs, including irrigation technologies for each farming community while at the same time intensify agricultural expansion services to deal with the pests and diseases outbreaks. 

In addition, Government needs to diversify the commodity space in an efficient way, through the increase in investments in the tourism sector with the aim of becoming competitive in the region.

    7. The reduction in the Central Bank Rate (CBR) led to lower lending rates, from 24 per cent, at the start of financial year 2016/2017, to 2l per cent in June 2Ol7; hence a growth in private sector credit growth from six per cent, in financial year 20l5/2016, to ten per cent in financial year 2016/2017. 

However, this effect of an almost year-long easing of monetary policy stance to stimulate the economy had only a very limited impact, largely failing to stimulate sufficient private sector credit uptake.

The committee recommends that current banking institutions in Uganda cannot meet the financial services needs for majority of the people that engage in productive sectors, especially agriculture. Credit from microfinance institutions has remained even more expensive, compared to credit from commercial banks. 

Government should support the emergence of financial institutions that serve the needs of the people who engage in the productive sectors. Uganda Microfinance Support Centre and Post Bank Uganda Ltd should be restructured with a view to making credit affordable to people who engage in productive sectors.

    8. The savings-investment deficit gap narrowed from 6.2 per cent of GDP, in financial year 2015/2016, to 4.3 per cent of GDP, in financial year 2016/2017. The deficit was driven by Government spending over its revenues by 3.9 per cent of GDP, while private sector invested more than its savings by 0.4 per cent of GDP.

The savings-investment balance of 4.3 per cent of GDP, in the financial year 2016/2017, implies that the country continues to finance investment from external sources. This tends to worsen the country’s current account balance and exposes the economy to shocks in case of a deteriorating external environment.

The committee recommends that Government should promote domestic savings through channelling people’s preferences for conspicuous consumptions. Other measures in this regard include reforming the pension sector and establishing credible savings vehicles and finance investment, through the development of capital market that intermediate between savers and investors.

    9. Fiscal Development

The fiscal stand for financial year 2016/2017 focussed on addressing infrastructure constraints in the economy. However, the implementation of the budget was affected by lower domestic revenues and the slow execution of infrastructure projects. According to the African Development Bank, 2016 Report, deficit in fiscal infrastructure in Sub-Saharan Africa could constrain GDP growth by 2 percentage points annually. So, we are saying it is in order to build infrastructure. 

The committee underscores the need to protect capital spending during fiscal consolidation, ensuring highest possible degree of efficiency during the process, and prioritising public projects, according to their growth and social impact.

10. 	Tax revenues were 13.6 per cent of the GDP, a growth of 0.3 per cent, below the annual medium-term target of 0.5 per cent. In nominal terms, tax revenues grew by 13 per cent when compared to financial year 2015/2016 levels. Tax to GDP ratios continue to be below the 22 per cent of GDP in Kenya and 15 per cent of GDP for Tanzania. 

Government should reform the existing tax system through further elimination of tax exemptions and widen the tax base in order to increase the tax to GDP ratio towards the EAC convergence criteria over the medium-term. Such reforms may include the implementation of simplified presumptive tax regime in urban centres, taxpayer education, expansion of the single customs territory to cover more goods, strengthening risk based audit process to enhance detection and non-compliance, and decentralise the large taxpayer and medium taxpayer offices, among others.

Further, the large informal sector has made widening of the tax base difficult. Government must compel businesses that operate above a given capital base to register for tax purposes.   

Grants amounted to Shs 949.7 billion below the programmed level of Shs 1.766 trillion

Government should strengthen domestic revenue mobilisation efforts to reduce reliance on foreign aid. Delays on implementing policy adjustments especially in the management of public investments could reduce fiscal space for social spending, crowd out private investments and adversely impact the external sector through raising public debt without increasing avenues for debt services.

Alternative sources of funding like the Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) are constrained by lack of institutional framework, weak judicial system and capacity constraint. 

Government should expedite the implementation of the institutional framework of the PPP Act and implement the judicial reforms with the purpose of enhancing its performance.

11. On the revenue side, Mr Speaker, widespread exemptions, limited tax base and poor tax administration may constrain the ability to achieve revenue gains in the near future. In some cases, optimistic revenue projections have been a source of frequent and persistent revenue shortfalls that lead to accumulation of arrears. 

Raising revenues should be the primary area of focus, but cutting unproductive public expenditure including efficient investment is also required to put public finances to better use, while at the same time, reducing the inefficient recurring expenditure such as unproductive subsidies. 

This should create room for high priority public investment and other expenditures with the desirable growth and social impact.

The expenditures were below budget levels by 16 per cent or Shs 3.356 trillion; hence, a decline to 19.1 per cent of expenditure to GDP ratio when compared to the financial year 2015/2016 levels of 20.2 per cent of GDP. The expenditure reduction was due to under execution of Government investment programmes by US $ 2.507 trillion under execution of development programmes. Despite this, the recurrent budget exceeded the programme levels of 4.1 per cent equivalent to Shs 393.7 billion. 

The committee recommends that in defining the scope of the execution cut, particular attention should be devoted to preserving pro-growth spending such as that on education and health. Adequate allowances should be made for the operation and maintenance of existing infrastructure, which often gets side-lined by new investment outlay without consideration for their efficiency and economic soundness. 

Government should review budget commitments that take a first call on the budget such as expenditure on thermo-electricity generators and interest payments arising from monetary report management. Mr Speaker, these take the first call on the budget – interest payments and other past commitments, which are long term like the expenditure on thermal electricity generators. Bank of Uganda must meet interest payments that are associated with monetary policy management without due recourse to treasury resources. 

12. 	Recurrence of domestic arrears continues despite the commitment to control systems in place, implying non-implementation of the policy on domestic arrears. Growth in domestic arrears not only undermines the credibility of budget targets, but also has a negative impact on private sector including banks.

The committee recommends that Government should adhere to the commitment control system in place to avoid the accumulation of new arrears that have constrained private sector development. 

The biggest challenge to fiscal policy management remains the significant under execution of development budget. The Government should improve budget execution and further limits deviations from the planned allocation of the public investment.

During the financial year 2016/2017, overall primary balance shrunk to 1.3 per cent of GDP, from 2.9 per cent of GDP, in the financial year 2015/2016. This implies fiscal policy contracted during the financial year 2016/2017 when compared to financial year 2015/2016. 

The committee recommends that a timely and well planned fiscal consolidation is critical in order to avoid the necessity of too sharp an adjustment and to provide time to mitigate adverse impact on growth and social outcomes. 

The overall fiscal balance was financed through external borrowing, Mr Speaker, which is equivalent to 2.9 per cent of GDP, and domestic borrowing of 0.7 per cent of GDP. Originally, Government had planned to finance 90 per cent of the fiscal deficit through external borrowing. However, this did not materialise as only 74 per cent was used from external sources to finance the deficit while the balance was from domestic sources.

Bank financing of the Government provides fiscal breathing space, but it may fuel inflation if supported by central bank refinancing, expose banking sector to liquidity stress and crowd out private sector credit, further weakening the economy and worsening fiscal deficit. These should be addressed through a combination of policies that include fiscal consolidation, gradual tightening of central bank financing of commercial banks and the removal of various benefits attached to Government securities holdings like tax deductibility and exemptions on exposure of reserve requirements.

Government decision to resort to domestic financial markets affected the borrowing costs of the private sector, which remain high at an average of 21 per cent. 

With fiscal space constrained by rising public debt – and this is a recommendation of the committee - addressing growth vulnerabilities in the banking system will be important to ensure financial institutions can support private sector expansion to mitigate the negative impact of fiscal consolidation on growth and support sustainable recovery. 

To this end, fiscal consolidation plans need to be supplemented by arrangements to resolve domestic arrears payment to Government suppliers, one of the key factors driving the growth of non-performing loans.

13. Financial Sector Developments

In Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda, the monetary policy stance has been appropriately been accommodative, focusing on core inflation, which remain subdued. Even though headline inflation rose sharply following a temporary spike in food prices, in Uganda, for example, the central bank successfully kept core inflation in a narrow band around its five per cent target, guided by its core inflation forecast and considering the weak growth levels. 

The Central Bank rates reduced by a cumulative 7.0 percentage points, from l7 per cent, in February 2016, to 10 per cent in June 20l7, to support recovery of economic activity. While this policy action was partly intended to increase the availability of credit to the private sector, its impact was delayed and limited. This was because of Uganda's limited financial depth. These policy actions had only a limited impact on economic activity with the proportion of the private sector having access to commercial loans remaining low.

The committee recommends the improvement of the financial market infrastructure including property titling and the availability of credit bureaus to reduce on information asymmetry, which we believe can broaden banks' investment opportunities and foster diversification of loan portfolios. 

The recent credit slowdown in some East African Countries (EAC) and its constraints in real terms does not appear to result from crowding out but rather an autonomous weakening of credit demand, related to  clients’ difficulties with servicing outstanding debts. A tightening of credit standards by banks and in the case of Kenya, the impact of interest rate caps also dampened credit growth.

The committee observes that efforts to strengthen financial oversight given the rise in non-performing assets and the failure of Crane Bank Ltd, which was the third largest bank; to further financial innovations like mobile money - the committee recommends that mobile money contribution to financial inclusion underscores the importance of steadfast efforts to ensure that the regulatory framework should keep pace with financial innovations. 

Government should conduct rigorous asset quality reviews of banks likened to stress tests to help identify forward looking capitalisation needs. Weaker banks should be immediately recapitalised or resolved to avoid threatening confidence in the banking sector.

The value of credit provided to the building, mortgage, construction, and manufacturing sectors have continued to decline with the total value of credit received by the sectors being lower than in the previous year. 

Sector wise, growth in private sector credit was mainly driven by growth of credit to the agriculture, trade and personal loans, which together constituted 49.6 per cent of the total private sector credit, albeit at high interest rates

Credit growth to the manufacturing, building and services other than  business service sector, which together account for 27.6 per cent of the total credit, was negative during the second half of financial year 2016/ 2017, a trend that posed downside risks to private investment and recovery of domestic economic activity.

The committee recommends that in order to provide lower cost of credit to private sector, Government should limit issuance of Treasury Bills and Bond to finance the budget, to free domestic resources for private sector activity. In the medium term, Government should annually capitalise the Uganda Development Bank to avail longer term funds at lower costs to the private sector in order to increase investments in strategic sectors that have higher multiplier effects in the economy.

14. External Sector Development

Public debt as a share of Gross Domestic Products (GDP) has increased in Sub-Saharan Africa since 2013; it is now above 50 per cent of GDP close to half of the region's economies. The number of low income countries in debt distress or facing high risk of debt distress increased to 12 in 2016 from seven in 2017. 

The regional frontier markets or other countries with credit ratings, except Namibia, have been downgraded below investment grade. These are lessons for Uganda, which is facing a moderate risk of debt distress, if its borrowing appetite is not curbed especially for non-concessional debt, while at the same time borrowing to finance consumption should be heavily resisted; else the country faces a high risk of debt distress.

The stock of external debt for both public and private sector increased to 41.4 per cent of GDP in financial year 2016/2017, from 4O.2 per cent of GDP in the financial year 2015/2016, amplifying strains on the financial sector. The Government faces a significant challenge in its endeavours to finance proposed expenditures in the context of the low revenue base and the high spending pressures.

Both public and private debts have increased as a percent of GDP since 2009, from 22 per cent to 42 per cent in 2017. This debt increase has been driven by the widening fiscal deficits, slow growth, slump in commodity prices and exchange rate depreciation. 

While the current account has improved recently and exchange rate market pressures eased somewhat, international reserves have been boosted. Improvement in current account balances has translated into the reconstitution of external reserves at 5.2 per cent of import cover. This is above the recommended three months. 

Debt accumulation of recent has been growing significantly owing to increases in public investments, reflecting large primary deficits, growing interest bills and balance sheet effects associated with exchange rate depreciation and low economic growth.

The composition of public debt has changed over time. Although external debt remains dominant at 66 per cent, its share in total public debt has fallen in recent years as Government increasingly relies on domestic bank and non-bank financing.

There was an improvement in the recurrent account deficit to 4 per cent of the GDP compared to 4.9 per cent of GDP, registered in financial year 2015/2016. The improvement in the current account deficit was largely driven by an improvement of the trade balance by $291 billion due to low oil prices, implying fewer imports. 

Relatedly, export performance indicated an increase in export values by 3.4 per cent, which was attributed to the rising global prices of the country's export commodities that rose by 11.4 per cent, compared to last financial year 20l5/2016 prices, despite lower demand from key regional trading partners including South Sudan.

The narrowing of the current account deficit is explained by a drop in imports due to financing constraints and weak domestic demand. However, current account deficits are expected to remain high due to huge infrastructure backlog and largely to be financed through external borrowing and Foreign Direct Investment (FDI).

Trade is an important source of foreign exchange needed to import intermediate goods required by local industries. The Trade balance, excluding services, improved by 18 per cent to a lower deficit of $1,555 million in the financial year 2016/2017. On the external sector, the committee recommends that the Government must endeavour to maintain public debt at policy levels, below 50 per cent on GDP, to ensure that the cost of debt servicing does not reduce its space to engage in critical expenditure requirements.

A country that does not generate savings sufficient to finance its own investment needs must attract surplus foreign savings in the form of capital.

The Government must endeavour to ensure that the current accounts deficit is matched by an equal inflow of foreign capital, which finances employment, sustaining investment spending that would not otherwise occur.

The existing vulnerabilities to terms of trade cause challenges to the growth of local enterprises hence affecting employment and poverty reduction efforts. The Government should, in the medium term, work with the private sector toward the total elimination of importation of consumer goods that can be produced by domestic industries.

Mr Speaker, to conclude, during the financial year 2016/2017, the growth of the economy further slowed down to four per cent due to the impact of drought. Slow recovery in the provision of credit to the private sector by the banking system and disruptions of trade with South Sudan.

Despite a weak economic growth performance, the main driver of growth has been public investment although this represents a small share of the economy than services, which accounts for more than half of the total GDP. However, the increase in public investments did not trigger a corresponding rise in private investment, largely because public investments are externalised with foreign companies implementing them.

Despite a decline in private investments, manufacturing started to recover in response to a rise in private sector credit inflected sectors.

Even with the drought, the affected food production, inflation rates remained moderate at 6.4 per cent and this enabled the Central Bank to use a monetary policy the effect of which gradually became manifest with commercial banks slowly reducing lending rates and accelerating the rate of expansion of credit to the private sector and money supply during the financial year 2016/2017.

The financial sector continued to experience reduced profits despite reduction in non-performing loans due to the heightened risk environment characterised by the deterioration in the quality of loans and the increased recognition of foreign exchange risks. The commercial banks have been slow to reduce their lending rates.

The fiscal stimulus that had been envisaged did not materialise as observed in running a lower budget deficit that had been anticipated; with 74 per cent of this deficit funded externally, the crowding out effect on the private sector was relatively low.

Fiscal policy continued to be undermined by overspending on the recurrent budget with this achieved through recurrent supplementary budget spending; notwithstanding the fact that supplementary spending could adversely affect the credibility and effectiveness of the budget as a planning tool.

Part of this overspending was necessitated by a weak budget policy. A number of activities financed through these supplementary budgets could have been avoided in the presence of proper planning.

The largest obstacle for fiscal policy to attain its objective has remained the significant under execution of the development budget. The execution has been affected by setbacks related to contract management, land acquisition and social safeguards.

With constrained fiscal policy, the current account adjustment to a reduced deficit with Government limiting imports due to levels of implementing the investment plans, resulting from limited imports due to fiscal policy shift, reserves were boosted to remain at five months of import cover.

However, poor public service management of the development projects has proved costly in generating the economic returns envisaged in the NDP.

The evolution of the global environment since 2016 has become favourable for Uganda. Commodity prices especially oil remain relatively low but above 2015 levels.

Global growth is on track with 23.5 per cent in 2017/2018 that is how I make projections. With a higher than expected growth in the euro area and China both which have strong trade and investment links to Uganda.

However, on the domestic front Uganda faces a rising public debt which is leading to increasing debt services cost and burden; absorbing 23 per cent of Government revenue in the financial year 2016/2017 alone.

Fiscal risks are starting to materialise, revenue shortfalls, creative expenditure shortfalls, supplementary budgets, growing accumulation of domestic arrears magnifying pressures in the financial sector as evidenced in the high non-performing loans and slow growth in private sector credit. 

The income the country has to generate from exports to pay back the existing debt has to significantly rise to avoid future debt repayment challenges that may necessitate undesirable fiscal adjustments.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. The report is critically important. Let us prepare and debate it because this is where we are going to make proposals for solutions that can help the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Government in dealing with the problems they are facing.

The committee has highlighted the key issues and this is part of the debate that this House must properly have. There are issues of a huge informal sector, a narrow tax base, low savings rates, and it is from the savings where we should have been generating money to do all the things that we are doing. There is also domestic borrowing that the minister keeps coming up with and they borrow from the savings, therefore crowding the market which the private people should have used to borrow. Probably, that contributes to the problem of the high interest rates we are facing now. 

We have adopted private sector led growth without an appropriate private sector credit line that can support the development of the private sector. We are not like Britain, which had original capital, which they stole from other places. They took minerals from many places so they have original capital to use. As a country we do not have that luxury but what source of credit do we have to support the private sector in this private sector led growth, that we have adopted as a method - Is it also a possible time of us to review the Washington Consensus, the tripartite themes -  privatisation, liberalisation, the regulation? Is it time to rethink how we deal with these things?

Honourable members, we must look at this report critically and have a good debate because we have been talking about the economy without us ourselves offering possible solutions on what could possibly be done. I request that we have this report internalised and debate when we are all abreast with all the issues that have been recommended by the committee. 

The next one should be a shorter report because today, I also want to receive a report from the Public Accounts Committee. Can we handle the state of indebtedness in five minutes before I receive a report from the Public Accounts Committee also? Please, honourable members, prepare for this debate – state of the economy.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE STATE OF INDEBTEDNESS, GRANTS AND GUARANTEES

5.53
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Lawrence Bategeka): Mr Speaker, in considering this matter, the committee benefited from an analytical report from the Parliamentary Budget Office on the state of indebtedness and public debt sustainability for Uganda as at 8 June 2017, which I am laying at the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR BATEGEKA: And also the signed minutes of the committee as well as a signed copy of the report by almost all members of the committee. 

I present the report of the committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees as at the end of June 2018/2018. The story is that the stock of debt continues to rise - I think that is known. This house has continued to approve loan requests presented to it by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. So, the debt stock has continued to rise. The question is how big is the burden? I should go straight to the committee observations and recommendations because I have been given only five minutes.

Uganda’s public debt stock increased by 16 per cent from Shs 29.7 trillion in the financial year 2015/2016 to Shs 34.4 trillion in the financial year 2016/2017. The observation is that the debt has continued to increase and the committee recommends that Government should expedite implementation of all projects financed by debts to increase the country’s productive capacity in order to pay the debts. We noted that the implementation of projects is very slow. 

Government should avoid borrowing for consumptive purposes as this will not increase the productive capacity of the economy and Government should carry out feasibility studies to assess every project to be funded externally. That is to say that before we access the money, a feasibility study should be done because hitherto, we even borrow money to do the feasibility study. 

Government should expedite the implementation of the export promotion strategy and intervene in areas where private sector should become more competitive compared to other exporting producers of similar goods and services. 

Let me go straight to the recommendations. The committee recommends that Government should set up an independent contract management unit within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that oversees contracts management within Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) to avoid contracting debts before adequate review of the procurement procedure and contracts to be awarded that have persistently affected project implementation over the years. 

Therefore, the story here is that there are many factors; you approve a loan then you begin the procurement that takes many years thereby increasing the cost of the loan. 

Regarding domestic debts, the committee recommends that Government should develop and deepen the domestic financial sector to increase participation in the various sections of the economy in the domestic financial market. This will entail, for example, implementation of establishment of the Tier-four Act; increase in the participation of domestic financial markets to lower interests charged on base per issuance.

In addition, Government should limit domestic financing of the budget in the short run as the financial market remains shallow and under developed with limited players in the secondary market. The limited Government borrowing from the domestic market will consequently reduce the interest charged on private borrowing. 

On Performance of project financing, Government should increase financing sectors that do not attract project financing but are critical to the growth of the economy. The committee recommended that Government should borrow for projects that have higher capacity of increasing productivity and production. 

Further loan should not be granted to sectors and MDAs without a budgetary allocation for counterpart funding in the prevailing financial year on the medium term. Lack of counterpart funding has been one of the factors adversely affecting the impact of these loans. Those with non-performing loans that have not taken off without clear justification. 

The committee further recommends that Government should expedite approved projects to finance through external borrowing to meet the desired projects objective and outcome. 

On contingent liability, the committee recommends that Government undertakes the value for money audit in all enterprises that have benefited from Government guarantees. 

On debt service, the committee observes that Uganda’s external debt is on the rise and outstanding growth of the country’s income currently at 4 per cent. This poses risks for future debt repayment especially as the country continues to acquire external debt at less concessional terms especially to finance the oil development programmes. More so, there is a significant reduction in the weighted average interest rate of Government debt from 6.8 per cent to 6.6 per cent in the financial year 2017. This followed reduction of the weighted interest rates for domestic debts despite a rise in external debt interest cost. It follows that as interest rates increase, the debt service obligations of Government also increase. The rise in external debt interest costs at least to the fact that Government is increasingly contracting non-concessional debt, which will increase the repayment burden. 

The committee recommends that Government should borrow from projects that have high capacity of increasing productivity and production in the economy while at the same time implement the forms that enhance efficient project implementation according to the planned timeline. 

On public debt sustainability, debt is sustainable if the economy does not in future need to default or renegotiate its debts or make unlikely large policy adjustments that may create unstable situations in the economy. Therefore, a country has to ensure that the rate at which a debt accumulates is lower than the rate at which the capacity to service it grows. 

The Country Policy and Institutional Arrangement (CPIA) rating for Uganda was lowered in this regard. There is something known as CPIA used to rate countries. Ours was lowered from stronger to medium performer in July 2015 by the World Bank. This subjects Uganda to lower threshold for external debt indicators increasing the risk of breach. This downgrade underscores the importance for Government to improve governance, transparency and financial management. 

The committee is concerned about the high debts accumulation rate in the short and medium term due to investment needs of the country. However, the accumulation has occurred with increasing levels of contracting non-concessional finance. 

The committee recommends that as Government contracts new non-concessional financing of projects, it should observe the set criteria in the Public Debt Management Framework of 2013, where non-concessional borrowing below a grant element of 20 per cent should be for projects with which return direct revenues to Government in less than three years (high interest rates but high return). 

External Debt Sustainability 

The committee observes that if growth and export prospects deteriorate further in the future, which could adversely affect Uganda's risk rating, as could additional reliance on non-concessional borrowing that would not lead to higher growth rates.

Similarly the burden to repay external debt from export receipts increases from 2.3 per cent in the financial year 2016/2017 to an average of 5.2 per cent over the medium term. This demonstrates the slow export receipts compared to the growth of external debt service that will fall due over the medium term.

The present value of debt service to revenue ratio, which averages 6 per cent over the medium term, is driven by low domestic revenue mobilisation efforts while at the same time external debt falling due for repayment in the medium term increases. 

The share of external debt (foreign currency denominated debt) to total debt increased from 62.4 per cent to 66 per cent. This implies increased exposure to changes in exchange rates, which could increase debt service costs. As a result, foreign debt exposure to reserves has increased from 2 per cent to 4.8 per cent. 

The committee recommends that Government should implement deliberate efforts to undertake or enhance the country's competitiveness to boost exports over the medium term, increasing through effective investments to fill the infrastructure gaps.

As the country's external debt position faces significant risks (deterioration of exports majorly) that will lead to the downgrade towards a moderate risk rating of debt distress, debt contracting should be scaled down to only projects that have a high economic and financial return in the medium term and target cheaper concessional loans to finance the investment plan.

In order to limit the impact of the ever increasing external debt service, Government should improve tax administration to increase revenue collection, while at the same time lower costs of production to promote private sector development to take lead in the expansion of the productive capacity of the economy.
To limit the impact of foreign exchange risks, arising from increased external debt, Government needs to significantly increase its foreign reserves through increase in the export capacity of the economy, attract FDI, and minimise imports to only capital and essential goods and services. 

Domestic Debt Sustainability 
The ratio of domestic interest cost to revenue has increased by 2.3 per cent from the previous year that ended June 2016, although it remains below the threshold. The interest cost has increased the burden on domestic revenues, due to short term nature of the domestic debt - you know this borrowing with treasury bills is short term, indicating high rollover and interest rate risk.

The ratio of domestic interest to Government expenditure has exceeded its threshold of l0 per cent, exceeding the threshold by l.2 per cent in June 20l7 implies that the amount of resources available for allocation to other critical sectors of the economy is limited.

Domestic debt relative to private sector credit declined by l.9 per cent from June 2016 to June 2017, although it exceeded the Public Debt Management Framework threshold. The decline was due to a rise in private sector credit of 10 per cent in 2016/2017, owing to the reduction of nonperforming loans. 

However, exceeding the threshold implies that Government domestic debt is constraining funding to the private sector. If this persists, private sector will be out competed by Government for credit from the financial system.

The recommendation of the committee is that Government should mitigate the interest rate risks through a combination of stronger revenue mobilisation and deliberate efforts to extend average maturities over the medium term. Government should issue longer maturity securities in order to overcome the risks associated with short-term debt.

Government should adhere to the domestic borrowing limit of 10 per cent to domestic revenue in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 to minimise competition of the private sector for credit. 

The Average Time to Maturity

The average time to maturity for total public debt deteriorated from 12.2 years to 11.9 years between June 2016 and June 2017. This was mainly driven by a decline in the average time to maturity of external debt arising from the contracting of less concessional external debt, with shorter maturities. 

However, the average time to maturity for domestic debt improved from 3.3 years to 3.7 years as a result of deliberate efforts of Government to lengthen the maturity profile of domestic debt. Despite the improvement in contracting domestic debt of longer term maturity, Uganda still has a very high percentage of domestic debt maturity of one year exposing the country to significant financing risks.

Government should implement expenditure efficiency measures, which will minimise domestic borrowing to finance the budget. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, Uganda remains at a low risk of debt distress with both domestic and external and public and publicly guaranteed debts found to be sustainable over the medium term and long term. However, risks to debt sustainability have increased. The scaling up of investment and related increases in semi-concessional borrowing have led to increased vulnerabilities. 

Therefore, the failure to realise the growth dividends from increased investments, particularly infrastructure investment, is a key risk as the severity of the export shock, driven by the large export growth volatility over the last 10 years exceeds the historical average growth rate of exports.

A downgrade would have significant implications, where Uganda's credit risk rating will worsen, implying that accessibility of non-concessional financing will be limited. This implies that Government should increasingly limit external financing at concessional terms. The slow growth of exports poses risks to Uganda's ability to repay her debts. Enhancing export receipts in the short to medium term must be a priority.

The depreciation of the shilling has also increased Uganda's external debt repayment obligations, and poses a serious risk to debt sustainability that needs to be addressed urgently.

The country also faces increased exposure to increased interest rates due to the increasing non-concessional external finance, some of which are contracted at variable costs. Therefore, Government should contract non-concessional finance for projects whose rate of return exceeds the cost of credit.  Timely and efficient implementation of projects is critical for generating higher returns on investments made.

Debt service of Uganda's external debt is on the rise and outstripping growth of the country's income, currently at 4 per cent. This poses risks for future debt repayments, especially as the country continues to acquire external debt at less concessional terms to finance the oil developments. 

Despite the improvements in contracting domestic debt of longer term maturity, Uganda still has a very high percentage of its domestic debt maturing in one year exposing the country to significant refinancing risks.

The fiscal space of critical expenditures in the budget is reducing over time due to increasing interest costs on the national budget and therefore minimising impact of any fiscal expansion by Government. Government should stay on course fiscal policies (revenue mobilisation and expenditure reprioritisation) and reduce the fiscal deficit immediately after the planned scaling up of public investments has been completed.

The ambitious plans for foreign financed development spending have typically not been realised, given a number of implementation challenges that have affected the growth dividends. Capital spending plans require improved project implementation capacity, which may take more time to build.

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. That is a thorough coverage of the subject and the two are related - state of the economy and the state of indebtedness. My proposal is that we will have a joint debate on both. Therefore, when a Member rises to speak, he or she speaks on both, but the decision will be taken separately because they are separate motions.

Honourable members, you also recall that the report of the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government) had two parts. We only dealt with one part and I proposed the question on one part. Therefore, I am going to propose the question for all of them now and then deal with it. I never proposed the question for the state of the economy; let me propose it now and then, I also propose the one for the state of indebtedness.

Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the report of the standing Committee on National Economy on the performance of the economy during the Financial Year 2016/2017 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and debate will be at a time that will be appointed.

I also now propose the motion that the report of the standing Committee on National Economy on the state of indebtedness, grants and guarantees be adopted and debate should start at the time that we will agree that we have this debate. In addition, as I proposed, we will have these debates jointly on the two subjects and then, we vote on them separately.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE CONSOLIDATED BACKLOG REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011 TO FINANCIAL YEAR 2013/2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will recall that this particular one was presented jointly but you can see that on the Order Paper, they are separated. Therefore, I want to propose a question for your debate: Debate on the motion that the Consolidated Backlog Report for Financial Year 2010/2011 to Financial Year 2013/2014 be adopted. That is the motion for your debate and this will also be debated jointly with the consolidated report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) for the Financial Year 2015/2016 so that you have a full coverage from 2010 to 2016. That will be a joint debate but we will also take a decision separately.

Thank you, honourable members. It is about time. The chair of the Committee on Public Accounts will need more time to deal with these matters. I think she has felt that the way the chairman of the Committee on National Economy and the chairman of the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government), have been given time, she deserves similar kind of treatment and she cannot be accommodated at this time when the House is not properly constituted. For those reasons, honourable members, we will resume tomorrow. The House is adjourned until tomorrow 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 6.18 p.m. and adjourned until 5 April 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
