

Wednesday 8 April, 2020

Parliament met at 2.33 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I just want to give further guidelines on the conduct of sittings of Parliament and the committees during the COVID-19 pandemic.

In furtherance of the measures that have been put in place by the Government and earlier guidelines issued by the Speaker on 19th March, 31 March, 2nd and 4th April 2020, with effect from 14 April 2020, acting on the authority given to me by law, the following guidelines shall be followed to facilitate the smooth flow of conducting Parliamentary business in Plenary and committee meetings during the COVID-19 pandemic period. 

In order to ensure the recommended social distancing and necessary preventive measures, sittings of Plenary shall be held in the Parliament Chamber and must end not later than 5.00 p.m. 

After the 14 April 2020, every sitting of the House shall be attended by not more than 100 Members, five members of staff of Parliament to be deployed by the Clerk and two staff on the technical bench of Government. 

Consequently, 80 seats will be marked on each sitting day for use by the backbench Members and each will have an assigned number. 

Prior to a scheduled sitting of the House, the Government Chief Whip, Opposition Whip, the Speaker on behalf of the Independents and the coordinator of the UPDF shall designate Members in accordance to the numerical strength in the House provided that all members of Parliament will be given an opportunity, once in a week, to attend the sittings of Parliament. 

The nominations shall be sent and received by the Clerk to Parliament by 5.00 p.m., a day prior to the date when the sitting of the House will be held. 

For the Tuesday sitting, the list must be with the Clerk by 5.00 p.m. on Monday. 

The Clerk shall notify the nominated Members by bulk sms solution, email or other means. The names will be uploaded on the Parliamentary intranet and be accessible on the Members’ tablets informing them to attend that particular sitting. 

The Sergeant-at-Arms shall ensure that each Member sits on a seat as numbered. 

There shall be some reserved seats for the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker, Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, 10 Cabinet ministers, honourable Leader of the Opposition and any Member who is scheduled to move business in the House, as long as it is on the Order Paper for that relevant sitting.

There shall otherwise be free sitting in the House to ensure that Members maintain social distancing. 

Where a Member occupies his or her allotted seat in the House, the Member shall not change seats or draw closer to another Member, move to the Clerk’s Table or the Speaker’s Table and the technical bench. 

There shall be no physical consultations at the Speaker’s Chair or at the Clerk’s Table. Accordingly, it is out of order for a Member or staff to approach the Speaker’s Chair or the Clerk’s Table for any purpose. 

Speaking and use of the microphone 

A Member shall only speak with the consent of the Speaker. Other than the Frontbench, he or she will use the microphone designated to that Member. 

Honourable members, I am hoping that we shall be able to arrange more microphones so that you do not have to move back and forth.  

A Member shall stand at least 0.5 metres away from the microphone and may, if he or she desires, wear a mask while speaking. 

For the Frontbench, a Member is not allowed to touch or adjust the designated microphone. This shall be done by the Sergeant-at-Arms who will ensure that the microphone is sanitised before another Member uses it. 

In the circumstances, the biometric register of Members’ attendance is suspended. The Clerk shall ensure that each Member is manually recorded as present during the relevant sittings. 

Plenary documents shall only be accessible through the Parliamentary intranet and Parliamentary website to avoid the use of paper documents. 

Every Member, while entering within or exiting the House, shall observe social distancing requirements. Therefore, you cannot move as a group. You have to move sequentially out of the House so that the sanitation measures are observed. 

Where a Member exits the House, the Sergeant-At-Arms shall disinfect the seat before it is occupied by another Member, in case there are Members who are outside wishing to come in. 

Honourable members, as I indicated earlier, the committee sittings are suspended but the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development or any other committee approved by the Speaker to be handling business of the pandemic will be sitting. 

Any committee that wishes to sit will have to get the prior approval of the Speaker, as you all know. All committee meetings must end by 5.00 p.m.

In order to facilitate the committees to sit, the committee meetings will take place here so that the committee members can sit observing the social distancing. 

As much as possible, committee meetings will be conducted in a paperless manner; just use your iPads. Where possible, the ICT Department will set up video conferencing facilities so that if they are required, they can be set up. However, this must be 24 hours before the time scheduled for the meeting. 

The committee shall be facilitated by one clerk assistant, one legal officer, one research officer, one budget officer and one Sergeant-At-Arms attending at a given time. Other members of the secretariat shall offer background technical support from the offices or their homes, as may be determined by the Clerk. 

The media will not be permitted into the committee meetings. The Clerk shall then make arrangements to enable the media access the committee meetings electronically so they can operate from where they are as the Clerk will facilitate them. Every submission to the committee shall be in soft form through the official email of the Clerk, which is clerk@parliament.go.ug. 

The general restrictions, which I have spoken about before are; a Member or staff who has travelled out of the country after 7 March 2020 shall be required to provide proof that he or she is COVID-19 negative. Where the travel was funded by Parliament, the Clerk should communicate to all the affected Members and staff. 

Catering services, unfortunately, will not be available within the precincts of Parliament but the Clerk will ensure that drinking water is provided during the plenary and the committee sittings. 

Again, as we have said, the communication will be mainly by electronic mail. Members and staff are advised to seek assistance or make inquiries through telephone calls rather than physically visiting the different offices.

We had already said that the public will not come to attend but they can follow through UBC, Parliament YouTube, Parliament Facebook account and Twitter account.

Members who have pre-existing conditions are encouraged to work from home. Members and staff of Parliament shall uphold hygiene measures and maintain the two metres distance between themselves and any other person whenever they are in the precincts. 

The Clerk shall ensure sanitary utilities are provided at all entry points as you have seen already; we just want to ask you to abide by those rules.

We had already said the personal staff members should go home and I want to thank the Clerk that the bulk of the staff, interns and other assistants are no longer here. 

If it is necessary, the guidelines may be revised but from now until the end of the pandemic, I have issued these guidelines on this 8th day of April 2020. Thank you very much. 

2.45
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Division Central, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the lead you have given the august House in the fight against COVID-19.

In the same spirit, I would like to pass on little information arising out of your communication. As Ugandans keep on following and as we keep on following Ugandans, I would like to report to you that many Ugandans that are living abroad and particularly China, contacted some of us this morning with distress calls that most have been evicted from hotels and Houses.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, I thought you wanted a comment on my communication. We are dealing with my communication.

MR NSEREKO: Okay, I will take that, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek your intervention so that I just pass this on.

THE SPEAKER: No, you have done that already by smuggling in an issue. Let us deal with the communication and then, we shall do other things.

2.47
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have given us clear guidance on how business in the House will be conducted including in the committees. However, Madam Speaker, you put it very clear that the two sides in this House will be maintained. You also provided for reserved seats for the Cabinet and on the Opposition side, you mentioned the Leader of the Opposition and the Opposition Whip.

However, Madam Speaker, I did not hear about the Shadow Cabinet because if we are to maintain the two sides in this House, it is prudent that the Shadow Cabinet is provided for as well.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, is to do with in the event that we can no longer reach you physically, I also expect that you tell us how we shall be communicating to you. Will we write chits to you? What shall we do in that circumstance? I would like to seek your clarification.

THE SPEAKER: You can write to me and the Sergeant-At-Arms will deliver. However, concerning the Shadow Cabinet, we have said that the person who has business on the Order Paper that day will have a seat in this House. If you have no business, please, do not come.

2.48
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, my concern is on the issue of the Order Paper. Sometimes, a Member might have interest on a specific subject on the Order Paper. 

For instance, right now, Kumi has been invaded by locusts and I look at the Order Paper and when I see that the issue of locusts is there but as a person, I do not have business officially on the Order Paper. How do we handle such a situation? Now that may be, I have not been listed among the Members to be present in the House, how do we handle such a matter? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have already said the Whips will work out the exact number of people who will attend each session.

2.50
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. Since we entered the era of COVID-19, you have been ably guiding us and putting in place measures to protect families, our electorates and us.

The guidelines you have outlined are in the best interest of you, our leader and us as leaders in our various constituencies. I request that we get other ways of how essential committees - you indicate those who are supposed to come and then, we suspend Parliament for at least a month until we are done with this. The strict measures that you have put in place, Madam Speaker, are protective.

We have seen that in our neighbouring country, 17 members of Parliament have tested positive. In your best interest and as a way of protecting your life and the lives of members of Parliament, why don’t we suspend Parliament and then, you call on committees when there is something very urgent? That is my humble request. Thank you very much.

2.51
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My issue is about the cameras of either UBC or Parliament. We are going to follow most of the debates using televisions. There is a general complaint that we are not visible enough and not audible. May be, you could speak to our people of either UBC or Parliamentary cameras to adjust and make us visible.

2.52
MR EMMANUEL SSENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before you send us on recess, I would request that you get all of us tested because we are not sure whether we are all safe. The way we have been converging, we are not sure whether we are all safe.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, on my way here today, I was over inconvenienced by the checkpoints because I did not have a sticker. What is preventing Parliament from giving us stickers so that we come to these sessions when you need us. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I was communicating last week, I said that I had invited you to fulfil certain obligations under the Constitution; to receive the budget and deal with the supplementary, which we have done. 

So, the question of recess, leave it to me. I know we need to be safe but we had to complete the official work of this House. You can imagine reaching the new financial year and there is no budget. That is why I said the Committee on Budget and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development will remain and any other which is involved in the COVID-19 work. That is all. I have already said that in my communication. 

We requested the Prime Minister to give us stickers and I do not know what happened.
	
2.54
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I was privileged to be in a meeting where Government was receiving donations from those entities that have come up to support the fight against the coronavirus pandemic. 

The Members who were invited for that meeting - I found senior leaders of the country discussing; among others, there was a submission that was being made that “we are trying our level best to fight this coronavirus pandemic but Parliament is one of the institutions that is failing us. Why is Parliament sitting?” I listened to that and felt a little disappointed. I was even asked to move “that side”.

Madam Speaker, I really do not know whether the other side of the Executive is flowing well with us, as far as our sittings are concerned. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should ignore them. This is Parliament and we know what our work is. The sittings of Parliament are determined by the Speaker. They will not be determined by people sitting somewhere in a small corner. (Applause)

2.56
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In your communication, I remember last week, you stated that you are going to devise means of Members signing committee reports other than signing every page as we usually do. I am a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Yesterday, I was given a report to sign the usual way - where I was signing every page. I would like you to tell us when the new way will be effective. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I already issued instructions and I expected you to swing into action. The instruction took effect immediately. 

2.57
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your good guidance and guidelines, concerning COVID-19. Some of us come from areas where issues of national importance come up all the time. I really need your advice on how that can even come through your Clerk directly to you. We should not all the time bring them on the Floor. There are some issues that can be handled outside this place. 

Secondly, Parliament should not go on recess. This is one of the major arms of Government. What we should do - Madam Speaker, your guidance is very good - rather than we going on recess and we leave things to happen. (Interjections) Members, whether you put me on a point of order, we have three arms of Government. Parliament cannot go on recess. Where parliaments have gone on recess, for example, Kenya did not put up strict measures as the ones guided by our President and the Speaker. 

Anyway, things should move on and we should not go on recess. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, leave the Speaker to do her work. This House cannot debate whether we go on recess or not. Please, leave those things to me. 

2.59
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point has been touched a little by hon. Silas Aogon. Madam Speaker, we would like to thank you for the communication and protection. 

Like hon. Aogon has said, somebody may be having some interest on the topics to be discussed in the House. I would like to suggest that may be, in addition, to the number of Members you will appoint who will be attending the proceedings, you should add five more Members who could be interested. Those who will come first should take the opportunity to also attend the House. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us think about it.

3.00
MR GEORGE ABOTT (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, we are here as members of Parliament, to execute our duties. You have ruled properly that we leave the people who are seated in the boardrooms to discuss. However, I think the important point that was raised by hon. Angura, yesterday, I was also touched. 

First of all, we are discussing issues that affect this country. When a senior member of Government, a full Minister of Security comes and belittles a Member of Parliament to an extent of chasing him by saying, “Go away from me, you are the people who are bringing coronavirus in this country; you have refused, get out of the house.” We are not here to hobnob. We are not here because we want but we are discussing very important matters. Other than just saying that we leave them, I think some Members must be brought to order. There are some people who think that they are “untouchables”. It is really painful for a member of Parliament to be told “Go away from here; you are bringing the coronavirus.”

Madam Speaker, I got your ruling but I am saying that some Members should be brought to order. It is very bad to threaten Members and telling them that they are taking coronavirus to the Parliament of Uganda. That was my concern and even yesterday, I heard that issue. It is very bad, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope you are aware that Government does not like scrutiny or oversight. Therefore, many of those people in Government do not want us to carry out our oversight role. That is why they want us to go. However, Cabinet is still sitting. They are not talking about Cabinet but they are talking about Parliament. 

3.02
MR TOM AZA (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance about the conduct of parliamentary activities from now onwards. 

My request is, I wish this information could go down to the grassroots. Let our people in the constituencies know about this. Otherwise, people are going to get the impression that some Members have been chased away from Parliament and this can create some political problems for us in our constituencies. Please, let this information go down to the grassroots that we shall be coming here in shifts. That will help them to know why we will not be attending parliamentary sessions on some days. Thank you. 

3.03
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to put on record my appreciation of your very able leadership in this Parliament at this critical time. It is not easy but you have tried the very best to ensure we execute our constitutional mandate. 

In general, I agree with your guidance. However, I am worried about one condition that may make a constituency not to be represented. I am worried about a situation where, one time, I will be required to be in the House, someone managing the list will say that I am not supposed to be here and when I return to the constituency, people demand to know why I was not in Parliament to contribute to a particular debate. 

Madam Speaker, we are talking about representative democracy. The people out there want to know and be sure they are actually being represented. If we get into a situation where there is a possibility of deliberating on a matter without a Member’s voice being heard, things may become very hard for us. 

I know it has been difficult for you to arrive at this decision but I request that if possible, go and rethink it. I beg, most humbly. 

I would be happy if we could have a situation where a Member is free to attend House for as long as there is a matter that pertains to their constituency but not to be blocked from the precincts of Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Both the whips and I will conduct this activity in a transparent manner. There will be those to attend on Tuesday, others on Wednesday and others on Thursday so that all of us have an opportunity. I really want you to be here but the conditions cannot allow. We have tried but we cannot ignore the situation we are in. 

3.06
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate you for the good guidance. I know that the Almighty God will help Members of Parliament and other Ugandans. I really feel your guidance is very clear.

However, there is one concern you have mentioned, that honourable members shall be communicating to the technical staff through mobile phones. Madam Speaker, there are some members of staff in Parliament that you can call over 10 times and they never pick your calls. 

I pray that you direct them and caution them. Let them not be selective in picking calls of honourable members. I know if we are not in touch with them, our activities shall be very difficult. However, I pray that you direct the technical staff to pick their calls. Thank you.

3.07
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know we have been pleading with the Prime Minister to offer stickers to members of Parliament. I also know that this Parliament is a sovereign institution. We have, on several occasions, gone for several functions like CPC and budget meetings with stickers. 

I would like to request that Parliament, through the Clerk’s Office, avails stickers to members of Parliament so that we are able to move. 

Yesterday, I had a problem with my eye and I almost failed to go to hospital because I did not know whether to go to the RDC’s office to request for a letter to permit me to go to hospital or call the minister. 

Sometimes, we may think these are small issues but we are surrendering our powers. How can a Member of Parliament start lining up at the RDC’s office to seek clearance? For instance, our wives do not have Parliament identity cards; our children do not have such identity cards too. In the event that a member of Parliament has an emergency, how do they proceed? 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker, and seek for your indulgence that you issue guidelines to ease the movements and work of members of Parliament. I beg to move. 

3.10
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join colleagues in thanking you for the guidelines you have issued. However, we should not be tempted to think about closing this Parliament for any reason. All other Arms of Government are working. I am a practicing advocate and the courts are open. There are limitations but they are open. We still go to court and argue cases on behalf of our clients.

As you have rightly said, Cabinet is sitting. In Kenya, a mistake was made. When the pandemic came up, they went on recess but Senators are demanding that Senate resumes sittings to attend to people’s concerns because of what is happening in that country. 

Here, even in the worst case scenario, Article 110 is very clear. Even when we have a state of emergency, it is this Parliament that approves it. Cabinet is supposed to be reporting to us periodically on the progress of the state of emergency. Therefore, there is no way we can talk about Parliament not sitting because of the COVID-19 pandemic. 

We should only work hard to adhere to the guidelines. I think there is a plan to undermine the role of this House. The President has been mentioning critical areas in his address to the nation but he has never mentioned Parliament. I think it is deliberate. He has talked about the media, the cleaners, security but Parliament has not been mentioned anywhere. 

We must be very careful. I think the attempt to gag us is very deliberate. We should not fall into that trap. We should come in but only adhere to your guidelines. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Basalirwa, I think the Government is only avoiding formalising the state of emergency because what we are in is already, in fact, a state of emergency – curfew, restrictions, no public transport, no schools, no weddings; that is a state of emergency.

3.12
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have said what I was thinking about. It is important that the President declares a state of emergency. The reason we are raising it is that they cannot declare it is because they fear that they would be reporting to Parliament. 

As a result of that, Madam Speaker, I would like to implore you. We are in the budget process and the budget does not know where a member of Parliament comes from. When you say we are going to bring five or 10 – when a member of Parliament is coming here to discuss, may be, the budget of his district, it will be dangerous for us to restrict them.

I plead that you may be expand this place for purposes of discussing the budget because the budget is the biggest tool of Parliament. The moment you say you will bring 100, you may bring those – (Interjections) Yes, every member of Parliament is equal to the other but the problem is, you may have left out a Member who might have an interest in his or her area and could contribute valuable advice.

Madam Speaker, since the budget process is on and the tax Bill is about to come, I would plead - What you have said should come after this process. Please, open this place and let people sit. If they want to sit in the Lobby and watch or sit in a tent, that can happen. Members of Parliament should not miss out on this budget process because they have four key issues and one of them is the budget.

Madam Speaker, having said that, I do not think it is important for us to declare recess. What we can do is to ask members of Parliament – For example, today is Wednesday. We can say that we are going to meet next week on Thursday. It would be more or less a recess but it would not have been declared a recess. The reason we are raising this is because the Executive needs us away so that they can do wrong things at this time. 

The oversight function of Parliament must exist at all times. In fact, we are the watchdogs of the population. We passed a supplementary budget yesterday and now, they are happy. However, you need dogs around to see how they are going to eat. (Laughter) If you send away the dogs, you will have a big problem. 

You saw that yesterday, they were full here but see what is happening now. (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali rose_) You can see, the General has just arrived and now, he wants to speak but all along, they were not around. (Laughter) They were only looking for the supplementary budget. They are now waiting for the budget and as soon as we are done, nobody will be here. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Kigozi –(Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali rose_) Rt hon. Prime Minister, you will come last.

3.16
MR EMMANUEL KIGOZI (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two points to make. First, I thank you for the guidance you gave me. I would like to inform the House and all Ugandans that I am negative and safe. I sent the certificate to your Chambers and I am grateful.

The other point I am going to communicate is about the safety of this Parliament. As we all agreed, I think we must continue. However, having gone through the quarantine, the testing and all those other things in Mulago, I suggest that each member of Parliament be tested immediately so that we all know our status and those that are positive are treated; it is treatable. 

Madam Speaker, I know I am negative but I am not sure that I am going back with the same position because I am sitting with people who have not been tested.

Lastly, I would like to request that the Prime Minister and Ministry of Health do something to improve the facilities at Mulago. When I was there, as members of Parliament, we were put in a place that was very good. However, by the time we left, people were crowded outside and they were actually lining up as if they were lining up for food. They were close to each other. I had to go back and use another staircase to bypass them. The situation there is not as good as we expect. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us have the Prime Minister.

3.19
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to inform the House, having entered and heard some irresponsible statements being made that Government or some people want to close Parliament. This is not Government’s intention. I would like to put it on record that if you are thinking that way, it is wrong. It is not from us. Rather, we are sympathetic with our colleagues who behave as if they are immune to this disease. I think this is what people believe. 

We are scared, as members of Parliament, because this disease has no choice. If you do not follow the regulations, you are in for it. Therefore, on record, I would like to say that Government has no intention of closing this House.

Secondly, Cabinet meets but only one-third of the members attend. I think this is the information that colleagues do not know.
	
Thirdly, this disease has come and we are all aware. The Government, like everybody else, is doing its best to stop it from spreading. One of the conditions that make it spread is –

THE SPEAKER: Is the microphone spoilt? Is there a problem? Is it faulty? Prime Minister, can you use this side? There is something wrong with that microphone. (Applause) The Sergeant will assist you. 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I was saying that people help to spread this virus by mixing together. Otherwise, the virus cannot move on its own; this is what they tell us and I believe you know it. So, if you know, then you are helping the virus to spread by mixing together and ignoring the rule of not mixing together. This is my view. I have seen you have. That is another statement from you and from me. If we disagree, then it is the Court to judge us. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I am happy for this opportunity. I have said that first, Government has no intention. Secondly, we should not help the spread of the disease. Thirdly, the disease does not choose. It does not know that this is a minister or a Member of Parliament; it does not choose so, we should avoid it. 

Cabinet sits but it is only one third –(Interjections)– No; I do not know. I am talking about Parliament; I am talking about Cabinet. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. However, from this House, what we want is for the Government not to treat us like children. Tell the Minister of Security to stop talking about Parliament. (Applause) 

3.26
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for keeping the House going. However, I would like to beg your indulgence on two issues. 

First of all, if it were still possible for the space that Parliament has including our parking yard, to be made available so that each and every Member of Parliament has the opportunity to come and represent his or her constituency. 

Secondly, even within the building here, we can afford to have rooms. For example, a limited number of members of Parliament could sit here, others in the Chamber and others in the Members’ Lounge. The IT people can work out a system where Members can notify you – those who want to speak – and then you will be able to pick them. 

Madam Speaker, I am also worried. The General has raised a bit of it. Under Article 88 and our Rules of Procedure, Parliament must have quorum; it is a constitutional matter. The 80 Members that have been picked fall way below the constitutional requirement of one third. 

Therefore, if it were possible at any one moment, we could enhance the number of our sitting capacity to at least meet that constitutional requirement. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the 80 is just for ordinary meetings; this thing that we are doing here. The two thirds are required for voting. 

3.28
MR JACKSON MBAJU (FDC, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The debate we are having here and whatever we see on TV shows that the disease is indeed serious. I would like to thank you for the guidelines that you are putting forward. 

However, there are some of us – actually, many of us who come here and even coming here alone is paying a sacrifice. As you have heard from other Members, we are not sure whether our being here is actually safe. There are some of us who want to give more of a sacrifice. 

For example, I have an ambulance but my drivers are afraid of taking charge of the ambulance. I wanted to take charge and drive that ambulance in my constituency. However, the biggest challenge we have is that even accessing the constituency is impossible. Are there any means, Madam Speaker, through which some members of Parliament who decide to go and offer a sacrifice back in the constituency can be allowed to go? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask our members of the National Taskforce to check on that one. Let us have hon. Atkins Katusabe, hon. Kyinyamatama, hon. Nambeshe, MP from Isingiro and then we close this. Honourable members, we have not started work on the Order Paper. 

3.29
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not want to touch the microphone. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Leadership is the ability and capability of standing up to identify a problem and offer a solution before it becomes a crisis. We are already in a crisis. 

Madam Speaker, the entire country depends on your leadership and the leadership of this Parliament. You did not wake up one day to offer yourself and make or crown yourself as a Speaker. It is a constitutional duty and mandate enshrined in our Constitution; Article 79 (1), (2) and (3). 

Nobody in this country has got the power to say anything that will have a force of law, except if he has gone through this Parliament; unless during a state of emergency. We have no state of emergency, Madam Speaker. 

As I speak, my community was raided by armed forces from Kampala – I am told – who locked up everybody, beat up everybody and shut down the markets and even the food stores. People are locked in their houses. How are these people going to feed? Are they not going to starve to death? 

If we want to create a situation where we – (Member timed out) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are making comments on my guidelines –(Laughter) – and you are talking about the markets in Bukonzo. Please, conclude. 

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. To your communication, I am the only one, as a Member representing the community of Bukonzo County West, who can ably speak for the people of Bukonzo County West. As I came to Parliament, they told me to first let the Speaker and Parliament know that they are locked in their houses and they cannot access the markets. 

Madam Speaker, we can create enough space for the members of Parliament in the Parking lot right in front of the South Wing. We can put up a big tent and then we can effect the mandatory social distancing. Thank you. 

3.33
MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for your guidance concerning the 100 people who will be attending plenary. I think every Member here is a representative and the voice of their people. Therefore, I think we need to create enough space and also utilise the fully fledged ICT ministry that we have. 

We can do Skype calls to ensure that our issues are aired out on a particular item on the Order Paper. Otherwise, if we miss out on that, our representation role as members of Parliament, will not be fulfilled. Thank you so much. 

3.34
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the guidelines. A quick one; if the Executive arm of Government thinks they are more equal in the event that we have coronavirus, which is a very good equalizer - the virus knows no boundaries whether you are more equal or not, young or old; it is an equaliser. 

In these guidelines, however, now that Easter holidays are around the corner, I expected you to make mention of an Easter break for the House – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why are you trying to do my work? 

MR NAMBESHE: Secondly, about the 17 members of Parliament in Kenya who are alleged to have contracted COVID-19, that is fake news. The truth is that an elderly senator has been confirmed to have contracted COVID-19 but he is complaining that he could have contracted it at the time when he was tested. So, even when Members are demanding to be tested, we ought to also be sure whether we might not contract the virus during the testing. 

Also, on the 80 Members who will have to come to the House according to the shifts, I wish the information could come at least two days in advance. 

3.36
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to make one suggestion on your guidelines. The guidelines are all good and they are all meant to safeguard all of us here. I thank you so much for them. 

However, is it possible to allow everybody come as usual, but with one group seated here and the other group, which is not supposed to be here on the day of plenary, sits and watches the proceedings in our main chamber? That is my suggestion. If there is an urgent matter that I think I should contribute to, then I can come running here and quickly make a contribution and run back, as I wait. That will enable Parliament to move normally but safely. 

I am here to do four things:

    1. To represent my people;
    2. To legislate;
    3. To carry out budget appropriation and also;
    4. To conduct oversight. 

Those are the core activities you are supposed to conduct and once you are denied those, then you might as well say, “Let me go home and relax”. Please, let us not accept that one. 

Finally, I would like to make an appeal to all members of Parliament that these are not normal times. Let us play these things calmly. Let us be calm and also very strong. The moment we are not calm, we are bound to make mistakes. We should not be seen by others as a country that is beginning to hit each other’s head. Even if the times are hard – (Member timed out.) 

3.38
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. We have a mandate and we are here as members of Parliament. We have also pointed out that there are people who would not want us to be here. Therefore, in the first place, for us to even be asking for stickers, - I do not think we actually need stickers. They can only limit you in the Kampala Metropolitan. 

So, even with stickers, it means that you cannot go outside Kampala Metropolitan. I think we need to make it very clear that members of Parliament are free to come to Parliament and go to their constituencies. I may want to sleep in Buhweju and go wherever I want to go without any hindrances. 

Therefore, the Minister of Security and the Minister of Internal Affairs should know that nobody should stop a Member of Parliament wherever they are going. Otherwise, if you say they give us stickers, it would mean that you have stickers that will keep you just around here. Therefore, no stickers and no limitation so that members of Parliament can go wherever they want. I would like to submit, Madam Speaker. 

3.40
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The challenge that you have - as you said that you would wish to have 10 or 16 people submitting instead of 40 Members who wish to submit - is the same challenge you are going to have when we have a limited number of Members designated to attend plenary. 

Secondly, some of us have suffered enough in the hands of the Government Chief Whip. We cannot allow to be subjected into her hands again for her to choose who is attending plenary. (Laughter) We apply for committees but she decides to take you where she wishes. You ask for something, she takes whatever decision she wants. Therefore, to say that hon. Henry Kibalya’s attendance is going to be determined by the pen of the Government Chief Whip when I was elected by the people of Gabula County South, - we have suffered enough under her hands and we are not ready to suffer again. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister said that they are not interested in closing Parliament. What I would like to tell him is that when we agree here and take decisions and Cabinet goes to sit and ignores them, it is enough to show that you are not interested in Parliament.

Secondly, to say that you sympathise with us because Coronavirus can kill us yet you do not sympathise with yourselves when sitting in Cabinet, is just abusing Parliament. That makes us feel there is something we must really look at. Therefore, Madam Speaker, the last thing – some of us are not on the 317 but one of the leaders of the 317 is mobilising members of Parliament not to attend Parliament.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I would like to appreciate your proposals. We are going to look at them and see what adjustments we can make, in particular the use of technology in making sure that we all participate. We shall come back to you on that one. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TOBACCO CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Urban Development) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Tobacco Control (Amendment) Bill, 2020” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, along with this is the Certificate of Financial Implications, which I would like to lay on the Table along with the Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. 

Honourable members, you know the issue of matters of national importance; I now have 20. If we are to handle only them, we will not do any other work. However, many of the things, for instance on the COVID-19 can be sent to the National Taskforce and we are represented there by hon. Mwijukye, hon. Arinaitwe, hon. Anyakun and hon. Benard Atiku. They are our Members there and because they sit every day, they can handle some of these issues. 

I would like to encourage others to ask formal questions otherwise we will take a lot of time - although I know it is important. However, we are doing more of that than the other work. Therefore, I encourage you to take your issues about COVID-19 to the National Taskforce and I will determine what is very important to be brought here. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Please note that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is absent. This business has been on the Order Paper for the last one week and there is no excuse for their not being here. Let that be recorded on the Hansard. 

3.45
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. Especially on South Sudan traders, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is being unfair to these people. Some of them have died – and we gave them a lot of hope that has not come to pass. At least, he should come and tell us here so that we can tell these people that their issues are not going to be handled. 

Previously, hon. Bahati said that it is the minister who should come but the minister keeps dodging. The other time, he said, “Okay, wait I am coming on Tuesday” and today is Wednesday – (Interjection)– hon. Cecilia Ogwal can give information - but today is Wednesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you now inviting people to give information? No. 

MS BETTY AOL: I allow her to give information, Madam Speaker.
 
MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker –(Laughter)– this information is very important; let the House and the Leader of the Opposition be informed that the money for this particular subject we are dealing with now has already been appropriated. If you recall, after we passed that resolution, money was also put aside for the payment of the traders. 

Therefore, I am wonder why we want the minister to come. We should just give the minister instructions to start paying these people because they have already been verified and are already known. As we speak, some of the companies have already acquired additional companies to supply the posho and you have seen them moving around distributing posho in Kampala and in Wakiso, while others are suffering. This is the information I wanted to give. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we last had this debate, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who is majestically marching back, moved a motion here to reaffirm our earlier resolution. So, we have already done it. 

MS BETTY AOL: However, Madam Speaker, you can see that we are not moving and also, the concern of the House was on especially who those traders were. 

The first batch of money, which was given, went to Aponye; four companies whose resources all went to one account. This is very unkind to especially those who do not have godparents. We are all here representing Ugandans and we must represent those who are more vulnerable. Thank you. 

STATEMENT BY HON. OKIN P.P. OJARA ON THE ACHOLI CULTURAL INSTITUTION

3.49
MR OKIN P. P. OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to give this brief statement. I rise under rule 53 of our Rules of Procedure, to make a brief statement to some clarification on the recent media and general public comments, about the cultural activity in Acholi in response to COVID-19. 

The comments and responses were not very kind to the Acholi cultural institution. I am making this statement to give clarification and some guidance on the matter as a former Prime Minister of the Acholi cultural institution and now as the chairperson of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. 

Let me start by commending the leadership of His Excellency, the President of Uganda and the Speaker of Parliament, in the management of this pandemic. Their workings will save us from a lot of trouble. I also commend the Minister of Health, Dr Ruth Aceng and the teams supporting her to fight this COVID-19. 

Madam Speaker, COVID-19 is real and dangerous; presenting a new global reality to us. It is life-threatening and requires a multi-faceted and collective response. These responses, however, must be coordinated, consistent and coherent with the mission at hand. 

The role of our traditional and cultural institutions, therefore, cannot be ignored in these responses. It is on this basis, Madam Speaker, that on 28 March 2020, all the units of traditional leadership in Acholi responsible for protecting the people from such calamities decided to evoke traditional epidemic control practices to support the implementation of the presidential directives and guidelines given by the Ministry of Health. 

As I stated earlier, I am making this statement to give clarification on the guidance on this matter. Plainly speaking to correct the public record, on 30 March 2020, while on routine briefing of COVID-19, His Excellency, the President issued a strong warning to the Acholi cultural leaders, when he was informed that the Acholi cultural leaders consider COVID-19 an evil spirit and that we are mobilising the community to curse it. 

In the first response to the media, the General stated that the cultural practise of “Ryemo-Gemo,” in Acholi - which I will later explain - was not consistent with the directive given by the President and the standard operating procedures of the Ministry of Health in fighting the COVID-19 pandemic. 

The Minister for Presidency was instructed by His Excellency, to travel to Acholi land and advise the cultural leaders to stop misleading the people. Subsequently, she gave an address on television on 6th, in which I think she also condemned the process going on there. Madam Speaker, I do not know of any community or tribe in this country and indeed the whole world that does not have a history, a culture and/or customs that guarantee and regulate, to a reasonable extent, the lives of its people. 

The Constitution protects the right to culture under Article 37. The laws of Uganda recognise this although with some qualifications but command the Courts to enforce section 15 of the Judicature Act, Cap 13. This is specifically customary law and I would like to quote it. It reads,  “Nothing in this Act shall deprive the High Court of the right to observe and enforce the observance of and shall deprive any person of the benefits of any existing customs, which is not repugnant to natural justice, equity and good consent and not incompatible either directly or by necessary implication with any written law.” 

The Acholi have a very strong culture, which has defined them. This culture includes their beliefs, values, traditions and customs that define their practices and behaviors. That culture has created and maintained systems and customs and has seen the Acholi people go through some of the worst afflictions in history - wars, conflict, natural disasters and epidemics.  

Each time the Acholi people are threatened or attacked, Madam Speaker, they mobilise the community and activate appropriate internal responses. Overtime, these mechanisms have been put to test and found not wanting but resilient, robust and commiserate to the long wars, famine and diseases. We all remember the outbreak of Ebola in 2000. This particular practise was evoked. Although we lost Dr Mathew Lukwiya, this particular practice helped the Acholi people to contain the Ebola outbreak; a limited number of people died. 

Some of these customs are being researched on and tested for possibility of adoption as accepted principles and practices to provide alternative justice mechanisms in post-conflict situations. Just go and type “Mato-Puti” in any search engine online, you will truly be overwhelmed with the articles, opinions, research reports, debates, thesis articles, books, name them. You will find them there. 

Madam Speaker, the Acholi people call a pandemic Gemo or Lapenyi, characterised in two ways - the physical affliction on the people and their life sustenance means. These include calamities like pests, invasions, locusts and armyworms, measles, Chicken Pox, Cholera and now COVID-19. 

The second relates to psychosocial and mental affliction largely resulting from trauma, abominable acts causing diseases like –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to item six. 

MR OKIN: Can I just summarise, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR OKIN: Madam Speaker, Ryemo-Gemo, per say, calls for isolation, social distancing and washing, especially for the pregnant women being protected in the circumstance of a pandemic. Nothing, therefore, in this practice is repugnant to natural justice, equity and good consent. That seems to be compatible directly or necessary education. 

Madam Speaker, this practice does not contravene the directives and guidelines given by the Ministry of Health. I beg to correct this perception by stating what I have stated above. Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for clarifying the situation. Let us go to item six. 

PRESENTATION OF THE PETITION OF THE EVICTED RESIDENTS OF RUHITA AND NYAKAKINDO VILLAGES, KITSWAMBA SUB COUNTY, KASESE DISTRICT

3.58
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament to present a petition on behalf the people of Nyakakindo and Ruhita villages in Kitswamba Sub County, Kasese District.  

The petition relates to the compensation of persons evicted from Ruhita and Nyakakindo villages in Kitswamba sub-county, Kasese District. Money amounting to Shs 1,477,949,000 has been halted for a number of years. 

Your humble petitioners aver that in 2007, the Basongora cattle keepers from the Democratic Republic of Congo were settled in the villages of Ruhita and Nyakakindo. Their settlement resulted into the relocation of the petitioners to Bigando Village. The evaluation report was produced –  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, state the issue and prayers.  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Your petitioners further aver that during the eviction, they lost their crops and property worth Shs 1.4 billion. 

Whereas Government –  

THE SPEAKER: Go to the prayers. Honourable member, you are reading the petition. 

MR NZOGHU: These are the prayers, Madam Speaker: 

    1. That Parliament intervenes and carries out an independent investigation into the matter of settlement and compensation raised by the petitioners; and 

    2. That Parliament takes cognisance of the report of the joint Government technical team on the evaluation price and compels Government to resettle and compensate the affected families within the stipulated time. 

Your humble petitioners, Madam Speaker, duty bound will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. 

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for perusal and report back. 

MR OKIN OJARA: Madam Speaker, because of time, I forgot to lay this document on the Table. I also would like to correct one of the submissions in the name of the late Dr Martin Lukwiya. It is actually Dr Mathew Lukwiya and not Dr Martin Lukwiya. I wanted that to be correctly captured on the Hansard. 

THE SPEAKER: The Hansard will be corrected. 

MR OKIN OJARA: I beg to lay this on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.  Item 6(II)

PETITION OF THE EVICTED RESIDENTS OF KYABATUKURA VILLAGE, KICHWAMBA SUB COUNTY, KASESE DISTRICT
	
4.02	
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a petition of the people of Kyabatukura who were evicted from their land in 2001.

On 20 December 2002, the District Surveyor of Kasese District Local Government surveyed the place and realised that this part of land was not falling under Kibaale National Park.

Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners contend that during the eviction, they lost their property and that the relevant authorities have been petitioned; the District, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Executive Director of Uganda Wildlife Authority.

Therefore, your humble petitioners pray that:
 
    1) Parliament intervenes in the matter and carries out an independent investigation into the matter of eviction, resettlement and compensation raised by the petitioners.

    2) Parliament, through the relevant committee, makes recommendations on a resettlement plan and appropriate compensation and compels Government to resettle and pay the compensation within a stipulated time.

Madam Speaker, even court has ruled that these evictees should go back to their land and there is an order to that effect but Government has not respected it.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, they want to seek your indulgence that you intervene in this matter otherwise, right now, they are landless.

Madam Speaker, your humble petitioners are duty bound and will ever pray. Here your humble petitioners have appended their signatures and I duly submit and lay the petition on the Table. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Nzoghu. The petition is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for perusal and report back.

4.04
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I would like to move under rule 58(1)(k) of our Rules of Procedure a motion without notice seeking a resolution of Parliament to permit Uganda Christian University to administer take home examinations.

“WHEREAS Article 30 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda stipulates that all persons have a right to education;

AWARE that the Universities and other Tertiary Institutions Act provides for establishment of universities and institutions of higher learning;

FURTHER AWARE that under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, the National Council for Higher Education is responsible for monitoring, evaluating and regulating institutions of higher learning;

FURTHER NOTING that under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act, the minister responsible for education may give guidance on policy matters;

COGNISANT that Article 99 of the Constitution vests Executive authority in the President of the Republic of Uganda;

NOTING that following the outbreak of COVID-19 pandemic, the President ordered for the closure of all academic institutions;

AWARE that some institutions of higher learning have adopted innovative methods of teaching, learning and examination that do not require physical appearance of students;

FURTHER AWARE that teaching, learning and examinations can be conducted using other platforms;

NOTING that Uganda Christian University, an accredited institution of higher learning under the Uganda Christian University Charter Notice of 2005, is one of the institutions that adopted e-learning and take home examinations;

COGNISANT that on 4 April 2020, the Minister of Education and Sports suspended examinations on grounds that students do not have the required facilities and money;

NOTING that Uganda Christian University has offered all students free data to submit take home examinations irrespective of whether they have paid fees or not;

FURTHER NOTING that the intervention is geared towards facilitating students to fit within the intake phases of the Uganda Christian University;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by the Parliament of Uganda duly convened and sitting today, that the Minister responsible for Education and Sports be urged to permit the Uganda Christian University to administer the take home examinations to fit the intake phases.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Seconded - Order. Honourable members, please listen first. 

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I know that this House sat and we agreed that the exams be suspended. I was of the same view until I got the facts. That at the beginning, when the exams were suspended -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there was a complaint raised and we asked the minister to examine and come back yesterday but they did not come back.

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to come to that guidance that you have given. We asked the minister to examine and they were due to report yesterday but they never came, like you have guided.

On further examination, as a concerned parent and leader speaking on behalf of the poor people of this country, also bearing in mind that the Uganda Christian University runs a three phase system of semester, I wish to move a motion, like I have moved, that if the students are not allowed to do the take home examination, the flow of the students’ phased structure will be tampered with.

What the House should know is that the university has a unique semester system that runs from January to April. Another phase runs from May to August, the third runs from September to December.

Madam Speaker, by the time of the lockdown and closure of educational institutions, Uganda Christian University had prepared its students to do exams to end the first semester, which ends in April called the Easter Semester.

Madam Speaker, the contention that we had, as Parliament, was that the take home examination was disadvantageous to poor students. The issue that was before the House was that students who had not paid tuition were not going to be allowed to sit exams; the other issue that we knew was that the students were going to be called from their homes to come to the university.

However, amidst the circumstances, we have further realised - and actually the students themselves have asked that we re-examine our decision.

Madam Speaker, I am also aware that the students have petition your Office to ask that we re-examine our decision because this issue takes back the innovation that His Excellency was talking about.

I am aware that many of the schools including secondary schools where our children go, have given packages to their children using online. The university, Madam Speaker, has decided to give students take-home examination. This take-home examination is not going to be done in one day. They have given them 18 days within which to do the take-home examination. Within those 18 days, you are at liberty to even consult your colleague to get the examinations. You are at liberty to collect material from wherever you can collect it and send back to the university within the 18 days. 

Madam Speaker, this examination does not discriminate. The university has put in place a system where students will be given data. The university has also accepted that students with or without full tuition payment, will all sit for the examination. I thought as a parent, that this system helps even us, the poor parents in terms of having our children do their examines from home without necessarily coming back to the university after the COVID-19 period, when we shall all be strained financially. 

That is why I said that this system was done in the best interest of the students and the students were in agreement with the system. I am also aware that parents will still suffer the consequences when the students go back to the university and are told to again, pay the hostel fees and transport fees when they are coming from wherever they will be coming from. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, I think you need to listen first before you take a decision.

4.14
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion moved by my honourable colleague, hon. Winfred Kiiza, to urge the Minister responsible for Education and Sports to permit Uganda Christian University, to administer take-home examinations so as to fit within the intake phases.

Government has put forward very good measures to curb this world scare called COVID-19. However, these measures and the scourge itself have not stopped life to continue. What we need to learn is how to cope up and correctly follow the measures put across by the Government. 

Madam Speaker, in closing down schools and other institutions of learning, learning was never stopped and it was not closed itself. What was stopped was learning from particular settings; schools and other facilities that could converge learners together. With this era of development in IT, an institution that has exploited the development of technology and is offering to have learners put together apart, should be applauded. I would like to urge Government that its 10 public universities should be facilitated to follow suit. 

For example, learning can take place outside schools, universities on what we call online learning. As we speak, some of the Members of Parliament are distant learners. Universities are across the world but the learners are within Kampala and elsewhere in Uganda and learning is well facilitated. 

Madam Speaker, we also need to interpret measures put across by the Government very correctly. We should not stop life. For example, we don’t know when this COVID-19 scourge will end but life must continue. 

Madam Speaker, I beg for your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MR KASIBANTE: For example, I have seen a number of media houses –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to complete.

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, I have seen a number of media houses, for instance, well guided by professional teachers on the education curriculum of Uganda, conducting lectures and classes to learners at home. 

In the same vein, we can have exams conducted when learners are far from each other. They could be from wherever they are so long as this fits within the standards of our National Council for Higher Education. This is a technical matter. We cannot sit here and say, it is not dated anywhere with the measures put forward to curb COVID-19. So long as the National Council for Higher Education permits these standards, we should urge Government and I would like to end by calling upon Members and very humbly, to applaud what this university has done but to have Government also follow suit with its public institutions. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when hon. Olanya raised that issue last time, I was of the view that this thing should not take place. 

Later, I received petitions from 2,000 of those students – Honourable members, I received petition signed by 2,000 of those students. Some of them are third-year students who are due to leave in April. They are just about to complete their course. They were supposed to be sitting for their exams when the scourge came. Please, order! 

I, therefore, engaged the Vice-Chancellor and said this matter was raised and we are waiting for the minister to come on Tuesday, which did not happen yesterday. In the meantime, the minister issued a directive that they should stop the exams. 

Honourable members, please, you are dealing with the future of thousands of children. If they don’t leave, they are going to continue spending money to be here. New students are coming in the new semester in July. There are many things that have been considered. What the Vice-Chancellor explained was that they send you the exam and you do it within 18 days and send back your answer. That is the explanation, I was given.

4.21
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true the role of Parliament is to legislate and under such circumstances, when petitions come, we should attend to them. 

However, Madam Speaker, this Parliament must stand its ground and carry its credibility. We stood here, on the Floor of the House, and encouraged the Minister of Education and Sports to reign in on UCU amongst others and stop the exams. 

The minister actually acted on the direction of the House, went and stopped the examination. (Applause)

Now, the manoeuvres being made both by the students and the university are – I think Parliament needs to help them manage themselves. The ministry of education has stood its ground and not allowed the examinations to take place. 

Secondly, I have been talking to the National Council of Higher Education (NCHE). Initially, NCHE communicated to the university and advised them to heed the guidelines of Government not to carry out exams. They disobeyed the NCHE which is the oversight body over those institutions. 

Now, NCHE also went to the ministry to report that they had refused, so asking what to do. When Parliament forced the minister to stop them, everybody is now on standstill. 

It will be very compromising for Parliament to create a window for UCU to have another way of doing those exams. (Applause)

Secondly, under the current circumstances, there are more urgent things to deal with than education. Let us be fair –(interjections)– please give me time. Education and doing exams is not as urgent as suppressing the spread of the virus as we are dealing with it.

Yes, it is possible they can do exams online but the question would be, how Parliament can allow some of the students in UCU to have an edge over the other students in the whole of Uganda. It is not the only university. There are other universities like IUIU, KIU, Makerere and others. (Applause)

If we allow UCU to proceed with exams even when they are online, what about the people in other universities doing the same courses?

It is my considerable opinion that we put our feet on the ground and side with Government as it has taken a stand. Students should be home. Studies should halt until when the opportunity comes for them to resume. 

Finally as I finish, there are secondary schools which also have online platforms. There are technical institutions that have online platforms. They are all going to be running here asking to be allowed to do exams after all they have online platforms. The moment we allow one, we are opening a Pandora’s Box.

Let UCU, like other universities, wait until the time is right. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think we took a position. We asked the Minister of Education and Sports to examine that situation and we vote on Tuesday. 

4.25
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I welcome colleagues who have brought this matter to the attention of this House. 

I have been a university lecturer before. I taught at the Islamic University in the Faculty of Law for over 10 years. The challenge we have is to try and create a policy for one institution. That is going to create a very big problem. 

I am aware that in this country, there is a Uganda Vice Chancellors’ Forum. Can we benefit from the official position of the Uganda Vice Chancellors’ Forum? (Applause)

It is even provided for under the Universities and Other Tertiary Institutions Act. Can we know the official position of this forum in as far as this matter is concerned? 

Finally, it is true you have a petition from students. Hon. Olanya raised this matter and he was giving reference to students from UCU. It is creating a very big contradiction that students from UCU on one hand are approaching their Member of Parliament to create a moratorium on exams online and again there is another petition –(Interjections)

Finally, Madam Speaker, I predict that you are going to have another petition of students coming to complain to you as a result of examination irregularities. (Applause) They will come to you over this process. 

It is important as Parliament, for us to move very systematically. Let us know the official position and we take a position for all institutions rather than looking at one institution. I submit. 

4.28
MR ABDULATIF SSEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Last time I was seated with hon. Roland Mugume and he had a message from one of the relatives from UCU concerning the exams. 

It is indeed true that there has been a lot of pressure to students and parents in as far as the exams are concerned. We are in an abnormal situation. Abnormal situations require abnormal solutions. 

All universities have been affected - even schools. I am an educationist but the education calendar has been changed. Indeed we are all affected. For us in secondary schools, we are giving online assignments but free of charge, just to keep our students updated and reading at home. 

Our greatest concern is that the students were being asked to pay before doing the exams. That was where the pain was. That if you were to access these online exams, you must have cleared the school dues. 

However, if they are saying that they are not in for clearance of school dues, then that is another thing to think about. However, if they are to pay before they do the exams, then it is going to affect other students who cannot pay the tuition because of the COVID-19 situation. 

I would propose, as hon. Basalirwa has suggested, that you continue engaging other institutions so that we can get a position that can be applied to all institutions so that we can move on the same pace. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think we shall be able to conclude this matter now. Let us carry out more consultations we shall come back to it after Easter.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO ADDRESS THE EFFECTS OF COVID-19 ON THE ECONOMY

4.31
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Tuesday we presented the assignment that this House had given us on the effects of COVID-19 to Uganda’s economy but in the terms of reference, we were supposed to conclude it with a motion; so today I am presenting a motion to that effect. Before I present it –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Okupa for giving way. The economy is a big issue. Last week when hon. Okupa and his team presented the report, the minister of finance said that he wanted to make a response to this report. That is when we agreed that after the minister of finance has made a response, then we will deal with the motion.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that for the minister of finance to first make a response and proposals - because he was going to come with the stimulus for the economy.

Otherwise, if we do not have it, we as Parliament may have a crisis. Let the minister of finance come, make his response and the proposed stimulus so that when we move this motion, we are in line with what will make the economy grow. Otherwise, we can speak for ourselves and the minister of finance will come and say business –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister was here on several occasions but he failed to present a statement. He asked for time and we gave it to him. How long are we going to wait? Present your motion.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the normal circumstances, that is what should have been done. And the minister kept promising to come but on that day, when I presented this report, both the minister of finance and the Prime Minister said that they had nothing useful to add to the report and they were happy with it.

When the Head of State gave us the last address, he commented about our report but I think the minister of finance, who was here and agreed that this was a very good report, did not brief the President correctly because the issues the President was trying to add were the issues that were in the report.

Today, Gen. Moses Ali is here, I will give him another copy to deliver to His Excellency, the President. 

The motion reads: 

“WHEREAS the outbreak of the viral disease, COVID-19 which started in December, 2019 in Wuhan China, has spread to different regions of the world including 52 confirmed cases in the Republic of Uganda and constitutes a threat to public health;

AND WHEREAS as of today, three months into the pandemic, there have been more than 1,477,471 cases confirmed occurring in over the 203 territories with 309,145 recoveries and more than 83,401 deaths;

NOTING THAT there is a risk that persons who have recently been in contact with those affected by the COVID-19 might be infected with that virus and infect others before experiencing symptoms of illness;

FURTHER NOTING that events attended by a large number of people are recognised by the World Health Organization as to facilitate the respiratory illness transmission, and that these have already been banned along with a total lockdown to clamp on the movement of persons and curb the spread of the virus;

RECOGNISING THAT there are only 447 ambulances in Uganda of which 179 belong to Government and operate in the Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area; 96 belong to the private-for-profit facilities and 172 belong to the Non-Governmental Organisations, Members of Parliament and private-not-for-profit facilities;

AWARE THAT COVID-19 is projected to heavily impact industrial production, sales and investments, the economy is already performing at a rate that is 2.7 per cent lower than the projected 6.7 per cent;

FURTHER AWARE that the Bank of Uganda issued a statement on the 20th of March reiterating the commitment to provide exceptional liquidity assistance for a period of up to one year to financial institutions that might need it;

ENSURING that the contingency plans of the supervised financial institutions guarantee the safety of customers and staff, putting in place to minimise the likelihood of sound businesses going into insolvency due to lack of credit; waving limitations on the restructuring of credit facilities at financial institutions that may be at risk of going into distress and that it is working with mobile money providers and commercial banks to ensure that they reduce charges on mobile money transaction and other digital payment charges;

APPRECIATING THAT the pandemic has overwhelmed the economies with robust health structures and systems in comparison to Uganda and has resulted in the widespread despair and anxiety over the short-and long-term economic effects it is likely to have on the global, regional and local scale;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this House that Government is urged to-

    1) Step up its tracking, testing, isolation and treatment programme with more support to the Uganda Virus Research Institute and Ministry of Health and strictly enforces the lockdown to minimise human interaction and contain the spread of COVID-19;

    2) Support the National Medical Stores to ensure that protective gear, medicines, medical supplies and equipment are available for timely delivery to the existing health facilities and any other spaces that have been designated as treatment centres during the outbreak of COVID-19;

    3) Ensure that all Government vehicles attached to non-essential departments that have been affected by the lockdown are deployed to provide transport for health workers across the country with immediate effect;

    4) Procure both air, land and water ambulances to all health centres IV in the country for evacuation of critical patients that are far from Kampala but are in need of super-specialised care;

    5) Set up a consolidated national emergency response service that centrally coordinates all emergency services, including ambulance and fire brigade services;

    6) Prioritise the implementation of interventions enumerated by Bank of Uganda to ensure that the country maintains a sound fiscal policy for economic stability during the COVID-19 pandemic over the next one year;

    7) Urgently address the issue of the national fuel reserves to handle emergencies such as the current pandemic.

    8) Promote a culture of saving and investment amongst the citizenry and adopt it as a national philosophy to replace the culture of expenditure and consumption as embraced by Ugandans before this pandemic.

    9) Invest in silos – this is for the agricultural sector. Invest in agriculture, especially in the areas of silos and other modalities of food storage, preservation and processing for value addition and distribution to ensure that in the event of a reoccurrence of a similar outbreak, there is sufficient food to feed the vulnerable.

    10) Engage the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, World Health Organisation, UNICEF, GAVI and other development partners who have indicated that stimulus packages are available for countries such as Uganda, to secure additional funding to bolster the national response of COVID-19.

    11) Further engage development partners that have already committed funds to the health sector in the financial years 2019/2020 and 2020/2021 to consider frontloading and reallocating the funds to cater for COVID-19 emergency programmes.

    12) Consider suspending the contributions to the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) by employers for 90 days to allow employers recover from the shock of the pandemic and the related lockdown. 

    13) Government should consider directing the landlords to defer collection of rental fees for the next 60 days and halt evictions of tenants from premises on account of defaulted rent.

    14) Facilitate and fast-track the enactment of the National Health Insurance Scheme Bill, 2019 to accelerate the much needed improvement in the health sector.

    15) Government should guarantee that National Water and Sewerage Corporation and Umeme Limited, the main providers of water and electricity facilities respectively, will suspend disconnections for the next 90 days to ensure people who are working from home have reliable access to water and electricity.

    16) Ensure that stringent security measures are put in place, especially during the duration of the lockdown, to guarantee the security of all persons and property, in view of the increasing insecurity arising from the scarcity caused by the interruptions to production, transport and employment in the informal sector.

    17) That all Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) adopt and adhere to the cost-saving measures geared towards ensuring savings by cutting back on non-critical activities such as travel abroad, workshops, training, and procurement, other than those critical in the management of COVID-19 and equipping and strengthening of the health facilities at all levels.
 
    18) Ensure that a COVID-19 fund is created to hold all funds appropriated and donated by both the private sector and development partners and that these funds are ring-fenced for activities related to the COVID-19 pandemic.”

Madam Speaker, those are some of the recommendations that the committee that this House constituted has to present to the House. The committee includes hon. Guma Gumisiriza, hon. Justine Khainza, hon. Joy Atim Ongom, hon. Muhammad Nsereko, hon. Winnie Kiiza, hon. Silas Aogon and myself.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this motion represents much of what we have been discussing; they have captured our thoughts. I would like to put the question that this motion be adopted.

Honourable members, I put the question that this motion be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORTS OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

4.47
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, last time you guided this House that committees, especially the sectoral committees, do not have to meet because of the challenges and effects of the COVID-19 pandemic; you limited the level of interaction.

Given the volume of committee reports here, I would like to move that we suspend Rule 148(2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that requires the House to consider the sectoral committee reports and refer the approved recommendations to the Committee on Budget for reconciliation, harmonisation and consolidation not later than the 30th day of April each financial year.

In the circumstances, therefore, I would like to move that that rule be suspended. The guidelines you issued today will limit our participation. The time for us to sit here is limited because we always have to close at 5.00 p.m. That is why I am moving that we suspend that rule and allow these reports to go straight to the Committee on Budget. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is it seconded? Okay, it is seconded. Honourable members, in the past, we would have actually given maybe two days to each report. They would be presented, we would listen, argue and then finish and they would go to the Committee on Budget. However, in the circumstances, this is going to be very hard. 

Committees have sat and made their recommendations. The request now is that if we agree to the suspension, the reports will now go to the Committee on Budget. If there are Members who have issues, they can go and handle them with that committee.

Honourable members, I put the question that Rule 148(2) be suspended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Can I now invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to lay his report on the Table.

4.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and the final report. Committee on East African Community Affairs.

4.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr George Ouma): Madam Speaker, in accordance with provisions of Article 155 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table the current budget proposals and estimates for financial year 2020/2021 for the East African Community Affairs. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, when one has been lifted by God to a certain position, the person obliges and goes to the right position. I have seen one honourable colleague who has been lifted to the level of a minister and he has decided to hide himself and yet there are seats for ministers in front here. Is it in order for hon. Raphael Magyezi to hide and yet he is now a minister who is supposed to occupy the Front Bench? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have a place on the Front Bench. Please move.  

4.52
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Robert Kasule): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the ministerial policy statements and the budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021. The report is signed by six Members of Parliament. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: The report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance.

4.53
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Mr Paul Amoru): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports – I thought I saw hon. Jacob Opolot. It is not ready? Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development.

4.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Madam Speaker, I agree to lay on the Table the report as guided but I beg you most humbly, for the first time, allow me answer one question that Members have been demanding from our committee. It is about funding for the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), which is a programme for older persons. 

People have been asking me many questions about SAGE. I would like honourable members to know that we do not have Shs 45 billion. It will be up to you to engage the Committee on Budget on that matter to make sure that we get this money.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Foreign Affairs.

4.56
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Ms Violet Akurut): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the sectoral Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

4.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Physical Infrastructure –

4.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kafeero): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the budget estimates and sectoral ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2020/2021, which takes care of two sectors: The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Ministry of Works and Transport. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Presidential Affairs.

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the Office of the President (Presidency), Ministry for Kampala Capital City and the Office of the Prime Minister for financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

5.00
THE COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Henry Musasizi): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.

5.01
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Doreen Amule): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for financial year 2020/2021 for two ministries - Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Ministry of Internal affairs. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation

5.02
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND INNOVATION (Mr Fred Bwino Kyakulaga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2020/2021. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. It is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

5.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob oboth): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs touching on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2020/2021, relating to 11 votes under this committee, which I may not name.

However, if I am permitted, quickly I will name them: 

    1. Vote 007, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs;
    2. Vote 133, Directorate of Public Prosecutions; 
    3. Vote 102, Electoral Commission;
    4. Vote 105, Uganda Law Reform Commission;
    5. Vote 104, Parliamentary Commission; 
    6. Vote 101, the Judiciary; 
    7. Vote 147, the Judicial Service Commission;
    8. Vote 109, Law Development Centre;
    9. Vote 106, Uganda Human Rights Commission; 
    10. Vote 103, Inspectorate of Government; 
    11. Vote 119, Uganda Registration Services Bureau. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable Chairperson. The report is sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. 

Honourable members, three committees have not been able to present their reports: The Committee on Education and Sports; Committee on Health; and the Committee on Natural Resources. You will have to wait until next week to lay your reports. 

Honourable members, the budget is accompanied by the revenue Bills, which are being processed by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Therefore, plenary sittings will resume on Tuesday to receive the reports from the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and also to see how far the Committee on Budget will have gone by that time in relation to the budget.

5.06
MR MOHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This afternoon, like I told you, when the minister had not yet arrived, there is an issue of our citizens that are not in the country and are under a lot of distress. I received calls from a number of our citizens in China and many Africans that have been ejected either from hotels - the story has even been carried on international media like BBC – or their rental apartments. Secondly, they are also being ejected from public transport or when they enter public transport, the natives walk out. 

Also some people from the Middle East - not all - have intimated that some of their employers have told them that their services are no longer warranted and that they should leave. However, many of these people’s visas are bent on the capability of their employers accepting to take them on during this period.

Madam Speaker, these people have tried to reach out to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and to the Government but none of them has been helped so far. I would seek your indulgence, that you urge the Minister of Foreign Affairs to come and present a report. Now that the Prime Minister is here, I pray that you urge the Prime Minister and Government to come up with a report on Tuesday so that when we come here, we know the status and the welfare of our citizenry that are out of the country, mainly those in China and some, not all, in the Middle East.

I have also been informed that governments in other countries are trying to give their citizens medical health and food that is required. However, citizens from some countries, including those from Uganda, have deliberately been discriminated against in this measure. Like in China, one Mutumba sent a message that his wife was told that she could not access medical services because she was not a citizen of that country. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for having given me this opportunity to present this matter. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That matter is complex; I do not know whether it will be fair to tell the Prime Minister to come back on Tuesday on this issue. However, he is here; what do you say about that plea from our citizens in China? It is worldwide.

5.09
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I will convey the message to the Prime Minister that a statement is required from him about the citizens of Uganda outside the country. I believe he will come and make it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, the Government will give us a statement on how they intend to handle the issue of our citizens who are scattered all over the world. 

Honourable members, we had agreed to close at 5.00 p.m. It is now 5.10 p.m. I would like to adjourn the House to Tuesday next week. Have a merry Easter, despite the lockdown.

(The House rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 14 April 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
