
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 28 April 2021

Parliament met at 3.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Yesterday, we suffered two tragedies in the country. We lost two eminent sons of Uganda; hon. Mathias Kasamba, Member of the East African Legislative Assembly and Director Mobilisation at the National Resistance Movement (NRM) Secretariat and Mr Sammy Kasule. We would like to send our prayers to the families, their friends and relatives.

Hon. Kasamba was one of the nine representatives of Uganda at the East African Legislative Assembly. Formerly, he was the Member of Parliament for Kakuuto County in Rakai District in the Eighth and Ninth Parliaments.  As I indicated, he has been the Director for Mobilisation at the NRM Secretariat.

Hon. Kasamba’s last legislative career included chairing the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Parliamentary Forum for Promotion of Coffee Growing.

Hon. Kasamba was a jolly gentleman, great leader, practical and mentor to many colleagues. He was a good mobiliser and very exemplary. We shall miss him.

Mr Sammy Kasule was a legendary musician whose musical career dates as far back as the 1970s in Uganda, Kenya and Sweden with Bands such as Super Kaumba, Les Noirs, Orchestra Vundumuna, Africa Jambo, Orchestra Simba Wanyika, Makonde and the Afrigo Band. He joins another music icon, Philly Bongoley Lutaaya who was his contemporary and friend. 

He was behind such great hits as Marie Wandaka, Uzima, Kipenzi, Kukupenda and many others. 

I am informed that Mr Kasule was in the Netherlands on his way to Sweden for further medical care. I invite honourable members to observe a moment of silence in honour of these two Ugandans.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

The Speaker: Honourable members, we have also learnt that His Excellency the President, who is the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, has promoted 40 senior officers of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces to higher ranks and an additional 1,393 officers to various ranks.

I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate our Member, hon. Francis Takirwa who was promoted to the rank of Brigadier General from the rank of Major General.

I would like to also commend a number of women who I saw, like Brig. Agnes Musoke, Col Nakalema, among others. We would like to wish them well in their new careers.

Honourable members, we have quite a bit of work on the Order Paper and I would like to propose that after we have dealt with item No.6, we should move to item No. 29, which is a loan request. We had already considered it and it is only awaiting a response from the minister about certain conditions. We shall bring up that item before we go to revenue Bills.

In the meantime, there are a few matters of national concern.

3.16
Mr paulsin luttamaguzi (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The matter of national importance I have is that on 27 April 2021, heavy rainfall and hailstorms hit more than five schools in Kapeeka Subcounty in Nakaseke District. One of the schools, Kapeeka Primary School was highly hit. 

Currently, more than 1,000 students are studying under trees. Roofs on the teachers’ quarters were also blown off. Some of the teachers do not have where to sleep. It is very alarming that there is not any Government response yet. My humble prayer is that the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees comes to the rescue of these students in Nakaseke, specifically Kapeeka Primary School together with their teachers by availing us with cement and iron sheets. Thank you. 

The Speaker: The minister of relief is required to urgently address the issue in those various schools in Nakaseke, give them support and offer us an update next week.

3.17
Mr Julius acon (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. My colleague from Nakaseke just made a statement.

On 17 April 2021, two parishes particularly in Anepmoroto in Orum Subcounty and Olech Ward in Otuke Town Council were affected by heavy rains and hailstorms, which destroyed many crops. The damage caused by the storm may result into famine in this affected parish.

The roofs of two of the primary schools in this subcounty were blown away. Students are studying under the trees.

I would urge the Government to provide these schools with iron sheets and each household should be given seeds to plant. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, the minister of relief is again urged to address the situation in Otuke.

However, in general, we should alert the minister that with these rains, they are going to have a lot of challenges and destruction.

3.19
Mr onesimus twinamasiko (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kakumiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is illegal sand mining in Kakumiro District, which is causing environmental degradation especially on wetlands that are sources of water for residents and habitants of aquatic animals. 

Madam Speaker, more than 16 wetlands, including Mabengere, Kaitanjogo, Kabale, Mpongo, Masaigi and many others have all been highly degraded because of the illegal sand extraction. This illegal mining has reduced the wetlands’ natural function of water filtering, thereby harming aquatic life. 

Sand miners in Kakumiro even use harmful methods like digging of channels to drain water from wetland areas where they mine the sand from, which pose high risks, especially to children. Some children and domestic animals have of recent been drowned and lost their lives. 

According to NEMA wetland guidelines, sand miners are supposed to acquire wetland user permits and restore the environment of the site to its original shape. There has been non-compliance with the law because no site restoration has ever been done and even these illegal sand miners have no permits. 

It is my prayer that:

    1. Government prosecutes these illegal sand miners; and
    2. The Government comes in to restore all these degraded wetlands in Bugangaizi East and Kakumiro District generally.

I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of State for Mineral Development is directed to urgently address the situation in Kakumiro. The Minister of Environment is here. I thought mining is part of the minerals. Isn’t it?

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENVIRONMENT (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague, for raising this pertinent issue. 

The issue of sand mining is going to be handled in our coming laws but to respond to the colleague right away, we are going to find out what has happened on the ground. It is true that permits are given for sand mining and the restoration order is given to those who have carried out mining. Once this is not done, it becomes illegal and we are going to take the necessary steps to prosecute all those involved in this practice.

I would like to comfort my colleague that we shall take immediate steps to address the situation in this area. I am going to ensure that our team goes there to establish what the facts on the ground are. If the restoration has not been done, the restoration order is going to be immediately reinforced and we shall come back and report next Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you are also aware that over Easter holidays, the road at Lweera on the Kampala-Masaka Road sank because of sand mining, which this House had warned you about for four years. The NEMA failed to issue a restoration order. I hope it will not happen in Kakumiro. 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I am aware of that situation and indeed, it was raised in this House. I would like to inform the House that we crosschecked the information. What we have on the ground, which is causing problems at Lweera, is the UNRA construction activity. It is one of the issues we are talking about now. 

The UNRA is currently constructing a bypass to that area to try to restore it. We are working together with the Ministry of Works and Transport to ensure this problem is solved once and for all. Thank you. 

MR TIMUZIGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, concerning the Lweera issue that the minister is talking about, while you have directed her to find out whether that problem was caused by sand mining, I would like to inform the House that part of the problem in Lweera is caused by the company growing rice, which has made very many channels preventing the water from freely moving. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to come with a response covering the sand miners and the rice growers in Lweera so that we know whether we should grow rice there, when the road is getting damaged? Otherwise, the entire road in that area will be totally destroyed in the near future. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you aware that rice growing also affects the environment there? Or can you examine the effect of rice growing? 

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I am aware that this issue has been raised many times on the Floor of this Parliament. At one time, you directed me to go on the ground and find out what is there. Indeed, I went there and even inspected the rice growing project. 

However, for the purpose of detailed information, I beg that I make a statement on Tuesday so that Members are abreast with this information once and for all. I thank you.    

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY OF THE PROPOSED PARISH MODEL

3.27 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, on 22 April, 2021, I made a statement on the proposed implementation of the Parish Development Model (PDM) in response to the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition about the same. 

During the debate of my statement, honourable Members of Parliament raised a number of important issues and comments, which we have addressed in this written response. 

In totality, these comments and issues confirmed that there is consensus amongst Members of Parliament on the necessity to implement the PDM as provided for in NDP III. What remained outstanding was the need for confirmation of Government's readiness to commence implementation of the PDM in the coming financial year.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, 27 April 2021, you directed that, in order to finalise the debate on the adoption of the PDM, we consider and harmonise the critical prior actions for the implementation of PDM.

I am happy to report that after consultations with the mover of the motion, the Leader of the Opposition and a team of colleagues, including the chairperson of UWOPA, we came up with the following prior actions to be undertaken by September 2021: 

1. 	Retention of operational funds under Uganda Women's Empowerment Programme (UWEP) and the Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP) in the ministry of gender over the transition period to the PDM. This will support administration of funds that have already been loaned out under these programmes.

The transition period to the PDM is planned to last a maximum period of two financial years. The success lessons from these programmes and their existing staff will undoubtedly benefit the PDM and its secretariat in the Ministry of Local Government. 

The supervision of the 40 per cent of funds to be ring-fenced for women projects will continue under the existing operation and structures of UWEP. (Laughter) Allocation of the remaining 60 per cent of the revolving fund will take into account affirmative action for the other special interest groups including youth, persons with disability and the elderly within the context of transitioning households from the subsistence economy. 

Budget allocations under the revolving fund of Shs 404.3 billion will not include administration and financing costs of the pillars of the PDM.

2. 	Recruitment and training of parish chiefs to fill vacant positions

Madam Speaker, out of the 10,594 parishes in the country, nearly half do not have a parish chief in post. The Ministry of Local Government, working together with district local governments, will accordingly gazette all parishes and wards, advertise and conduct interviews for the vacant positions of parish chiefs between May and June 2021. Successful candidates will be oriented to their jobs and trained within the first quarter of Financial Year 202I/2022.

3. 	Constitution and operationalisation of parish development committees

Madam Speaker, where parish chiefs are already in-post, constitution of parish development committees will be undertaken in parallel with the recruitment exercise for parish chiefs by the Ministry of Local Government and district local governments. Upon conclusion of the recruitment exercise, training and resourcing of parish development committees will commence countrywide under the coordination of the Ministry of Local Government.

Membership of the parish development committee will include the chairpersons of the existing councils for women, youth, persons with disability and the elderly.

    4. Preparation, publication and dissemination of information, education and communication materials on the PDM

Madam Speaker, between May and June 2021, the Ministry of Local Government will prepare and commence dissemination of the information, education and communication messages required for popularisation and sensitisation of the masses about the parish development committee. This will be done alongside stakeholder engagements at national, zonal and district level.

5. 	Establishment of parish-SACCOS in parishes without any

Madam Speaker, each parish is required to have an approved parish SACCO for on-lending funds from the parish revolving fund to eligible parish households. 

Between May and June 2021, the ministry of finance will work together with the ministry of trade and local governments to facilitate registration and approval of parish SACCOs in parishes without one.

6. 	Conduct of mind-set change campaigns 

Madam Speaker, mind-set change campaigns are both a continuous and crosscutting action for all stakeholders. This action will commence as soon as implementation of the PDM has been adopted by Parliament. The ministry of gender, ministry of ICT, and Ministry of Local Government will be responsible.
7. 	Design and activation of the community information system 

Madam Speaker, to address the need for both baseline and real time data required to for planning, policy guidance, monitoring and evaluation, in the implementation of the PDM, the Ministry of Local Government together with Uganda Bureau of Statistics will commence, in May 2021, the design of the data tools and software required to support the Parish Register and Parish Dashboard. This design and testing of the tools will be concluded by September 2021, in time for operations of the PDM to start in October 2021. Members of Parliament will be supplied with information generated from the CIC and from the operations of the parish revolving fund regularly. It is important to note that the parish development model will be implemented using existing structures of Government.

Madam Speaker, with this clarification, I beg that the House adopts the PDM for implementation in Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, as you recall, we had a lengthy debate on this issue. What the minister has summarised is actually the demands that were made by this House before implementation. I believe that they have been answered. I know that the Leader of the Opposition has been part of the meeting.

3.38
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We appreciate the presentation by the minister. He said the Government is going to recruit parish chiefs. 

However, we gave a situation, where we have a parish with 15 zones and another parish with one zone. How are they going to handle that? Will those two parishes receive the same amount of money? You will find a parish with 15 zones with a population of around 4,000 people and a parish with one zone- (Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my honourable colleague, I am constrained but I have to put him to order for misleading the country that we have parishes with one village. That is not correct. We do not have parishes with just one village. At the very least, the minimum is three villages. Is he, therefore, in order to mislead the country? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kibalya, do you have a parish with one village?

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Minister of Local Government is not in charge of what is going on in her ministry.

Madam Speaker, in Kasambira Town Council, the ward is made up of one village. In Namasagali - I am forgetting the parish- there is one zone, which they have just divided into two zones during the NRM campaigns, when we were distributing money for NRM.

THE SPEAKER: That is Kabanyoro and Kabaganda.

MR KIBALYA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I am the chairman of NRM in that area and I am the one who was giving money. The area was divided for that reason. In Namwendwa-Isingo Parish, which was with Buluya, we just divided the area to make sure we cater for it but the whole parish had gone to Buluya entering Namwendwa Town Council.  We wanted Isingo to remain in Namwendwa rural and so, we divided the zone there. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Local Government should revise her notes so that she can get this information right.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I think that is a legitimate concern.

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, when we are running the show, we must be alert and alive to the realities on the ground. This should not give us a headache. Where we find irregularities, we shall correct them. If there is a parish which is too big, we can divide it. There is no problem at all, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: That is why we insisted that you must first gazette them before you recruit. 

MR KASAIJA: As we are doing the preliminaries, we shall identify these new parishes and gazette them; there is no question about that.

3.41
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to appreciate the response by the minister. I am one of those who had several issues but he has adequately responded to our concerns.

For example, he has increased the money for the women to 40 per cent and that was what we wanted because we saw 30 per cent as very small.

Added to that, the money has been ring-fenced. We are now sure that this money will go to the women rather than be in the open pool. Also, we were not sure how the money would go to the women but now, he has included on the parish committee the chairperson of the women council, at parish level and then the chairperson of the youth, the elderly and the chairperson for persons with disabilities. 

These ones will make sure that the money goes to the right beneficiaries. We also had an issue with the training; they had provided money for training of Uganda Bureau of Statistics only but now, there is funding for training of the parish committees, which are going to be the management committees for this money.

I have a small problem with the parish SACCO. Yes, we should develop the parish SACCO but we should not immediately demand that people must belong to the parish SACCOS because we saw the problem with the Emyooga where people paid for membership; some of them borrowed money, others sold their small properties to be members but to-date, they have not received that money.
So, is it possible that these people get money in their small groups; because they already belong to groups and then, as they multiply the money, they can now pay to be members of the parish SACCO?

This is something that we should gradually work towards, rather than demand that people belong to the parish SACCO before they receive funding. Thank you.

3.44
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM,    Rubanda County East, Rubanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the idea of establishing the PDM. However, I would like to appeal to the minister to look at the point hon. Kibalya was making. 

It is true. In my district, I have a parish called Nyaruhanga, which is a one village parish. It is also true that in my parish, we have 16 villages with a population of about 6,000 people and it is also true - I have various parishes with five to seven villages, with a population of less than 2,000 people.

Therefore, assuming we send Shs 40 million to a parish, you will find a parish with one or two villages receiving Shs 40 million. The same Shs 40 million that is being received by a parish with 16 villages or more. I know even other parishes with 22 villages.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my prayer is that as we synergise toward implementing the PDM, we look at the number of people in these parishes and we appropriate funds accordingly. (Applause)

In a situation where a parish has less than 200 people, we do not send the Shs 40 million. We appropriate funds according to the number of people in the parish and not according to the administrative unit called a parish. I beg to submit.

3.47
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM,    Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a big challenge concerning the source of funding for the PDM. Whereas it could be a good idea, the source of funding for this project is very questionable. One of the key sources, apart from UWEP, which they are trying to correct, is the Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA). When I was presenting the budget for this financials year, I laid on this Table a very voluminous document concerning the suppliers of coffee seedlings to UCDA. Not all these have been paid, save for a few of them. 
Secondly, the coffee sector has been doing quite well; it has been growing. Indeed, the number of bags we are exporting is increasing monthly.

We are removing Shs 58 billion from this sector, on the account of the PDM. Yes, you can argue that in this model, we shall be promoting coffee growing but this has not come out clearly at all. It is going to leave the sector in a crisis and the growth that we have been experiencing maybe seriously hampered.

In addition to that, the other sources are these affirmative action programmes like the northern Uganda programmes; PRDP, Luwero, Rwenzori and others. Madam Speaker, Parliament has been increasingly supporting these interventions. Now, much of the money is being moved away from these programmes. I am not quite sure that this model is going to be any different from other models that have been tried before.

We have seen models such as Bonna Bagaggawale, Entandikwa, Emyooga and they have failed to take off. What assurance do we have that this one that was abruptly arrived at is going to work? (Applause) We have not done any baseline studies to establish what is on ground. We want to do the studies as we implement.

One of our biggest weaknesses has been doing policy implementation before doing policy research. We need to do research first. Let us spend this coming financial year doing baseline research on this project before we talk about implementation. We should not burn our fingers the way we have been doing after spending a lot of resources.

We are talking about a budget of Shs 490 billion. When you divide this amount of money across the country, it is just peanuts going to the parishes. This will not change our lives, I am telling you. With Shs 38 million at parish level, it is totally meaningless. We shall come back here lamenting, with no results to show.

My opinion is that we need to do a baseline study before we implement this programme. In any case, we should pilot it before we implement it. They are talking about a revolving fund. We have been looking at revolving funds that never revolve at all. 

The story simply ends with the first group that you give this money. They do not return it, with several excuses, including allegations of there being no rains; “I took the money; I could not grow the tomatoes because there was lack of this and that.” They thus do not return the money.
Unless the minister is saying that it is going to be a recurrent cost each year providing money into this problem, I am not sure that it is going to succeed. Madam Speaker, I am not talking politics. I am presenting a technical assessment of this programme. (Applause)  

We are borrowing money every day and here we are, wanting to donate money anyhow. What are we doing to our country?  This is very unfortunate. We need to do a thorough study before we implement this programme.

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause)

3.53
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister of finance for giving us this additional statement on the PDM. The other time, I had some concerns, which I have not seen rightly addressed. 

We all appreciate that indeed, we need this PDM. I, for one, would really support this model but I think we still need more clarification. 

I had raised the issue about the stabilisation fund that my colleague has just spoken about, the PRDP, NUSAF and the rest of the interventions, which were meant for regions like Kigezi, Northern Uganda, Karamoja, Teso and the rest. 

I expected the minister to have given an explanation because in the last one, they had said they were going to get funding from those programmes to fund the PDM. Nothing has been said about these programmes. Are they going to go on or are we still going to collapse them, in order to fund the PDM?

Secondly, although there has been an amendment on UWEP, we want to appreciate that it will now be 40 per cent. On the composition of the committee on the PDM; although the minister has amended it to say they will be the chairperson of the parish women council, persons with disabilities and the youth; the other time, he had talked of a third of the committee to be constituted by women, which I was still not comfortable with.

For us to say it should be a chairperson of the women council, we might end up with only one woman on that committee. We still need a percentage on this. The argument is that we have over 52 per cent of our population composed of women. I had recommended that let the committee be constituted by 50 per cent of women. I beg to submit. Thank you. 

3.56
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I thank the minister of finance for making the clarification but I also have other concerns.

I agree with the chairman of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development that if we are to go and implement the PDM, we should focus on population data.

If you look at my constituency in Zombo, there is a village with 11 sub-villages. If we now base on the administrative unit, we are likely to make a mistake and that should be corrected. When it comes to the issue of taking money – like from UCDA, first, we must identify an enterprise where we have comparative advantage. Coffee is one area where we have few competitors in Africa. Our immediate competitor is Ethiopia.

Last year, Ethiopia got about $900 million from coffee exports and Uganda got about $47 million. This is why we have the UCDA, with technical people who can help to expand coffee export for Uganda. This is on the Arabica coffee side.

On Robusta coffee, we can talk about Vietnam as our immediate competitor. Vietnam is now exporting 30 million bags of coffee and generating a lot of money along that line.

My appeal is that the coffee sector should be supported because it is one unique thing and Uganda coffee is very good. It will generate a lot of money if we put it in the hands of technical people. However, you want to bring this serious development strategy to be implemented by a parish chief. 

Another clarification I need from the minister of finance is that we have some information coming about the District Discretionary Development Fund – what you call the DDEG. It is like they are scrapping it from some districts and in other districts, they are maintaining them. Can the honourable minister clarify on this? I thank you.

3.59
MR ASTON KAJARA (NRM, Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for presenting this PDM. While implementing this model, I would like Government and particularly the ministry of finance to avoid the disease that has befallen similar programmes that have been implemented in the past. 

We have probably 20 similar programmes; Entandikwa, NAADS, Operation Wealth Creation, YLP, UWEP, Prosperity for All, Emyooga and others. What has the country achieved from these projects? 

Some of the projects we conceived have been operating without any legal or institutional framework. Are we now ready to actually offer something new? Do we have an institution? Do we have a legal framework for operationalisation of the Parish Development Model for us to benchmark and say, “After this or that period, this project should be a success or a failure”?

Some of these projects have been implemented without policy direction as one Member said here. You get a policy and from the policy, you develop a legal framework. From the framework, you can then implement the policy.

Where are the monitoring and evaluation mechanisms for this project? Where is the –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR KAJARA: As I conclude, at the end of this project, we want outcomes that will increase household income. We want outcomes that will reduce the poverty level of Ugandans. We want a mechanism for monitoring and evaluation so that the money we will invest in this project benefits the ordinary Ugandans. That is when the Government will come back to say, “Yes, we did it.” I thank you. 

4.02
COL (RTD) FRED MSWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the minister for the clear elaboration that cleared some of the doubts on our minds. However, poverty is a big enemy and when we are fighting such a serious enemy, we need all efforts. 

This PDM is part of the efforts being added to the YLF, UWEP and Emyooga. We are not yet done with poverty. I support, therefore, any effort that is complementing the increase of household incomes. 

Lack of money is not the only cause of poverty. There are many other causes in our villages or parishes. For example, I would like to see a parish health centre established at every parish. I would like to see a primary school at every parish added on because education and health can be big implements to fight poverty.

We have been lamenting here. This House has an oversight role. Why can’t we set up a committee to carry out a study on all these efforts that have been initiated and implemented? Some colleagues said the efforts have failed. Why have they failed? We should study the causes of the failure and see how to eradicate them so that we –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Once we do this study and make conclusions, we will give the report to the House so that we can learn why these efforts have failed. This will ensure that the PDM does not fail like the other projects. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that we first evaluate before we start it off?  

COL (RTD). MWESIGYE: No, I am proposing that we go ahead with the PDM as we study the causes of the failure of the other projects. I propose that this effort should be supported and it should go on as we do the study. We cannot afford to wait until the study is done. That was what I meant. Thank you. 

4.05
MR RICHARD OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to make a contribution on this matter. I thank the minister for the response he has given. I equally have two concerns. The first one is the source of funding as the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget has put it and the second one is the mechanism. 

It is now very clear that the PDM is nothing but a revolving fund; that it is a revolving fund is where my problem begins. In funding this model, much of the money has been taken from the ministry of agriculture. The money has been taken from the productive sector of the economy.

The Chairperson of the budget committee has given a hint on the effect it is going to have on the Coffee sector. It is unbelievable that one of our major cash crops – the crop that mainly drives the economic growth of this country - is the one that is going to be severely affected. 

In 2015, His Excellency the President, the Chairperson of my party, launched a roadmap. To-date, we are on a good track to achieving the roadmap, which will help in liberating this country from poverty. 
When we look at –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MR OTHIENO: I would like to give an illustration. Over the last seven years, we have invested Shs 400 billion in the Coffee sector. Out of this money, the return has been Shs 13 trillion. Why would we want to kill a sector where we injected Shs 400 billion and the return has been Shs 13 trillion? 

Let me shed some light on the comparative analysis here. In terms of Vietnam and Uganda, in 1980, Vietnam exported 77,000 bags of coffee and Uganda exported 2.1 million bags of coffee. In 2018, Vietnam exported 29 million bags of coffee and we exported only 4.5 million bags. What is it that Vietnam did right, which Uganda could not? They invested in research.

We are removing the budget for research by 100 per cent from UCDA. Vietnam also invested in extension services, which cannot be done by the PDM. We are removing 81 per cent of the budget for extensive services from the Coffee sector.

Therefore, my appeal is that if we want to help, let us mainstream the PDM in all these operations. We can ask all sectors to focus their operations at the parish level instead of removing from these sectors, which are productive and putting it in what you are calling a revolving fund. Coffee production is not about a revolving fund but about production of one of our major cash –(Member timed out.)

4.09
Ms jane avur (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the clarification he has made. Before I raise my issue, I would like to make it clear that last week, when we were debating the report on UWEP, I mentioned here that the parish model is not a bad thing for Ugandans but more research needs to be done. I would like to agree with Members who have said that we need to carry out extensive studies so that the implementation of this model is done the right way.

The honourable minister has maintained that UWEP implementation will be within the parish model. I would like to thank him because he has already ring-fenced funds for UWEP and the way it will be managed.

However, I did not hear the minister indicate what funds shall be allocated to operational funds for the funds that have already been disbursed to women under UWEP. The ministry of gender will have to continue recovering what has already been disbursed. How much? They need to allocate some money for that money to be recovered because as he already mentioned, this is a revolving fund. For it to work, there has to be continued mentoring, supervision and monitoring of the groups.

Therefore, I would like to appeal that as we plan to implement the parish model, we need to budget for operational funds for the success of this model. Thank you.

4.12
Mr tonny ayoo (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the clarifications he has made on the PDM while urging Parliament to support that we implement it this year. First of all, I would like to find out from the minister whether he is sure that all the sub-counties that are in this country have got the capacity to operate and also support these parishes. Are they strong enough to run the programme? 

There are parishes and subcounties that have been newly created and this programme is to be based at subcounty level. It is still at parish levels but it would need support from both the subcounties and the district because they will help in quite a number of things while implementing the programme. It is not going to remain to only one person or the team at the parish. It is true that we need to strengthen the people at parish level to be in charge of their own development and manage it.

However, it is the responsibility of Parliament to advise Government so that if there is any intervention we are going to make, which is pro-poverty eradication, it must be an intervention, which is well thought of, planned and implemented. 

If it is a matter of saying, “let us go ahead, implement it without caring about what the outcome is” - if we fail, then we will look for another programme. Government must be ready to listen to Parliament.

What is the hurry? When we were handling the education curriculum here, Government did not listen to Parliament to first wait and study it. They went on to implement –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Please, conclude.

Mr ayoo: Thank you, Madam Speaker. How far have we gone with implementing the education curriculum? I would think that to pick money from PRDP, UCDA, Luwero, Rwenzori for revolving funds at parish level - Dealing with money is one of the most difficult things. Of all the pillars of parish model, we choose a revolving fund; yet, you know that money is not easy to deal with. I would think Government should rethink this. 

Give yourselves a year, train, prepare and develop the attitude of the people to manage this so that when we implement it, it is going to fight and eradicate poverty at parish level. If we do not, just a year after that, you will come here. 

The same thing happened with Emyooga. We implemented it in hurry and now, we are stuck. In my constituency, district and most of Lango, people have not received money up to now. There is too much confusion because things are not streamlined.

Madam Speaker, we are not stopping the programme but please, get ready and give yourselves time. We need about one year and then, implement it the next financial year with more resources put together to support the parish model for transforming Uganda. Thank you. 

4.15
Mr dononzio kahonda (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the PDM. I would like to also thank the minister for giving more clarification. These are clarifications that honourable members requested for.

For any development project to take place, there must be inclusiveness and this is the only project where there is inclusiveness. As an advocate for local economic development, inclusiveness is very key. This is where all key players are included.

Regarding the source of funding, the country must get funding from its own basket. Where else do we expect funding from? Are we now going to process a loan in order to fund this programme? The country must get what is available within our basket.

These programmes like the Luwero-Rwenzori programme, NUSAF and PRDP have been going on year in, year out and they have been receiving funding. When will Busoga, Ankole or Kigezi get its own programme? This is the only programme that is going to balance the regions.

Lastly, I would propose a five per cent budget cut across all sectors because this is the only programme that is going to involve all Ugandans to participate and benefit equally. Thank you. 

4.18
Ms margaret baba diri (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the clarification he has given.

I would like to get some clarification on three things. First, I am happy that UWEP money will remain as it is; whether at district or parish level. There must be more women in its management. When it goes to the parish, it must be called Parish UWEP money; and the same with the youth. There should be nothing like mixing it up and people using it randomly. That way, we can support it.

Secondly, registering SACCOs is a nightmare. You have to fill forms, have the laws and come to Microfinance Support Centres to get the certifications. Is there anyway of simplifying the process of registering SACCOs so that the parish level can have them as quickly as possible with minimal money, since they might demand for a lot of money from our people? 

Could I be assured that each parish will have its own agricultural extension workers so that they are able to reach all the farmers? Otherwise, if we remain at subcounty level, the work will be a lot and the issue will remain the same without supporting the farmers. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.20 
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for making these eight clarifications. I would like to support the PDM.
Last week, when we were here, we came up with these clarifications. I can see now that we have gone back to add up more things. One of the clarifications we had given the minister is what my colleagues have come up with; the issue of piloting. We need to pilot every programme. 

I request the ministry to start piloting in regions, where we know the poverty levels to be high such as Karamoja, Bukedi and Busoga for the first year and then, we see how it is going to work. 

The minister told us that they are going to carry out training for the parish chiefs. I hope the Minister of Local Government is going to do overhauling of parish chiefs. They have been sucked into the community and are corrupt. Most of them are drunkards. If we are going to leave this programme in their hands, we are not going to yield fruits out of it. Therefore, we need a thorough comprehensive training for these chiefs to know that this is a serious programme that has to be monitored and achieved at the end of the day.

The challenge we have been facing in the commissions and ministries is the issue of administrative costs. I believe this parish model is going to help us to save money where the people of the ministry have all the time to go up to Nakapiripirit and spend money and nights in Mbale, before they arrive in Nakapiripirit, when the money is channelled directly to the parishes. We are doing a lot of saving. Hence, administrative costs will be reduced and this programme will also save us, as Members of Parliament because money is going deep to the constituency. It will also help our people at the grassroots. 
I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

4.22
MS DOROTHY AZAIRWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues to thank the minister of finance for his presentation. 

I would like to say that it is good that we have heard that this parish model is going to form SACCOs. I have participated in the formation of subcounty SACCOs. I would like to ask my honourable minister what happened to subcounty SACCOs that now they have resorted to the formation of parish SACCOs? Did they succeed? Are they still in place? Have they helped the people? Why are we jumping from what we started and going to a new thing without studying the mistakes we made? 

This money is called a revolving fund. The UWEP money has been interest free for the first year and it has been 5 per cent for the rest of the years, as you cross one year. I would like to understand if this revolving fund at parish level is going to have an interest? Who is going to pay for it? How is it going to be monitored? 

I would like to ask the minister of finance to give us an example where this parish model has worked successfully so that we roll out this money for the whole country. I support that it is paramount in the first year. Let us have model areas where we can practise. If we see that it is working, then, we can roll it out to the whole country but if we collect all this money in one basket and take it to the SACCOs at the village level, it disappears. We will have lost a lot because this money is going to be allocated to the whole country. It is better for us to have areas to do for the first year and then after we roll, when we have seen that it can earn something for our country. Otherwise, the money is going to disappear in the hands of the technocrats at the sub parish level. I thank you. 

4.25 
MS HARRIET BUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those that have thanked the minister for the elaborative take through of what the parish model entails. 

I personally support it because I come from Hoima District, which was blessed with very big subcounties and parishes. The UWEP we are talking about and the youth fund has not yielded very good results because of the scope. The population is very high. For example, when you go to Kigorobya Subcounty, it has a population of close to 80,000 people. Therefore, when you want to roll out a project and you say it is supposed to uplift the livelihoods of the people at subcounty and district level, then, it becomes unrealistic. The people just watch and do not earn anything out of it. 

I support the parish model. However, I am seeking clarification from our Minister of Local Government. Some of our big parishes have been elevated to subcounty status but these lower administrative units have not yet got courts. I would like to hear from the Minister of Local Government details of how this will be done. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.27 
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, I would like to put figures to some of these arguments. The report presented to this Parliament by the Committee of Presidential Affairs says, “Money that was geared towards regional equalisation…” 

This is how it has been affected; let me start with northern Uganda, which has had Shs 22.5 billion. It is going to remain with Shs 2.3 billion and the rest of the money is going to be taken away. 

Busoga Region has always had Shs 10.8 billion but now, it is going to remain with Shs 3.3 billion. The rest is being taken away – 

THE SPEAKER: Are they taking away the Busoga money? 

MR KIVUMBI: Yes, they are taking the Busoga money. (Laughter) Teso Region – (Interjections) – hon. Ogwal has said this is another Togyikwatako. We are saying for this one, “Tuzikwatako.”  Teso region has had Shs 15.5 billion but it is going to remain with Shs 3.57 billion. Bunyoro region had Shs 12.8 billion but is going to remain with only Shs 2.8 billion. Luwero Triangle - I do not know why this is the most hit, it had Shs 12.5 billion but is going to remain with only Shs Shs 86 million; the rest is wiped out. Karamoja Affairs has been having Shs 12.2 billion but is now going down to only Shs 2.5 billion.

Madam Speaker, this is the argument we have. The intervention is about equalisation in the poverty-ravaged areas. This is the money they have been having but they are wiping out and taking it to the revolving fund, yet, money in the revolving fund will not go towards equalization. People will use it in any way they want.

Therefore, my appeal to honourable members, together with the voices of the very many is that let us fund a study, give ourselves time - Uganda is not going away; there will be Uganda next year. We can do a thorough job. Kwarakwara affairs should end. This is a new era and a new generation; research is the only way to go. The minister wants to do business as usual but I am afraid he will get the usual results he has been getting. 
I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister. I want to say that I can only support him if he convinces Parliament that the programme is going to address political gaps. Otherwise, if he says it is supposed to address economic gaps, then he is far away from the reality.

What can a mere Shs 39 million do to a whole parish? Madam Speaker, I am an example of a person who comes from where the Chairman of Operation Wealth Creation comes from. However, when you go to the ground, you realise that wealth creation is far away from the people and the word wealth creation is far away from reality.

Therefore, I would wish that the minister found some places, which are extremely hit by poverty and made them pilot areas specifically, maybe like Nakaseke –(Interjections)– yes, or maybe Busoga region because I understand it has been hit by low prices of sugarcanes or maybe Karamoja. Otherwise, taking 39 million to a parish is just a total mockery. Thank you, Madam Speaker.
4.32
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I come from a district that survives majorly on tea planting. We have been getting seedlings from NAADS. The youth and women got money from UWEP and YLP are operating nursery beds and are expecting money. 

Now, they are taking away Shs 56 billion that is meant for procuring such things as tea seedlings. When you say you will give these people more money at the parish, yet, they cannot now get more money for the seedlings, then you are just mocking them.

Honourable minister for finance, if you cannot plan, be human. If you cannot be human, be realistic. We represent the poor you are talking about. We come from those villages and we know the circumstances under which our people live. Please, who are you working for?

The Members are telling you that you are wrong but you are insisting - whom are you working for? We are here as representatives of the people and we shall not allow you to disorganise our people. 

I want to support somebody who suggested that we should first deal with a study to identify why we have failed before we introduce a new programme. We cannot keep introducing programme after programme - we have new subcounties and town councils and they do not yet have money. I am sure the Minister of Local Government is bleeding; he came here with a list new subcounties but there is no money to fund them –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague is that hon. Kasaija, the minister of finance, is giving a subcounty Shs 12 million in a financial year to work on the roads but one kilometer consumes more than Shs 2 million using a grader. If you are giving Shs 12 million for a subcounty to work on all the roads, then why do you give Shs 38 million to a parish? Is that applicable?

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, because we could not give people money, we said the farmers should plan and have gardens before we give them seedlings. They are now waiting for seedlings in Greater Bushenyi, and not just Buhweju. The seedlings are in the beds, the operators are waiting and somebody just sits without any plan and says we shall not have money for seedlings; instead, we shall give you a revolving fund? We are very disappointed with you. 

4.36
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, I got feedback - as the Chairman of Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus, when you assigned me to deliver your message - and the family of the late Justice Cosmas Kato appreciated your support - that people are actually watching debate. 

I have five questions - I was yet to go to my senior minister of finance, who is really trying to navigate this programme - the ministry bunyoro affair was created 12 years ago as part of affirmative action. However, to-date, they do not have the affirmative action in terms of a budget and programmes.

They thought that if there is any effort in fighting poverty, which they really appreciate, our son should take the lead. We have not seen the money in the ministry of Bunyoro affairs and it is now 12 years down the road.

We have un-coded schools in the parishes of Bunyoro. We would want to see the money for those schools before we take on the PDM. The health centres II were killed. We would like to see the money for those health centres II before we raise another expectation at the parish level.

Madam Speaker, we have elected town council members and subcounty chairpersons of the newly created local government units, which are supposed to supervise these parishes but we have not found them money to operationalise. Honourable minister of finance, you remember when you came with the Minister of Local Government to the oil and gas town councils, when the Minister of Local Government had come to announce the start-up of those town councils but to-date there is no budget? The Presidential Directive on the Albertine Special Planning Area, even FID was signed but there are no physical planners and town clerks to manage those town councils. My experience on the issues of the budget is: if we are sure that Karuma is going off, the high-cost drivers of the budget - it is a one off but recruiting parish chiefs is not a one off. The minister of finance, that should be coming from you to Parliament. Yet, now it is Parliament giving the information. Uganda Revenue Authority must be wondering who informs the ministry of finance and the director of budget. 

Recruitment of these people we are talking about is not a one off. We are struggling with debt servicing and now, we are at the stage of looking for salaries. What is the plan of raising this? Possibly, I would recommend that we look into the existing resource envelope.

When we remove energy and infrastructure, what are the other high spending areas? I know there are supplementary here and there are intentions of up-scaling. There is another group of high trillion spenders in this budget. Why don’t we look there? (Interjections) I do not have to mention them; classified or not. Why don’t we look there and find money? 

As a rural development economist, I know that we have lost more wealth in post-harvest handling than in the Emyooga and all these things. The hard-working Ugandan farmers have lost more wealth because they have no value addition more than we are trying to create. What is the best thing to do? I would rather we put more money in value addition and silos to make sure that Uganda can supply the regional market, instead of trying to go down to the parish.

Finally, I think the word “parish model” is an energiser. There is nothing new in the parish. My grandfather was a chief of the late King Sir Tito and the parish was used in the Kingdom Saza model but the parish was very powerful in food security, cash crops and primary healthcare. This is the model I would want to defend.

Remember, 25 years ago, when we introduced decentralisation, they were working with the parishes. It is our Government, which stopped recruiting parish chiefs and killed the health centres II. What is the new story? Why don’t we do the right packaging and concede?

Possibly, the Government is coming before Parliament to say they are sorry; we killed the parishes and now, we want to revamp them. That would be better packaging. Otherwise, it is not something new; it has worked before under the kingdoms working with the colonial Government. It has also been working under the decentralisation model with the district subcounty model. It also worked with the National Development Plan I, II and III. Madam Speaker, the budget conference starts from a parish; the planning area is the parish.

I remember very well minister Suruma attempted to get data from the parish. I want to request that we - the piloting is not something new but what we need is to tell the country the truth. We have not been investing there.

Madam Speaker, I end by saying: why don’t we use regional effort and affirmative action of those regions, which by the Constitution formed this country; Article 178 of the Constitution talks about equalisation. The Busoga, Bunyoro, Karamoja, Teso should put their money in their regional effort. In Bunyoro Affairs, we know our parishes and we shall reach them and trickle down to percolate and fight poverty. Thank you.

4.43
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM,    Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A few minutes ago, you informed this House that hon. Kasamba was a coffee champion and initiated the Parliamentary Coffee platform. It is unfortunate that as we praise him for that, we are trying to kill what he yearned for.

You are removing over Shs 58 billion from coffee. However, we need to know what the country wants and where we want to go. We have not yet achieved the intentions of Vision 2030, as far as the coffee roadmap is concerned. 

In February, this year, we exported 562,000 bags of coffee worth $50.55 million, just in one month, which was the highest export per month, over 30 years. We should be trying to find ways of how we can up that export to $100million per month. Why did we export $50 million, a month in February, from coffee? Possibly, it could be because of the interventions we have been making.

Currently, if the problem was dumping at the subcounty, then the point of delivery of this same input should be a parish; delivering the same inputs.

I also expected the minister maybe with this vision to inform Parliament of how many ministries are going to be scrapped. You cannot have a ministry with a budget of Shs 87 million, like Luwero, Rwenzori and you have a minister. Another is Busoga and Karamoja with a budget of Shs 2 billion. Yet, Kampala City Council Authority - I looked at the report - the Director of KCCA is going to get Shs 700 million, worth of a vehicle yet, you are giving Luwero-Rwenzori Shs 87 million. Why the punishment, unless this is being looked at in another way? Otherwise, if the intention – yesterday, I heard the Minister of Finance in a committee saying that corruption is not easy to deal with. 

By taking money to the parish, you are supporting corruption. If there is any project that this country has ever come up with to support corruption, it is the PDM because you are removing money from inputs and delivering it in cash. Can you give us feedback about how much money has been recovered from UWEP and YLF? Probably, if people have misused this money, they should  be imprisoned. We should also increase the budget of the prisons because almost every person is going to be imprisoned.

Our problem is not money. The way this money has been packaged looks as if it is political. People will say, “The other time you had Emyooga and groups were being formed at a parish. Now more money is coming up.” People are even setting up private SACCOs.

4.418
MR MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA    (Independent, Workers Representative, National): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for coming up with this parish model. My concern here, as many have said, is that we have had a lot of trials to support the Wanainchi or the people of this country. That is the reason why a lot has been tried out. Among the tried out are wealth creation, Entandikwa, Emyooga among others. However, at this point, we need to evaluate ourselves and find out why we have failed.

Recently, I heard someone requesting that we need to have a proper accountability and forensic audit on what happened with the Emyooga. Before we come up with a new model – because I do not think his concern has been addressed - we are now moving on to the PDM. – What went wrong with all those, so that we can put things right?

What I know is that we are not concerned about piloting because if we were to pilot, we would then move a long way to success. On top of that, I know that if we are to use the PDM, we cannot ignore the LC1 chairpersons of the villages that make up a parish. These are the people who know the residents in their villages and they are the people who would give recommendations.

However, when you go to the local government responsibilities, you find that the LC1 is a political person, who is a volunteer. They do not earn salary. If they do not earn a salary, yet, they are the people to give recommendations that they know Rwabushaija; that she is from this village and, is therefore, part of the people in this parish to get money - 

If they are to recommend and yet, they are not earning because they are supposed to be volunteers; according to the Local Government Act, then we will be the people to bribe them with money, so that they can write the recommendation letters that we want. 

That way, we will be failing completely because that will be corruption being engineered right from the village. Something must be done about this. We must move transparently if we are to support the people of this nation. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We can have hon. Centenary, Alum, Kilak – no, you have just arrived, first sit because you have just come in. (Laughter) I have seen all of you; you all want to talk. 

4.51
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister for finance, thank you for the PDM. 

I would like you to take whatever we are advising here in good faith, because you will end up going down in the history of this country as the minister of finance, who hopped from model to model to model, and ended up succeeding in none. (Laughter) If we try to advise you, please, take it in good faith and listen to us.

I would like to propose that you halt this programme; give it a more scientific look, learn lessons from the existing programmes such as the one that has been implemented in Busoga and Rwenzori and then, come up with a more appropriate model that is going to be rolled out to the entire nation.

There is Shs 200 billion from the agri-led programme - you should know how we suffered to ensure that this programme takes off and it was an affirmative programme. Rwenzori has suffered, for Christ’s sake.

How are you going to ensure equity in these war-ravaged areas? We suffered ADF, floods and so many things and now, you want to take away even the little that we have been implementing successfully - instead of recapitalising and adding us more funds? 

I can advise you. State House spent Shs 590 billion, over and above the Shs 410 billion that was allocated to it. Is that one of your priorities? Don’t you think we can cut some money from State House and put it into production in this country; so that your people - whom you are charged with and whose welfare you are entirely charged with – become economically active and productive and pay taxes, which will facilitate the Government to run?

You need to look through this thing very carefully, because before we even do our forensic audit for Emyooga, you are now bringing the PDM. This model is a very good one but it can be financed through – for instance – the planning process which starts at the village level. It can go up to the PDM and you incorporate that money in the budget of the Ministry of Local Government, if you really want to implement it. However, do not suffocate ministries that already exist.

For instance, how do you create a ministry for Luwero-Rwenzori affairs and then, you give them Shs 86 million to run a whole ministry? That is not even what the President spends on his fleet on a daily basis.

You pretend that you have a ministry for Luwero-Rwenzori and that you are trying to uplift people from poverty in Luwero, after causing trouble there. Government knows why it created a specific ministry for Luwero-Rwenzori. It is the duty of Government to finance and increase the budget of Luwero-Rwenzori. If you cannot increase it, leave it as it is. 

Money for the AGRI-LED programme should be maintained and implemented, because you should not kill an initiative that was started before it even starts. We need our money; this is our money. 

We have told the people in Rwenzori and Luwero that the money is coming. Before it reaches, you want to put it in a central pool, where there is not going to be equity. You are not even sure where that money is going to be allocated.

A parish is a good unit of implementation but please, do not misuse it. I have seen the seven pillars you have put about the parish development model. No one disagrees with those pillars; that is the modus operandi at parish level. However, it is not justification for suffocating ministries, agencies and departments of Government; that are already implementing successfully, simply because you want to create a pool. Kindly, look elsewhere and leave our money alone.

I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow your colleagues to speak?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was seated in this House, when the minister presented the PDM and when he presented clarifications that had been demanded.

Immediately after, the chairperson of the Committee on Budget raised a very fundamental issue about the lack of funding. He questioned the source of funds for this PDM. He indicated that nowhere in the budget, well aware that we are coming to the tail end of the budget process, had the ministry of finance, who are the sole owners of the budget, presented this PDM to our responsible Committee on Budget.

Madam Speaker, well aware that this House has a Committee on Budget, whose chairperson has informed this House about the lack of a source of funds for this model, are we procedurally right to continue burning the midnight candle to bring out all the good ideas; well aware that our rules prohibit debate in anticipation? 

Are we procedurally right to continue debating, when we know very well that we are flogging a dead horse?  (Laughter)  We are simply here, given opportunity to talk about it and aware that we could even have a full year to prepare, sensitise, arrange and even avail the funds for the full operationalisation of this parish fund.

Madam Speaker, are we procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the decision on whether to wait or start will depend on the outcome of this debate. Let us remember they are contributing. (Applause) There are issues that have come to light today, including the source of funds – including Busoga - This money was painfully secured one financial year ago. 

4.58
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for attempting to make clarifications. However, in some areas, he even confused issues more. 

First of all, in development terms, when you are describing a development strategy as a model, it must have been something which was tested, which people can learn from. This thing is not tested and no one can yet learn from it. It is just a strategy. When it is tested and it works well, then we can say it is a model because it is something that people can learn from. For this one, however, no one can learn from it. 

Secondly, the reason I said the minister also complicated some issues; after being prompted by my colleague, hon. Kibalya, about the size of the parishes, he stated that where you find the parishes are very big, you divide them. I am happy the Minister of Local Government is here. We have a letter to all responsible persons stating that creation of administrative units is halted. Therefore, which one are you going to use to support those big parishes? There is nothing to talk about that.

We are talking of engaging workers at the subcounty level. What is happening now is that the eyes of many of these civil servants are on fixed projects, which come to their areas. They have forgotten their traditional work. That is why as we are looking at projects, which are moving, the traditional work of civil servants is being stifled. The public servants are doing nothing in that respect. How are we going to make sure that both of them are done?

I stated here that if these programmes, at their small levels, have failed, how are we sure that when we merge them, they will succeed? Are we now going to bring staff from heaven? Are we not going to use the same group of people who have made other programmes to fail?

For me, first of all, let us not even talk about a model. It is alright that we have the parish and strategy but let us first test it to make sure it has succeeded. Then, we can say it is a model and other people can learn from it and copy. Thank you. 

5.01
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the minister of finance, for addressing some of the concerns that were raised by this House, more especially about the women’s fund. I, once again, thank him for addressing the issue of the women council getting involved in this money. 

However, the PDM has failed even before it started. Our parishes are unique in their own way. For example, they are unique in size, population and even programmes. Look at the coffee sector; it is a technical enterprise which needs some kind of technical backing. Look at the women’s fund - it has been doing very well but it is being lumped together with other programmes. So, because of the uniqueness of these programmes and the uniqueness of the parishes, I see that if we go ahead without a study, this programme will fail. It has already failed after all. (Laughter)

I would like to give an illustration from my district. Aramita Parish in Ngai Subcounty, Oyam District, has 30 villages. Another example is Wirao Parish; it has 17 villages with 11,000 people. We have Adyegi Parish with 6,000 people. If we are going to give a uniform amount of money, it means some of these parishes will not benefit much.

Honourable minister, this is an illustration to show you that this project just sprung from wherever it did without any study or due consideration. I would like to join my colleagues in saying that this is a very good programme. We are all passionate about money reaching our people but first do a thorough study on the PDM so that our people gain from it.

Finally, the parish executive committee needs a lot of training. It is because people of different backgrounds will constitute the parish executive committee. If they are just brought in without any training or skills, these programmes will not go far. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving the House the time it deserves to handle this important subject. 

5.05
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Instead, I would like the minister to come to the House and explain to the Members the performance of past the money allocated to various programmes in this country. History is very important. We need to learn from the past and compare it with the present. We shall then be in position to predict the future. 

We allocated money to programmes like Entandikwa. What were the impacts of Entandikwa on the population? We have PRDP in northern Uganda, SAGE, YLP, UWEP, Operation Wealth Creation, NUSAF I, NUSAF II, NUSAF III and Bonna Bagaggawale.

If you are introducing programme after programmes, I feel we need to slow down. We need to study the impact of that money. The minister may not be aware that we have groups of schemers in Uganda right from the ministry of finance. I am very sure that they have already schemed how much they are going to benefit from this money. I think taking the money to the parishes is very risky for our people. 

Finally, I remember two months ago, Gen. Salim Saleh asked for the accountability for the Emyooga funds. He asked for the accountability before the people received the money. We wondered why he would ask for accountability before giving the money to the community. People from my district applied for this money. Teachers cried for this money and now the Government is asking for the accountability before giving the funds to the community. 

Let us slow down. Let us first study the performance of the past money given to other programmes and then, we take a decision. On this case, let us hold on. Let us slow down and be systematic in our planning for the betterment of Uganda. I beg to move. 

5.08
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Even with the clarifications that the honourable minister has presented this afternoon, there is still a glaring assumption that the conception of this parish model was not given proper study. For example, you realise that a parish is a very well understood administrative unit throughout the country. The PDM the minister presented before assumes that the whole country has got the same poverty levels, which is not true. 

It assumes that there are parish chiefs throughout all the parishes in the country. It is only today that he has noticed that these people do not exist.

It also assumed that there were SACCOs. It is only today that they are saying they are going to start training and registering them. For that matter, these facts, which have not been studied need to be given some time.

It is not true that throughout the country, the poverty levels are the same and therefore, when you implement a parish model, it is going to bring all the over 60 per cent of the people to the cash economy.
There are some regions, which have attempted to implement commercial agriculture but there are others that are lying so much below the poverty lines. The eastern region is most hit and so, we cannot just say we are giving Shs 30 million to every parish in the country. There will be no equity or anything trying to bring up those regions that are already languishing in poverty.

It has been repeated several times and the Minister of Local Government is here. A moratorium was put on the creation of more administrative units. In Pallisa District, there is a subcounty, which is made up of only one parish. Now, they are not allowing creation of any more administrative units.

Imagine that parish called Kibale Parish, Kibale Subcounty, which is going to be rated the same throughout the country. There are certain things, which need to be understood –(Member timed out.)– 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR OSEKU: Madam Speaker, let Government be honest. Honourable minister for Local Government, I can see a lot of work being directed towards you, which I am not very sure that you are comfortable with.  We need to be honest, come out and be clear that this is either possible now or not.

The 6,000 parish chiefs are not yet there and districts have no budget to recruit them. They have just finished recruiting people recently with the little money they had. Where are they going to get money to recruit more in the next two months, which you are saying that between May and June, you are going to put these people in place? Please, stop deceiving the country.

As I conclude, most members here have expressed the view of Parliament that we appreciate this model. All you need to do is go and give it more study and bring it back. There is no need to hurry. People have been there already; they are surviving in their own way but it would be better that we intervene in a way that is able to uplift them rather than again reverse the trend and status of these people to even be a worse situation than they are in now. I beg to submit.

5.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister because he has given us a good report at the wrong time. The chairperson of the budget committee was very clear on the source of funding. A new financial year is starting in the next two months. 

During the planning process, no minister came to tell us there is a PDM. I am on the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development but I also just heard about it through osmosis.

One programme, which is very dangerous to what we call regional equalisation programme of Government is this. We all know that Teso, where I come from, there was cattle rustling and poverty levels are high. There was insurgency and an affirmative action programme that the Government started. They talked about Shs 15 billion but now, it is shocking to hear that it is going to be only Shs 3 billion.

You give from here and give a red card there. It is very bad. This programme is a way of giving us a red card. It is giving a red card to Busoga, Teso, Luwero, Rwenzori and Northern Uganda as well as Karamoja. It is giving a red card to the women programme in this country. (Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Abala, the information I would like to give you is that whereas the ministry of finance is giving a red card to Busoga, Teso and others, they are also giving themselves a bonanza; to them, it is a green card. For instance, this financial year, the ministry of finance has cut money from all these entities but given themselves Shs 10 billion for a get-together party for their staff after pushing through this parish model. 

They have also given Shs 56 billion to develop –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I am normally very polite and humble to this House. However, when a whole Member of Parliament stands on the podium and tells a blatant lie that we have fixed money in the budget for us to go and celebrate when this PDM is passed, is he in order? Can he bring the evidence to show that I have budgeted money for celebrating when we pass this parish model?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Othieno, the allegations are serious. Can you substantiate?

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, I am speaking from a document, which is in the possession of the budget committee. If given time, there are even much more allocations that the ministry of finance - we would not like the country to know.

I am speaking with authority based on information produced by the ministry of finance submitted to this House through the budget committee. I am ready to lay it on the Table tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ABALA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, grass thatched houses are found in Busoga, Teso, as you go to Lira and West Nile. This programme stipulates that all of us are developing at the same time, which is not true.  As David Abala, I will not support this, unless we study it further. By the way, when developing a programme, we must initiate it and do a study, plan, implement and close it. How do you jump straight to implementation without understanding the dynamics involved in some of those places in this country? 

I have been a lecturer for a while and that is why I am sure of what we are talking about. I would like to finally say that this programme is a good one but it is not appropriate right now. It is out of the proper circle of Government – I do not know if I should call it smuggling but it is not a good one. We should probably wait until next year. 

5.20 
MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When all the Members stand here to talk, they love the word PDM. It sounds good but is it clear? 

I am a teacher by profession and in teaching, when you are dealing with a topic, you must study it, teach the students and let them understand. What is happening in the country? We have Emyooga today and tomorrow, we have the PDM. Where are we putting our people? They do not understand anything. 

People in Rubanda asked me what is happening to Emyooga. Some have not yet received the money and some injected in some money because they were being requested to do so when they opened accounts. They still have questions but now, we are telling them that we have come up with the PDM. Why are we disturbing our people? Why are we taking them for granted? Why are we pushing them to the last drop? It is a question that we all need to ask. 

We all love the PDM. I love it in Rubanda because I think it will help my people but are we doing it the right way? Madam Speaker, I stand with the people saying that we should study the PDM; let us do research. 

One of the things killing us is that we are not doing research. We wake up in the morning and talk about something; when we feel it sounds good, we want to implement it immediately. However, we are pushing our people to the last drop. The day they will stand up to talk, they will talk against us. I pray that we help our people through consultation; study the PDM and evaluate it. 

I thought that when we came back from the elections, we were going to be given a clear report about Emyooga so that when I go back to Rubanda, I know what to explain to my people. Nonetheless, I do not know what to explain to them. I wonder how I am going to go and start talking about the PDM. At the end of the day, how will I go back to evaluate it? 

The reason I stand here to support the UWEP money is because we are seeing something. That is even why they wanted to put it in the PDM; because they are seeing something –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude. 

MS AKAMPULIRA: They see and feel the impact of UWEP. If you want to feel the impact of the Parish Model, we need to do thorough research. We need to study, understand and then implement. We need to stop jumping from one to two to three because we shall end up repeating the class and we will never achieve what we want. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.23
MS GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The PDM is a true duplication of the programmes that have been happening. I will give an example. Tell me any project that has been happening like UWEP or NAADS, where you find that those people that have benefitted do not belong to a district, a subcounty, a parish or a village. What new thing are you bringing? The people who have benefitted from UWEP belong to a parish, a district and a village. What are you bringing on the table? 

Madam Speaker, my biggest concern, like other Members have said, is, before bringing the PDM, let us first evaluate. We need to get to know what happened to Bona Baggagawale, where people became poorer and poorer. What happened to that programme? 

Honourable minister Kasaija, can you come here with a list of people who have become rich because of Bona Baggagawale Programme stating the village and names of those people? If people have become rich, why are you duplicating another programme? Why shouldn’t you stick to Bona Baggagawale? 

These programmes have completely failed and that is why you are trying to come up with a new shell. They are the same programmes and you should not fool Ugandans.

Before we even think about the PDM, we need to first remodel the parish chiefs themselves. A long time ago, a parish chief was admired; the way he would dress and articulate matters. You now find these parish chiefs wearing sandals; one black and another green, seated somewhere playing cards. You find them in torn suits but this is the same person who is supposed to preside over the programme; look at it and evaluate. What went wrong in this country? 

Madam Speaker, I am happy my Member of Parliament, hon. Magyezi is here because we still have town councils in his constituency. They were elevated to town councils but they are still getting funds as subcounties. We have very many unfunded priorities. They created parishes under those subcounties that were elevated but they do not have money; they are still operating as villages. 

We should not rush this. Unless the minister and the team have ill intentions of killing this country, they should not bring us the PDM. Let us remain where we are. For God and my country.            

5.28
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the response he has given because there is a bit of consideration for the women fund and the youth fund.

Madam Speaker, my understanding in his response is that the minister has started conceding about the implication of amalgamation. We said having UWEP Fund and the Youth Fund amalgamated would affect service delivery and he has conceded.

Honourable minister, we request that you do the same for others because it is the same voice that we are using. My worry is that putting all eggs in one basket is more risky to my Government. Should the boat start to sink, balancing becomes the problem. I cherish my Government and I pray that the powers of my Government are sustained.

We have been having hopes in some of these programmes because of the differences in management. Therefore, amalgamation of funds is not the best option now.

Secondly, my understanding is that this financial year, we are experiencing fundamental changes. We are still struggling with the effects of programme-based budgeting where all related activities have to be aligned - the activity itself including the funding. We are still struggling with how we are going to cope up because of the way we are operating our budget up to date.

Madam Speaker, to add this, which to me is like an uncle to programme-based budgeting because amalgamation is a factor that cuts across - this cannot be applied in every activity. For example, constructing a road in northern Uganda needs different strategies compared to mindset change. If you are going to amalgamate these things and it needs people of different capacity, the strategies would not be the same.

The common thing is that we want to transform but the strategies are not the same and they need different amounts of money. Madam Speaker, as Adjumani District, through other affirmative programmes, my subcounties, which are benefiting under refugees support, a subcounty that has a construction of a school, health centre and a road, gets more than Shs 30 million.

Therefore, saying that taking Shs 30 million to a parish is going to transform our society to me is not ideal. I support taking services nearer to the people. Transformation of our society needs a lot of money.

I would wish to hear from the minister; have we failed to get enough money to reach the parishes? We are ready to go to the parishes but we do not need Shs 30 million. We need more money.

Madam Speaker, I have one cry. This aspect of taking services to the parish is good but the halt on creation new administrative units is also sabotage to the progress. I request that the Ministry of Local Government should lift the ban at least at parish level - if we can create parishes where they are too big. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.34
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting a paper that was seemingly better than he had earlier presented.

I had been convinced that this was going to work but I am dismayed by the statement from the budget committee that there is no money. 

Honorable minister, you are the minister of finance, what is wrong with your coordination? I thought that the paper he had presented - I was ready to support it but there is no money. This is a white elephant that we are debating. I want to know before I proceed whether the money is there or not and from where are you getting that money? Is it from agriculture, coffee?

Secondly, is it true that you have not provided money to subcounties and town councils we have just created, when you presented the certificate of financial implication? If you have not provided money, what are you doing here? You just come and just initiate a debate that is going to end nowhere.

Madam Speaker, can I allow the minister to clarify on those questions so that maybe I can proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please, clarify on the source of funding; I want to know about all those funds in detail.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, for this important debate. As the debate rages on, on how we can uplift the 3.2 million households who are in the subsistence economy into the money economy, I think it is the duty of the ministry and all of us that we debate with facts. As we speak, there is no proposal before Parliament that is not backed by resources.

We have allocated Shs 453.3 billion to cater for the proposed PDM under Local Government. That resource has been submitted and it is with you Members of Parliament as you debate this matter in your different committees.

There was a question of whether we got out the money for the programme of Busoga or not. The resources for Busoga, we are maintaining the base. Therefore, the money that we are talking about- 

There was a also an issue of hon. Kivumbi who said - you know, when you do this PDM, you are actually removing money. I just want to give an example of Busoga, you see in Busoga region, where there are 810 parishes. Currently, we have been allocating for wealth funds of Shs 10 billion but with the parish model, 38x810 means that Busoga, for example, will now access Shs 30.9 billion.

Honourable colleagues, the people of Uganda we want to serve are in the parishes, not at the districts or in heaven but in your parishes. You also asked about the source of funding. Out of the studies and experiences we have had, we took a decision that we should merge all the wealth funds that we are running currently.

So, the source of the Shs 453.3 billion is UCDA, Shs 58 billion, AGRI-LED Shs 200 billion; NAADS, Shs 56 billion; Luwero, Shs 9.3 billion; PRDP, Shs 98 billion; and the women fund, which we have explained - how it will work Shs 32 billion.

Colleagues, there has been a debate here on whether we should continue distributing tree seedlings or provide funds and then the people who are involved to have access to them. That is what we are doing - (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I have the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Presidency, Ministry of Kampala City Council Authority and Metropolitan Affairs, Kampala Capital City Authority and Office of the Prime Minister and on page 44 it reads: “…interventions geared toward regional equalisation of Busoga subregion require Shs 10.8 billion but only Shs 3.3 billion is provided resulting into a funding gap of Shs 7.5 billion making it difficult to support the equalisation effort for Busoga sub-region.”

Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to give misleading information to Members of Parliament that there is money for Busoga, yet, the report signed by the required number of Members of Parliament shows otherwise?

THE SPEAKER: What do you say about that, minister? Is the money there or not?

MR BAHATI: Honourable colleague, you are a good friend and now that hon. Ssewungu has given me a point of order –(Interjections)– one point of order is enough, my friend.

THE SPEAKER: Allow hon. Kibalya to raise another point of order.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This information is good for the minister if he has to help this country. I want to help the Prime Minister because he cannot talk. I will read this part from the report verbatim: “…intervention geared towards regional equalisation of northern Uganda requires Shs 22.15 billion but only Shs 2.2 billion is provided resulting into a funding gap of Shs 19.2 billion making it difficult to support and reintegrate Lords Resistance Army war victims in northern Uganda.”

We cannot read all of them; if we bring all the regions, Teso, Bunyoro is here - Bunyoro is supposed to have Shs 12.83 billion but only Shs 2.8 has been provided.

Among what he has quoted and the source of funding he has talked about - he cannot talk about these ones - is it right for the full minister of finance to mislead this august House, which is requesting to help him to put things right and eradicate poverty?

We are all in the struggle of fighting poverty but the minister is sugar-coating and smearing this to mislead the whole country.

Therefore, is it in order for the minister to avoid the document that he based on to submit his request and instead begin bringing in new things while hiding what is true and allowing a lie to prevail?

DR BUKENYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was here two weeks ago asking for road equipment for 15 districts equivalent to Shs 47 billion but the ministry of finance said they do to have that money. Now, they want to go to the homesteads and give them Shs 70,000 and bring development?

What more can bring development rather than a good road, which allows people to access the market? Is the minister in order to go and give little money and leave the fundamental things of infrastructure? If you add the money going to 15 districts, you get the money to buy roads equipment, yet, this is the money from which hon. Bahati and hon. Kasaija want to give Shs 70,000 to give each homestead. Are they in order to come and mislead us by giving us wrong information?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, you have heard the complaints. Please, answer.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, this revolving fund at the parish level is not for distribution per household; it is to support economic activities for those involved in them at the parish level. It is not that when you put Shs 30 million, then, you are distributing.

It is also important to note - I am a student of mathematics. I do not know whether zero is greater than 30 - at the moment there is zero money at the parish but we are putting 30 per cent and then, you say it is little? What is it that you are talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we want clarification on the affirmative action funds.

MR BAHATI: We took a decision to avoid duplication of these wealth creation funds and so, we decided to merge them so that we have an impact across all the parishes. So, the Shs 453.3 billion, which we are allocating under the parish model, will come from UCDA, agro-led - that is all consolidated - NAADS seedlings, Luwero, PRDP and the women fund.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, with whom did you discuss your proposals before you brought them? Was it with the stakeholders or their leaders? You just took a decision with a pen and said, “okay, now remove all this money?”

MR BAHATI: We have been discussing with the stakeholders.

THE SPEAKER: Which ones?

MR BAHATI:  For example, NAADS.

THE SPEAKER: But I have not been invited, yet, I am a stakeholder too.

MR BAHATI: Also, there is a formal way of submitting Government proposals and the formal way of submitting proposals for Members of Parliament to consider is through the budget and the budget is with us. We are discussing it and getting valuable contribution.

In our lifetime, how do we improve the quality of life and remove the 3.2 million households, two out of every five households in Uganda live in subsistence. Should we wait for another year? Somebody asked “What is the urgency now?” Honourable colleagues, when you go to your parishes, you know the challenges you face. A women’s group is asking you for funding. A youth group is asking you for funding. We are saying that let us put the money at the parish and for once, abolish these demons of poverty in our country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kaberuka, please, conclude. 

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister of finance should be helped and I think he should listen to be helped. The problem is not changing money from pocket A to pocket B. The issue is to look for money and put it at the parish model but not killing the coffee sector, which you had started. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the other day, we were celebrating a great reap in terms of coffee production because of the interventions. Have you reached the climax to the extent that you now want to kill coffee? Are you saying coffee should not go to parish level? Should we stop growing coffee?

Madam Speaker, if it is about the PDM, nobody should indict Parliament and try to insinuate that Parliament is fighting this model. The model is good the way it is but let us get money. 

I have heard that there is a bonanza. Hon. Kasaija, let the bonanza come here and we put it in the PDM. Let us get money from where we have Shs 7 trillion and we put it in the PDM. Let us not touch the money that is already doing something and try to disguise it.

THE SPEAKER: Where is hon. Akamba? 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I would like to help hon. Kaberuka. He was requesting the minister that instead of picking money from regions and coffee, we get the money for bonanza.

The same ministry has money for zebra crossings; around Shs 9 billion. (Laughter) Even the same ministry is going to plant palm trees and issue irrigation guidelines, which is above Shs 50 billion. We have sources of funds but they do not want to touch that side. They only want to squeeze some small areas.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, through your guidance, let the budget committee be given authority to cut this money, where it is and we put it in the PDM that we want. Let us not disguise with these people who are here, trying to sweet-talk us. Yet, the money is lying somewhere and they are simply trying to sweet-talk the people of Uganda.

It is in good faith that we get money that is lying in those areas, other than touching money that would help Busoga and Luwero to grow and try to lie to the people that you are taking the money. 

Hon. Bahati, I support the PDM entirely. If this model is to work, let us do it with intention, not disguising ourselves. Honourable minister, we get like Shs 10 billion from security. We can even get Shs 1 trillion from there and put it at the parish level. It will change the whole thing, if you want development. If we want to eradicate poverty, let us not pretend. Let us get to real issues.

Madam Speaker, I am submitting that this arrangement is good but let us empower the budget committee to get money and then, they come here and tell us, where they have made cuts. I have talked to the Minister of Local Government but there is no money so far, for these newly created local government units. Yet, the councillors have been elected through the Electoral Commission. There is no money.
We want commitment from the ministry of finance now that local government units that you created have funding, before we go there.

Let us remove money from where it is and we close the chapter. Let us empower the budget committee to cut this money without reservation and put it in the PDM, without tampering with other programmes that are moving on well. Thank you.

5.52
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to comment on the brilliant idea that the minister has made, which will take a process to work.

Honourable minister, remember you are a member of Parliament like us and you get the same phone calls. As we leave this evening, I think each of us may get about 50 missed calls from people who want help.

I want the minister to know that if such a project happens, it will rescue the politicians. However, I want to say this. Before we jump, we have approximately 1,000 newly created subcounties, which do not have offices; they are incomplete. 

We have almost 10,000 parishes. If you look at these subcounties that are not completed; for example, there are district hospitals with no mortuary. Look at this problem. We are creating problems on top of problems. We are jumping here and there. Therefore, in order to make this system for the PDM, let each and every step be completed. Otherwise, I think our country will need help. We must complete everything before we move. I want to support this, if all these things are progressively done right. Thank you very much.

5.54
MR PAUL AKAMBA (NRM, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for having good intentions. You have brought this model in good faith. However, my understanding is that you have not taken trouble to undertake research. I wonder whether there is a research department in the ministry of finance and whether the planning department is doing its job. 

Recently, they introduced the Emyooga programme, simply because they never took trouble to do research. They did not envisage a situation that is happening now in the country, where some RDCs have turned it to be a way of extorting money from Ugandans.

I will give you an example of Namutumba. The RDC of Namutumba used Emyooga programme to extort money at every stage and people have up to now not benefitted from the programme. You have now repackaged it and you are saying it is a PDM. Can you tell us which country has had any success story, where this PDM is and it has developed the citizenry?

I want to suggest that you undertake a study throughout the country. If, indeed, you want Ugandans to get out of poverty like you have just said, can you first ensure that there are extension workers in every subcounty? 

Apparently, Ugandans are on their own. If you want Ugandans to get out of poverty, can you empower UNBS to liberate Uganda from consuming fake products? Somebody goes to the garden; after six months, they harvest but they can only buy a shirt that will get torn in just one day. 

They buy seeds, pesticides, fertilisers and chemicals, which are fake. Even if you bring this PDM, will it achieve the purpose, when people in those parishes are buying fake products on the market?

Madam Speaker, I do not support the model until the ministry carries out research research and plan properly. Otherwise, it is a waste of time. It will not achieve the purpose just like Entandikwa, Bona Bagagawale and all those other programmes that Government came up with, without thorough research. I beg to move. 

5.58
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the very beginning when the minister introduced and presented the issues about PDM, I believed that the idea of the parish based implementation is good. However, in this one particular case, I definitely do not support the rush in it.

First of all, I would like to leave all the other things I could have spoken about; because of time and pick the SACCOS element of the model. As a country, for over 15 years, we have been having SACCOS. The President has been talking about SACCOS all the time. As Members of Parliament, we have been trying to form SACCOS. 

SACCOS have a law that governs them. When you form a SACCO, it is almost like you are starting a banking institution at the lowest level. A SACCO should be initiated by members. It must be owned and facilitated by its members. If you are going to coerce people into forming SACCOS, those SACCOS are dead at birth. It is because my intention to join that SACCO will not be the promotion of my financial status and economic empowerment but to pick what I can from what has come. 

If I am to ask a question; why must we say we are going to implement this fund as a SACCO-based model? What money are we going to give to the people? Importantly, a SACCO has to have four elements. One, it must have a subscription fee for membership. Is the money we are going to give the people a subscription fee? Two, you must have shares. Is the money Government going to give shares? Three, it must have an element of savings. Is this money going to be treated as savings? We also have microfinance support centres that channel all the supports and borrowings at a low cost to SACCOS. 

I would like the minister to get up and tell me how many people in a parish will be willing to have politically elected leaders as executives to manage their SACCOS? The law that governs SACCOS requires the formation of the interim executives and then, you can upgrade from there. If we want to help our people to have economic base and support them to come out of poverty, there are very many big and dangerous problems that Ugandans have; that we should deal with, other than giving them money.

Madam Speaker, in the name of SACCOS, this is just hoodwinking us into something that will not materialise. Just like any other programme has failed, this will fail, too. For us to rush in less than two months to implement this kind of programme is a big shame. We are not going to head anywhere with this.

I support the programme, but why can’t we first hold on? Why can’t we first move with what we have that we are well acquainted with? Probably, we can select two or utmost five districts and concentrate on them. We can study them and then progress from there. Where you do not have roads, even if you gave me Shs 100 million – Where I do not have a school or a hospital where women can go and deliver successfully, that means any money that will drop into my hands will first go into solving my primary problems other than development. I thank you. 

6.02
MR ROBERT KAFEERO SSEKITOLEKO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Madam Speaker, at first, I had reservations for supporting the PDM, especially having seen what happened with the earlier interventions by Government; for example, the Entandikwa, the Emyooga and all the others. However, having failed once or even twice should not deter us from trying again. 

When I listened to the reviewed presentation by the minister of finance who I would like to commend for labouring to see that we have some funds that can trickle down to our people at the parishes, I am now in support of the PDM.

When the minister exonerated the UWEP fund, the YLP fund and also told us here that he is ready to recruit and train the parish chiefs, I got new hope. 

Going forward, being an ex-officio Member of the budget committee, let the budget committee be empowered to go back and review the source of funding. Those projects and programmes that have performed well should be left to continue the way they have been operating. We should identify funds, the would-be wasteful expenditure and allocate them to the PDM. That will help us to move forward.

Also, this formula of a flat figure for all parishes is not good. I would rather go with the proposal by the Chairperson of the committee on finance hon. Musasizi, of using the population to create a formula. Some parishes are bigger than others, even in population. As we consider the population, you should also examine the productive - You may find some parishes with more than children than adults. That formula should be based on the potentially productive adults, so that they can be able to use the money to make more money and return it. 

That way, we can be able to take money to parishes. These people ask for money whenever we go there. The women and youths ask for money from us. Now that Government has decided to take money to the parishes, let us embrace this programme. Let us review the source of funding and then proceed. I beg to submit. 

6.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said but I thank you for giving me this time, so that I make a contribution to this important debate. 

Indeed, it is true that the fundamental principle behind the parish model strategy is to ensure services are closer to the people and they participate in service delivery. It is the real people who are supposed to receive the needed service.

When we look at the principle behind our education system, the primary schools are in the parish, which every community is happy about. 

When you come to the health sector, previously we had the health centres II at the parish level. When the Ministry of Health took a decision to remove them, we met lots of resistance. One of the key principles that was raised is that service is delivered at the parish; therefore, health centres II are not to be removed. It was not easy. 

The public took it up and at the end of it, we left it because we also saw that the parish is a real service point for the people. Instead, we started upgrading health centres II to health centres III in a phased manner.

When we come back to this parish model strategy, it would be good - as colleagues have said - if we ran it in a phased manner. However, which part of the country will accept to be left out? Which part will accept to start with?

This is a beneficiary service that should start at the same time and be rolled out in a uniform manner. In principle, we have all accepted that it is a very good model that can take services and people participate; they plan, implement, monitor and evaluate it. 

However, there are critical things - as has been discussed - that the timing is to be looked at because we also need time to sensitise the masses –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Please, conclude.

Dr moriku: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The next thing is equity in resource distribution. We have always talked about the issue of equity, numbers in the parishes and level of poverty, which varies in the country. It is very important to look at that.

Of course, there is the issue of corruption. We also believe that when this model is at the parish, it will minimise the level of corruption because the community will be there to look after their resources, monitor and ensure they achieve their goal.

Lastly, I thank the minister. We can empower our local people. It is a good strategy. There are challenges where we can improve, fill the gaps and make it stronger so that our people’s standard of living improves. Thank you. 

6.11
The minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for guiding the House in debating this very important subject.

I thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Hon. Matia Kasaija for his clarification and members for the spirited manner in which we have debated this issue.

I would like to share with you something. I was the chairperson of the Manifesto Committee for the National Resistance Movement (NRM) for 2021-2026. We carried out a preliminary study on the question of how we could lift – at the time it was 68.9 per cent of Uganda’s households who were in the subsistence economy - how we could lift them out into a money economy. The study showed that we had improved. It was no longer 68.9 per cent but had improved to 39 per cent.

The households - not individuals because sometimes there is confusion – they are about 8.5 million. Consequently, 39 per cent of the 8.5 is about 3.3 million Ugandan households, which are still in subsistence economy. 

The question is; how do you reach these 3.3 million Ugandan households? To be in subsistence socially and economically is a holding back force that could make this country – the country would have become a middle income but it could not when you have 3.3 million out of 8.8 million households still in an economy, which is moneyless.

This question is true today as it was when we were raising it. We were searching for answers how to reach these 3.3 million households. We came up with the parish model as a vehicle for reaching the 3.3 million households. This would be science-led based - in the sense that you would begin with information and data gathering - so you gather data on each household. 

Determine the family land size of each household, test the soil and determine which crop can be suitable for that land size. If it requires inputs, you make it possible for the inputs required. If it requires fertilisers – in Uganda today, there are very few people who use fertilisers. You also do extension service at household level. 

If there is post-harvest handling, which is a problem, you also advise it on extension service. If it means establishing cottage industries at parish model, you do it.

The emphasis in this model was that you distinguish between food security for the household and cash income. Each household must have two things; food security and cash income.

For that to happen, the chief – I will listen to you, Hon. Stephen Mukitale. (Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Please conclude.

Prof kamuntu: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, while the chief was selected – yes, we might have weak chiefs as you were describing but this time the role of the chief is going to be critical because he must be able to coordinate efforts, including state and non-state actors to act as development committee. That parish model in accessing information, being guided would be now the engine of transformation.

In conclusion, we are debating implementation of a parish development model. Remember that we must answer the question; how best can we transform the 3.3 million households? This is the only thing, which is holding Uganda from becoming a middle income country. You cannot when this big chunk of your population is in a moneyless economy.

The parish model is science-led. It is to reach every household. I support the model and the minister. I plead with Members of Parliament that this is unique. It is something we have not tried before. I think with the parish development model, this country will take off. Thank you for listening to me.

6.17 
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Prof. Kamuntu because he has added a missing perspective to this debate. The emphasis had been on the Shs 38 million at a parish level, which is misleading.

I have been trying to conceptualise what we are talking about. What we are saying is that we are working at a subcounty level. We are now saying that we should move from a subcounty level to a parish level; we are talking about increasing production to create surplus and cash income for people; trying to get the 3.2 million people out of poverty. There are a lot of things happening there. 

The capital that the minister is envisaging is the money that the people can borrow; the Shs 38 million. I think it is a problem to overemphasise that Shs 38 million.

What I have seen in the paper that the minister presented before is mobilising capital for the SMEs; the people trying to get into the cash economy and also increasing their competitiveness. The assumption is that production will be increased. 

The minister talked of supporting them in value addition and creating markets. It is very unfortunate that the debate has – and I think it is a mistake from the ministers – lost all that along the way. However, there are also problems, although I support the model because it is a great one once perfected and we get it to work. 

Nonetheless, there are problems. I do not know what has happened. How is it that we forgot about it and did not include it in the budget framework paper? It is not in the ministerial policy statement but you are scrabbling from where you can get the money to implement it. I think the first problem is that it is rushed. 

Professor, you have talked about research you carried, but it should have been available to all of us because it is not rooted in evidence. 

I am surprised that there is pilot initiative starter going on since 2004. Madam Speaker, your parish, Bulambuti, is mentioned as one of those model parishes on the Government website. The others are Kasokwe in Kaliro, Lwabenge in Masaka, Kikoni in Ntungamo, Busita in Sironko, Kyanamukaka in Masaka, Sheema in Bushenyi, Bwera in Kamwenge, Peta in Tororo, Nakyesanja in Mpigi and a few others –(Interjection)– I have not seen anything in Kiboga. 

Honourable minister, how come you do not refer to any evidence from these parish models and yet these have been going on since 2004? Why is that so? I think the answer maybe that it is because you have rushed it. 

The third problem is that it assumes that all areas have the same problem which is money. We need the money in Kiboga and we are poor. I have SAACOs; the village saving groups. In one village, I have eight saving groups and each has about Shs 21 million, which they share at the end of the financial year. To them, Shs 38 million for the whole parish is nothing. What they need is how they can be supported around what they are doing now so that they can do it better.

This is a very good project but I think there are mistakes that have been made in trying to introduce it. I appeal to you that you listen to the voices here. Let us pilot it. Let us look at the different needs in the different areas and see how best this model can respond to those needs. I think once perfected, it can lift Ugandans out of poverty. 

I would like to credit Government because it is continuously looking at how to get the millions of people in poverty out of it. Thank you very much. 

6.23 
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for having solved part of the challenges that we presented last time. 

When we talk of parish models, many people compare their parishes - some of us have bigger constituencies, equal to a district. A parish on Koome Island is equal to five parishes here. I do not know whether the minister also considered hard-to-reach areas. 

One parish in the areas of Mbale or Sironko – because I travel to those areas of Sironko – traveling in one parish of Sironko is equal to covering a subcounty in my constituency or others. That should also be taken care of. 

One of my colleagues here talked about the parish chiefs. It is true that when you advertise for these positions, you need degree holders. You are going to have people who are not mindful of the community needs. How are we going to tackle that? Is there some serious sensitisation apart from capacity building? 

We have 716 town councils and subcounties, which are part of unfunded priorities. Is there an arrangement from the ministry to fund them? When you start sending money to parishes when the created subcounties are left unattended to, there will be conflict because all those elected leaders will have an interest in whatever is taking place. At the end of the day, the Shs 39 million, which could have been helpful at the parish level, may end up wasted. 

The minister talked of committees where the chairpersons, LC 2 and the women councils will be in control. Who will be the supervisors? Some of us would like to know that before we support this. 

I also agree with the colleague that was here before who said that we should look for money in other areas; the chairman of the Budget Committee also made the same statement. Why don’t you cut money from other ministerial areas? They is a lot of budgeted money which can help and solve this problem apart from cutting it off regional money; Busoga or Soroti. We need to balance this small amount. The committee can look into this and we solve this problem for the good of our country. 

However, emphasis should be put on hard-to-reach areas and islanders because with Shs 39 million on an island, you may spend Shs 10 million on mobilisation alone. At the end of the day, those areas will get less money. I thank you. 
          
6.27
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Talking at the tail end, answers would be required from the minister. Prof Kamuntu said they conducted a research - I wonder whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development would consider Parliament of Uganda today and what has happened here today as the focus group discussion to help enrich your research, especially in relation to the feedback you are getting.

Somehow, we all fear new things so honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development take it in good faith. Given what has happened before, we have our fears. I do not think you should think that our fears are unjustified. 

A certain gentleman who was stung by bees one time while climbing a mango tree sees every mango tree these days as if it has bees. He has a phobia. The Ministry of Local Government has been left to only create local government units. This is the first time I am seeing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or Government empowering the Local Government to do more than creating administrative units. I must congratulate you, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - (Laughter) - and even those that you create, it is very difficult to get money for them.

Madam Speaker, the question here is - and I think members support this Parish Model but what remains unanswered and where the fears are is, how this model will be carried out and the second one is the quantum; is Shs 38 million sufficient? 

I have about 350 groups and by the way, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in Tororo District, all the other constituencies have received Emyooga funds but the 14 groups in West Budama Central have not. Therefore, I am torn whether to support your Parish Model or to raise an issue with you on why West Budama Central has not received funds.

The issue of having cash - The poverty we have in Bukedi that we are ranked second to Karamoja - Madam Speaker, you have been to Bukedi many times. You see us putting on suits here but people are poor. The poor are very poor while those who have also have. We used to survive on smuggling but when URA became tough –(Interjection)– Yes, this is a fact. We used to do so many things –(Interjection – Okay, wrongly maybe but it was an economic activity and it was helping us. To lump us together with all other regions and sub-regions would be unfair. Karamoja, Bukedi, Bugisu and Busoga, are all ranked - these are statistics. Poverty is not anything anybody can be proud of.

Now that we are discussing the Parish Model, this is a matter that could be supported but honourable minister, would you find it prudent to fine tune the how so that this matter can be sorted out; the how and the quantum?

That source issue where you are again taking from where it was not enough - Are you a good father really? You give Shs 10 billion here and say, since I have given birth to another child, let us take your bread. That is the cause of resistance.

However, honourable minister, this is a very fundamental stage that we are in and take the comments here as good feedback as if you have been a researcher. Thank you.

6.32
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving us opportunity to help the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development go back to the drawing board to re-plan what to do about dealing with poverty in the country.

First, I think we should stop using the words “Parish Model”. We should either call it a ‘game changing model’ or call it ‘building castles in the air’ model. I am calling it ‘game changing model’ because we had a purpose of putting money in sub-regions in order to deal with deep poverty in those areas. 

The minister is now coming to tell me that yes, Northern Uganda has been allocated Shs 22 billion but we are going to remove Shs 20 billion and put it in this weird pool and you will be left with Shs 2.2 billion to deal with the deep seated poverty in Northern Uganda. The same with Busoga which we have been very concerned about. Shs 13 billion has been allocated but they will only give you Shs 3.3 billion and the Shs 10 billion is going into that parish pool. Madam Speaker, isn’t that building castles in the air? 

The Basoga understand the gaps in their development, same with Northern Uganda. We know where poverty is coming from. Just give us time to redesign it but let our money be there. Now you are saying that you are taking it away. When shall we deal with the poverty where we have already formed infrastructure? 

There is a ministry with experts to help us design, monitor and evaluate. Now you want to put it in a completely different area where we will all get lost and not know who has gone wrong. Are we being serious? That is my question.

Secondly, let us be factual. The money we have - The ministry now wants Shs 44.6 trillion for the Budget. Development is only Shs 6 trillion, Shs 7.7 trillion is going for defence and yet we are not at war. Interest for debts alone will be Shs 6.9 trillion; that is about Shs 7 trillion and the minister is very much aware of that. Statutory obligations will be about Shs 12 trillion. 

How much money do we have to drive administration and economic development, which we are talking about? Where shall we get the money? That is why every day, my loving son, David Bahati keeps coming to you with loan requests. We are mortgaging this country. It will be very sad for history to read that while Rt Hon. Speaker Rebecca Kadaga was Speaker, the country was driven into deep poverty because of debts. We are not taking this matter as a joke. 

I would like you to look at the earlier presentation of the minister on page 4 where he said what this parish model shall be doing. It shall be dealing with production, processing, marketing. How, with no structure?

It will be dealing with infrastructure and economic services, it will be dealing with financial inclusion through their SACCOs, it will be dealing with social services.

Out of that money we are talking about, it will be dealing with governance and administration. So, are we not dreaming? This is building castles in the air.

I want to plead with the minister, we all err - in fact, I expected Hon. Kamuntu to advice the Government that while he was in the UPC Government, during Obote’s time, this is how he did it. You did not need special money to make the co-operative movement effective, to drive the economy and wealth, we did not need Government money to deal with the poverty in Lango, Busoga, Teso.

We had fruits, area-based production; now you want to take even the cotton the backbone of Lango and put it in an area we do not understand. You are taking away coffee and put it in area the Baganda will never understand. This is a non-starter model and we should spare Ugandans from another lamentation; “If the child is dead, let us bury it and try another pregnancy.” thank you.

6.38
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  There is time for Heaven and I want to thank you, very much for giving this House enough time to expound on this matter of the parish model.

The time to get to Heaven when God asks you, “Rebecca what did you do when this project was going to kill the country?” The answer will be, “My Lord, I gave Members of Parliament enough time to discuss and debate it.”

Then God will say, “Come on to my right Hand and sit with me.” If the minister insists on the same, still he will get the same question in Heaven, “What did you do when they told you that this model cannot work?” Then the minister will say, “I insisted” Did it work? “No” then you will go to hell.

One of the major problems we have in this country-when the late Julius Nyerere started “Ujamaa” in Tanzania, he thought that he was bringing a good project for his people but it failed. Nyerere went out and apologised to the Tanzanians and changed the system.

Here we have ministers who do not apologise. Honourable minister, how can you give the whole region like Bunyoro Ministry Shs 80 million and the vehicle of the Minister is worth Shs 300 million and you still sit in the chair as a minister.

I was going to be impressed by Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu because I talked about this when he was not around. He came out with his Obote ideologies but then the ghost hovered around and went away from his own ideologies.

We shall pray that Obote comes back and hits your head then you remember what you used to do. When we get time, I will bring a picture of Hon. Ephraim Kamuntu in the early 80s when they were supplying hoes with handles which were red.

In 1983, I sat primary seven and 1984 my father was a farmer, he could harvest his coffee, after he would tell each of his children, “I have removed my coffee now go and get coffee from the plantation for your pocket money.” I could harvest coffee after the major harvest of my father and collect at least a million which was exchanged in 1987 and I bought a Nazaro shirt, ziko shirt, sharif pair of trousers and a jacket called Michael Jackson and jeans enjoying myself.

Some of us were suspended from school because of too much money. By the time of exchanging in 1987 I had Shs 1,000,000 on me and they gave me Shs 7,000 and I was expelled from Kako S.S.

This was not out of parish model but because co-operatives were working. When you ask the honourable minister Kasaija, “You want to take a parish model, have you gone to those areas to find out where they are operating” even the offices and stores are they still there? Can he find them out?

Since they drive their vehicles just looking at the flags and fighting jam, they forget the work they are supposed to be doing deep in the villages that can solve people’s problems-(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you, for giving way. I want to inform you that all that money you were getting out of coffee was given as a Government policy approach for pricing coffee exports.

Secondly, my role as ambassador extra-ordinary and potentially in President Milton Obote’s administration was a contribution to the development of this country, it is part of history. But we have a proverb in vernacular that a woman was told never to use the skin of a hyena to wrap a child in her back; then she said, “Well, I did it for the child who died.” Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I told you that the minister would come out with no information to me and at the end of the day he has forgotten that Gen. Moses Ali has to go for futari. He is spending a lot of time without giving substantial information.

As I conclude, we must work on the mind-set of our people. I was in Ghana and I met the former President J.J Rawlings - I will get time and produce that video tape for my fellow catholic the Minister of Finance.

Hon. Kasaija, the late J.J Rawlings went out looked at the people of Ghana, they were acting everywhere in the villages. He spent money on training and taking them to learn how to act and make money. We call them Nigerians but a majority of them are from Ghana so let us work on the mind-set of these people.

I thank God, my personal key is telling me that you are not going to be the next Minister of Finance. I pray that you go to the Ministry of Local Government. You get there and this money does not get there as you think, then you start crying as we come back.

I pray that we halt this, first study the project and then we give you support without rushing because you have no evaluation everything is coming politically.

Young people in the villages when you give them money, they buy smart phones because you have not worked on their mind-set. Smart phones consume money, they cannot do anything because you have not trained them.

It is not giving people money that makes them become better. You sit with bishops, why don’t you ask them how they are developing people in their rural areas?

Thank you, I pray that we study all these. With the money that I have seen in this proposal, things cannot move but if it is going to be political; definitely we shall be there. Donkeys leave longer we shall see what will take place.

6.16
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today is the third day debating on what arose out of a motion which I brought about Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) not amalgamating with other funds. However, today, we again sat and agreed on the common position for UWEP.

I am going to concentrate more on UWEP and leave alone those other equalisation funds. We agreed on priority actions and one was on the retention of the operational funds - under Uganda Women’s Empowerment Programme and Youth Livelihood Programme - in the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. We agreed that we should retain operational funds under this ministry.
 
However, from the debate, we have all heard the criticism. That means then that even the revolving fund for the Parish Development Model is not going to work and it means we should take back UWEP to where it belongs.

The idea of taking UWEP to parishes was a little better in that all the parishes of Uganda would taste UWEP. The UWEP fund – as of now – is very small. The Shs 32 billion is being appropriated for financial year 2021/2022, plus what is at the grassroots - about Shs 20 billion – would make about Shs 52 billion only. 

However, putting the fund together was going to benefit the women more. As women, we want to see the ordinary woman at village level empowered economically; to stand strong and support her family. At the moment, even the little funds have worked well only that they have not reached a greater majority of the women.

Madam Speaker, the minister should know that this Parish Development Model has come under criticism because they did not inform people in good time. No research and piloting were done. If it is going to be put aside for now, then leave our UWEP to operate and only add something to it probably. 

Do not remove these regional, equalisation or affirmative funds without properly sensitising the people who should benefit from them. For example, if you remove the Peace, Recovery Development Programme without sensitising people in the 55 districts, which benefit from it, that will be a disservice to those people. 

You now have yourself to blame because right from the start up to today, you have seen the direction of the debate. People could have bought the idea of the Parish Development Model but the way you brought it was not the best.

My appeal is that you accept what people have said in the debate here and go back to the drawing board. Start to plan and make sure that when you go for this model, the funds should not just be only Shs 400 billion. It should be increased to even over two trillion shillings if it is going to have effective results on the people at parish level. What I am saying is that do not start too small. Start something which is going to at least leave a good impact. For the time being, I am crying and appealing that UWEP remains - as I brought the motion – as a standalone. 

We already agreed that it would still be put under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for monitoring. Both the operational and revolving funds should remain there, since your idea has not been bought by Parliament.

This is my appeal, Madam Speaker, that the minister whom I love so much should know – I mean Hon. Bahati – that it is not I alone. Originally, it looked as if it was I pushing but now, I am not alone. Personally, I had accepted but you have not got the right place to get these monies to fund your Parish Development Model.

The Parish Development Model has to get its own fund, not to borrow from PRDP, NAADS, Uganda Coffee Development Authority or even the Luweero Triangle-Rwenzori and the rest of that. This is what I can say.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much and I now rest my case. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we have spent so many hours on this issue because of the importance of the policy decision involved in the parish model. However, does the Minister of Local Government want to say something? 

6.53
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable colleagues, for the lively debate. There are a number of questions that were raised about local governments. I would like to respond as follows.

Question one was on the ban on the creation of new administrative units. Madam Speaker, we had to do this because you are aware of the court ruling, in the case of Hon. Kwizera v. Attorney-General. The ruling was that there will be no mid-term elections. We can only have general elections or by-elections.

Therefore, even for those cases which deserve truly, they will continue to be considered and processed before the next general election. 

Secondly, we thought it prudent to first operationalise the new administrative units, which are in place, before we create new ones. Madam Speaker, we have 711 new sub-counties and town councils that we created. Their leaders have been elected; they were gazetted. They were created after a study and are in place. However, we think that instead of adding new ones, we should first set off these old ones which have been created.

Thirdly, the ministry has been criticised for not having an objective formula for the creation of new administrative units. So, we are looking at Article 179 of the Constitution and reviewing the formula, so that it is more transparent and objective.

Finally, we think that we need to first find some money to provide the structures for the sub-counties, parishes and districts we are talking about, so that we have viable administrative units.

I would like to beg the honourable members to support this position. Halting does not mean stopping forever. Those which deserve will continue to be processed, in view of the subsequent elections. 

The second question was on the coding of the new sub-counties and town councils. Madam Speaker, the coding is done by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Uganda Bureau of Statistics. We have been discussing this matter with the ministry. 
They have assured us - We have presented the minimum requirement to operationalise these administrative units. We are talking of about Shs 13 billion for the subcounties and Shs 38 billion for the town councils. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has assured that they will find Shs 51 billion required for these subcounties so that they are accorded and operationalised. (Interjections) Somebody asked the question “when”. I think the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is going to answer that.

The third question was on the role of the Chairpersons of LC1 in the proposed model. They will be part of the development committee at the parish level depending on the number of the villages in each parish. This is an inclusive committee bringing together both the Government and the non-state actors at that level. 

They do receive some emolument, though it is very little. We only give them Shs 120,000 at the end of the year. This is small. As the resource envelope improves, we already have a proposal to see how to raise this emolument. There is at least something for them. So, to say they do not get anything is not completely accurate. 

The fourth question was on the recruitment and quality of our parish chiefs. We have vacancies in about 5,000 parishes. Gladly, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has provided 15 billion in the budget for the recruitment of the parish chiefs. The minimum requirement will be diploma level. We think it is possible, even in the next two months or three, to have them recruited at the district level.

The fifth question was on the formula. I think the proposed formula to include population so that it is not uniform across the board for all parishes is good. However, I think from the beginning, in the first year, the agreement was to cover all parishes uniformly. We are going to have a pillar called “community information system”, which will raise the data that is required, and in the subsequent years, we shall be looking at a factor called “households under subsistence production” as a key factor for disbursement of the funds. Let us start from somewhere, and as the implementation progresses, we shall improve. 

Finally, what is new in the parish development model as far as local governments are concerned?  I have spent 29 years in local government and this is the very first time that funds will be decentralised to the parish level for the development of the community at that level. For us, it is a big achievement. It is deepening the decentralisation effort. 

I think it should be supported in view of the fact that this is an inclusive arrangement. Whereas youth fund is for the youths, the women fund is for the women and Karamoja fund is for Karamoja. This is now an arrangement that is all inclusive, which should be supported right from the start.

There is a question on piloting. It is important to point out, and I think Hon. Keefa stretched this. We have tended to focus only on the financial inclusion pillar; the revolving fund. However, when you look at the community data, the community information system - when you look at production, processing, marketing infrastructure, economic services, and service delivery like social services, health, education and environment, mind-set change, governance and administration, for me, if we simply say let us take one or two parishes, we shall be doing a disservice to this model. 

Let us take it as it is because the advantage this model has over the other models is that it is bringing together all the ministries and departments of the Government to the parish level. Mind-set change has Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Community information system has the component of the Ministry Information, Community Technology and National Guidance and UBOS. Production and marketing involves the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Look at social services, health and so on. 

Therefore, we are now challenging ourselves as the Government. Can we all move to the parish level to see how we can support these administrative units to improve the communities so that we achieve the objectives of transforming from the subsistence production to a monetary economy? It is worth it. We still have a lot to do and to think out. I am glad that we have got good proposals from the members. 

Let us allow the model to begin and subsequently, it will improve. I am sure that even next year, we will be talking of not just Shs 400 billion, for the revolving fund. If we are talking of a budget of Shs 40 trillion, and yet to uplift the community, we are speaking of only Shs 400 billion, that is only one per cent of the total budget. In the subsequent years, when we have established the procedures, processes, structures and when the institutions are interlinked from the subcounty to the parish, and the district upward, I think it will even increase. Thank you. 

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give you, honourable minister is that the money is not only in the Coffee, UWEP or wealth creation sectors. The money is in the Shs 41 trillion budget. You are failing to ask the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to get money for the parish development model. Ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to find the money for the parish development model. 

We want money for the model because it is good. You should continue thinking that the Parliament is saying the model is bad. Let us not target the money for the coffee sector, UWEP and other money that is already working. Let us get money from security, water and other sectors. Hon. Musasizi should get the bonanza money from the finance sector so that it is put in the model.

Minister of Local Government, we are supporting this model, but we want the finance ministry to provide money for it. Let them not pretend and put the problem on the Members of Parliament and the people of Uganda. Thank you. 

7.03
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I must say this is a new trend to allow the Prime Minister to speak before the closure of a sitting. I am happy you have recognised that before we conclude today’s sitting, the Prime Minister should be given time to say what he is thinking. I am very happy because the Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) is one of the offices to be considered.

First of all, I thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to provide guidance last week, when I asked you for permission. 

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you are the Leader of the Government of Business. How can I say no? 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: You are the one presiding. You could say no, which is possible. Nobody will take you to court anyway. I thank you, for allowing me to speak. Even today, you did not say no. (Laughter)

However, I am going to advise the House. I am not going to say I am concluding. One, when I advised last time that we should sleep over this matter, indeed, we slept over it. I think a lot has happened since then. 

This afternoon, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s presentation sort of relieved me. I was a bit happy. He did well in his presentation to the point that he even failed to pronounce the women fund. I also do not know how it is pronounced. (Interjections) He failed to pronounce UWEP. (Laughter) Of course, it does not matter whether he could pronounce UWEP or not. All the same, he gave them something. He gave 10 per cent instead of 30. I think that was a good gesture. Anybody with a serious issue in mind, should not take this type of concession lightly. An organisation getting Shs 10 billion in addition should be taken seriously.

Therefore, it means that there is room. Your acceptance of us meeting again over this matter had given us a lot of hope; as far as I am concerned. If we refused to talk last time, this and many other issues would not have taken place.

In addition to - is it 420 - three trillion? Those are the things to be considered, because this money is not easily found on the way or anywhere. 

Madam Speaker, I must also give myself time to go and break the fast, but I would like to say one thing. After thanking the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for his presentation, the debate started to take a completely different course. Even today, the debate has taken a totally different course.

Three or four issues came out. First, lack of study. They said that this Parish Development Model was not studied. It was brought from “heaven” and that there was no piloting.

The other point is equalisation fund. To my understanding, this country is developed differently and poverty is different. Therefore, the money already given for whatever reason and consideration is just taken away. That is a very serious matter.

The third issue is, if we have not realised as Parliament, we are charged with the responsibility to continue talking until we come to a common understanding.

Finally, the fourth position is that we are the same people. We are in charge of the same country. We must aim at a win-win situation and not just strangling each other. We are all here for this country. We must sit and find a way to agree and come out with a winning position for all of us here. It is not a question of going to war. We have no time for wars, anyway.

I am proposing that tomorrow, a team from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Budget Committee must meet here or wherever they want to, in order to discuss this matter. The subject has been discussed the whole day today. If need be, the Hansard can be produced for them if they do not remember the contentious issues. They must discuss tomorrow the lacking issues. If they are unable to finish, they must discuss until Saturday. On Tuesday, they report back here, so that we jointly discuss. Thank you (Applause)

The Speaker: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for your advice. After listening in carefully, I think I agree with you on all those issues. 

Honourable members, I would like to emphasise that if you go to Busoga, I do not think that they are looking for the Shs 38 million. They are looking for equipment to manufacture items out of their sugarcane, but not the revolving fund. 

Therefore, if you talk about the Shs 38 million, it is not our priority.  Our priority is how to add value to our sugarcane, which you have not solved for seven year. The same is with the other parts of the country.

Honourable minister, your boss has spoken - the Leader of the Government Business has spoken.

Honourable members, again we do not take a decision on this matter, but I think we have agreed on the broad areas. I think we agree that we are not exactly ready for all the issues. On the funding, let us separate the affirmative action funds from this programme. Find your separate money to run this programme and leave the affirmative funds to do the work for which we had appropriated them. I think that is important, so that people do not feel as if they are being marginalised.

Then of course for the overall programme which was sketchy today - you can come back to us tomorrow if you are ready, or Tuesday if you are not ready by tomorrow. Thank you. 

Honourable members, I am sorry to inconvenience you a bit, but there were things we wanted to finish today. Of course, this was very important. I know members wanted us to stop the debate earlier, but I think it is not good to stifle people’s views. That is why I allowed members to speak.

There are just two things I would like us to complete. First, on the Order Paper is item 20. We debated it yesterday and the Minister for Kampala Capital City Authority came and responded. We were left with just taking the question.

Therefore, I would like to put the question that a question be put on the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, on the failure by Kampala Capital City Authority to adhere to the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” policy in the procurement of buses from India.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Speaker: I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

The Speaker: Next, we had an issue of the loan, which we had asked the minister to give some responses. I do not know whether she is ready to lay them on the Table, so that we can also complete that matter. That is item 29.

7.14
The minister of state for water and environment (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was asked to give more information to the issues raised by honourable members. We have compiled this detailed information to respond to the queries of the scope of the project coverage, status of utilising other on-going loans, and how the project will address livelihood and assurance that the Government has counter funding. All these are here. 

We have the map showing the coverage and also attached the titles, which are on-going for cancellation as requested by honourable members and they are also attached here. They are about 343.

Madam Speaker, we have also given the spread on how the funds are going to be spent between the two ministries and which activities therein. If I do not have the time, I beg that I lay this information on Table. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, once the papers are laid, they are available for you to study for your scrutiny. Now that the minister has fulfilled what we requested, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House authorises Government to borrow Special Drawing Rights 57 million, equivalent to USD 78.2 million from the International Development Association (IDA) of the World Bank Group to finance the Uganda investing in forests and protected areas for climate-smart development project. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us go back to item 4. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT ON PUBLIC DEBT, GUARANTEES, OTHER FINANCIAL LIABILITIES AND GRANTS FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

7.17 
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report on public debt, guarantees, other financial liabilities and grants for the Financial Year 2020/2021. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back but I expect it may not be done in the Fifth Session. The report will probably come back to us in the 11th Parliament. Thank you very much. 

MODALITIES FOR EFFECTING THE MERGER OF SELECTED GOVERNMENT AGENCIES GIVEN THAT MOST OF THEM ARE ESTABLISHED BY ACTS OF PARLIAMENT

7.19 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, this issue came up on the Order Paper. Since what we need to compile is a lot, I seek your indulgence to present this on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: It will be put on the Order Paper for Tuesday next week. Let us go to item 5. 

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORTS OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FY 2021/2022

COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

7.20
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Ms Jane Avur): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

I also beg to lay on Table the minutes that were derived during the processing of this report. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. It will be sent to the Committee on Budget for perusal and report back. 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

7.21
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the Financial Year 2021/2022 for the 11 Votes therein with accompanying records of proceedings. The minutes as attached. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson, can we also ask you to move the motion under Rule 148. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF THIS PARLIAMENT TO SUSPEND RULE 148(2) AND (3) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT, 2017

7.21 
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of this Parliament to suspend Rule 148(2) and (3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017. This is moved under Rules 16, 55, 147 and 148 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament: 

“WHEREAS the Ministry of Finance, in accordance with Rule 147(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2017 laid before Parliament on behalf of the President the proposed annual budget for the Financial Year 2021/2022 and the Speaker, in accordance with Rule 147(2) committed the proposed annual budget to the Budget Committee and to the sectoral committees, the part of the annual budget that falls within the jurisdiction of those sectoral committees;

AWARE that in accordance with Rule 148(1), each sectoral committee is required, not later than the 20th day of April each financial year, to consider and review policy statements and budget estimates committed to it under Rule 147 and present its report to the House; 

RECOGNISING that the term of the current Parliament is soon expiring, making the consideration of each of the sectoral committee’s report by the House as required in Rule 148(2) impractical and impossible; 

COGNISANT that Rule 16 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament allow a member with the consent of the Speaker to move that any rule be suspended in application to a particular motion before the House; 

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this House that Rule 148(1) and (2) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament be suspended in order for the reports of the sectoral committees of Parliament to be considered by the Budget Committee of Parliament in order for the Budget Committee to report back to the House by the 30th day of April, as required, in accordance with Rule 148(3).”

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Members, is the motion seconded? It is seconded. What is your justification? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, in view of the time constraints, this is a unique financial year; we are coming to the end of this Parliament. This Parliament must conclude business before the swearing in of the next Government, which is by 12th of next month. It makes it very difficult for us to go according to the rules strictly laid.

In view of that, it would only be possible if these specific rules are suspended to allow the Budget Committee to consider, on behalf of the House, instead of the House debating these committee reports. This is so that the Budget Committee considers these ministerial policy statements and the reports from the sectoral committees and reports back to fast-track the process. 

Madam Speaker, it cannot be a better time than now that I move this with the justification to have Rule 148(2) and (3) to be suspended to allow this Parliament to perform its duty as required by law.

7.26
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I fully support the motion. However, I was of the view that since the Commission has arranged a two-days seminar, and you have said that, we are meeting up to 7.38 p.m., we could possibly have the Budget Committee submit to the House either on Monday or on Tuesday because 30th is Friday and on that Friday, the seminar will still be going on and yet this is the only opportunity we have to meet as the Tenth Parliament before we go our different ways. 

I thought it is important for the Commission to have the two days put aside; the mornings only, so that we either can have the Budget Committee submit on Monday or on Tuesday as it is appropriate. This is the minor amendment I would like to put to the House, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think if we can just put the question for the suspension, it will deal with issue of the dates.

7.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I am in support of the motion but I wanted to suggest that we are given the first week of May to handle the Budget because it is a huge exercise. We cannot even report on Monday. Some of the reports have just been laid and we have to meet each of these and dissect the issues and then prepare a report, harmonise the figures, prepare the Appropriation Bill- it is a lot of work and we need to be very careful because we are dealing with numbers. 

Now that you have taken a decision about the parish model, we have to look for the figures within the districts wherever they are and bring them back- it is a lot of work. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I do appreciate your predicament but we only have the sitting days from Monday up to Friday because after 7th we shall no longer be able to convene. We shall be preparing for the swearing for the Head of State, after that the swearing of the Members of Parliament, so everything really has to be condensed. Maybe we could give you up to mid next week; can we give you up to Wednesday? Okay.

Honourable members, I put the question that Rule 148(2) and 148(3) be suspended as per the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow we have a seminar in the morning on life after Parliament and in the afternoon, we shall come back to do our ordinary work.

House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. Thank you very much and I apologise to the Muslims again. 

House rose at 7.29 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 29 April 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)


