Thursday, 11 April 2013 

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister and honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As you will recall, yesterday the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid on the Table preliminary draft estimates for the financial year 2012/13. These papers by law are required to be here by the 1st of April every year. However, you recall that the minister wrote to me requesting for extension of time and she complied by bringing the same yesterday.

Under Section 7(2) of the Budget Act, the sectoral committees are required to consider, discuss and review the preliminary indicative allocations of the sectors they supervise and submit their findings and recommendations to the Budget Committee by 25 April 2013. We have lost some time. So, this means there are few days remaining for the committees to analyse the estimates and process their recommendations. To facilitate this process, the plenary sittings will be suspended for two weeks to enable those committees to sit both morning and afternoon from Mondays to Fridays.

Secondly, yesterday there was a proposal to amend the terms of reference of the committee investigating allegations of bribery in the oil sector. However, as you recall, when these investigations commenced in 2011 there were specific terms to guide the inquiry. So, we do expect that the committee should report their findings under the terms that we agreed to. To amend the terms of reference at this stage will mean that committee may not report for several more months. I think this may also set a bad precedent. Let us use what we have to do the work. If there are areas that will not have been handled, other agencies will be able to deal with them. Therefore, the committee should proceed to complete its work and report to this House.

Honourable members, I think our matters will come in after question time.

2.57
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There was a specific directive that you gave yesterday for the Minister of Defence to come and substantiate on matters of allegations about oil bribery by the former UPDF spokesperson who is now the CPA of the same force. I cannot see the minister here. Can we get clarification as to what happened to that directive that you issued yesterday?

THE SPEAKER: I am not able to answer because I have not seen the minister and I have not seen the response. That why it is not on the Order Paper. If he comes, we shall require him to answer because the directive was for today.

In the circumstances, since we have the Leader of Government Business, he can put on record what is happening to his minister and whether he is on his way or not or whether he can take up the challenge. The moment we have the Leader of Government Business and the Prime Minister, certainly he should be in the know of where his minister could be and what happened to the pending directive by the Speaker of this Parliament.

2.58
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, hon. Ssekikubo is simply taking advantage of the reality that the minister is not here. As you know, we lost a very senior officer in the Army yesterday. The minister represented Government at the funeral service here in Kampala and today is burial. As Minister of Defence, it would have been inappropriate not to bury a commanding officer of the Force. So, he is involved in that. I seek the understanding of the Speaker and colleagues. I am sure as soon as this is over, he will be able to comply.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, the matters we are handling are very pertinent. The Speaker’s directive must never be rendered in vain. Once the Speaker has directed, even in the normal conduct of this House, we need courtesy to be informed as to what happened to the Speaker’s directive. Short of that, we shall be coming here and matters are taken for granted.

In the circumstances, once you speak of oil and you put the entire integrity of this House in doubt, certainly it touches the very core of this Parliament. That is why whether in one way or the other the minister responsible is away, we expect a candid response or at least a response to put matters to rest. 

I would not like take it that we should receive a casual response and an excuse that the minister is away. It is true that the minister can be away but there is Government, there is a Leader of Government Business; certainly, hon. Crispus Kiyonga has not moved with Government. Life must move on and if that is the case, we should demand that we give a timeframe when he is expected to be here and at what time so that it is put on the Order Paper rather than being treated in a casual manner like is being attempted to be done. The issue is that this Parliament should be given a definite time when as a country we should receive a response and we put the matter to rest. Short of that, it raises more questions than answers.

MR PATRICK AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the allegations labelled against this Parliament are of a grave nature. They touch the core of this Parliament and tell something about the integrity of the House including the person who leads us. For anybody to allege that Parliament has been bribed is definitely moving a vote of no confidence on all of us. So, it defeats my understanding when the Leader of Government Business tries to convince this House that there is nobody else other than the Minister of Defence who could bring information demanded by this House in a timely manner.

I know that we have a substantive Minister of Defence in the person of Dr Kiyonga, but we also have a deputy to hon. Kiyonga in the person of Gen. Jeje Odongo. We all grieve with the family of the UPDF that has lost, but I think like my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo, said, the country will not come to a standstill because the minister has gone for a funeral.

MR KYEYUNE: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Just yesterday hon. Kiyonga was around. This officer died the other day. Hon. Kiyonga never bothered to give that excuse and yet he was here yesterday. The information I want to give is that since hon. Kiyonga was here yesterday, why didn’t he tell us that he would be unable to make it today?

MR AMURIAT: Precisely! This paints a very bad image of Government and I think the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi should be ashamed by these actions. It is unfortunate that we have been taken in a complacent manner as Parliament.

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has just been on the Floor of Parliament and tried to humble himself by saying “sorry”. An unavoidable circumstance has happened, we have just lost a commander and the minister has gone for the burial. He even officiated yesterday at All Saints Cathedral. Is it, therefore, in order for the Member to continue insisting and stressing and pushing words into the mouth of our Rt Hon. Prime Minister that he should continue talking about something, which has already passed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we know the circumstances that involve death. Nevertheless, the minister is still obliged to have informed me that he would not be able to come. We worked with him until late evening yesterday. He was here until 7 O’clock and there was no indication that he would not come. Therefore, I think we want to take exception to this conduct. We are also aware that there is a junior minister or he could have assigned another minister to handle that docket. We think this is not right.

MR REAGAN OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I think the Prime Minister and all of us should take this matter very seriously. We all know we lost our brother the other day but it was yesterday again that this senior army officer was on TV. He never went for the funeral service, he was on TV. He was alleging that Parliament was bribed but also added that some MPs were being used by enemies of the State.

Those were two very serious allegations. It is a treasonable act. It is of security nature and a threat to the stability of Uganda. I know the Leader of Government Business and ministers have always delegated their responsibility. (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I think the issue we are talking about is indeed of a great nature. Yesterday in the evening as I was listening to one of the local FM stations, the same officer was denying and saying that he was misquoted. He went on to say that he was quoting what His Excellency the President said when he came here sometime back; therefore, we must not pin the officer only but also the source. He alleges that the source is His Excellency the President.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, I am really not bothered about the source. He made the statement. The minister committed himself to coming back to the Floor of Parliament to inform us about what has happened because this was a live talk show; it was not reported speech. He was not quoting from any script; he was speaking from his heart. During this talk show, there was Mr Rwomushana and the moderator was Mr Kato. It was from his heart and the flow of these ideas was a normal flow of debate and discussion. He was sober, confident and actually, behaved as if he or they are the only ones who are responsible for the security of this country and, therefore, Parliament has been irresponsible in handling the security of the country.

I want to propose that the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi represents the minister now and reports to us. Looking at his casual body language, I think he was just imagining what he said; he never got any brief from the Minister of Defence. He was just imagining that maybe the minister has gone somewhere. We may be surprised. Madam Speaker, you know what happened on the Floor of the House the last time. The Leader of Government Business could not respond and he was asking you to write to the officer responsible. Suddenly, when the minister came, he promised to respond. I think this casual approach to very important issues of national security and national integrity and respect for the institutions of Government must be taken seriously.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if by the close of business the minister or his representative has not come, I think I am going to take a look at the National Assembly Powers and Privileges Act and see whether we cannot summon Mr Kulaigye to come to the rules committee and explain these actions.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, yesterday you granted me an opportunity to say something about a committee which was appointed to scrutinise allegations related to bribery in oil.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we are dealing with something completely different. We are dealing with Col Kulaigye. I have already made a ruling on that issue of oil. You came late.

RESPONSE BY THE PRIME MINISTER /LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS TO THE ISSUES OF PUBLIC IMPORTANCE RAISED BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, honourable members -(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I am surprised that the Prime Minister keeps staring at us and pointing his finger towards us. I do not know the meaning of that. I do recall very clearly that his opposite number this side did bring a written statement to this House and it was circulated to us. Today, the Prime Minister is attempting to respond to this statement and he is doing it casually and off-track. 

Is it procedurally right for the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business, and I think he is Brig. Amama Mbabazi, to come and treat this Parliament casually and attempt to respond to a statement by the Leader of the Opposition without availing copies to Members of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is customary when responding to send over 300 copies to the Members. This is a very important response; it is not just from a minister but from the Prime Minister. So, we really need copies of the response. We can stand over this and do other business while you bring the 300 copies. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Ssekikubo says I may escape but Madam Speaker, I do not feel that you have denied me the freedom of movement. I am sorry that the copies have not come, but I will step out and get them in one moment, if you give me permission to do so. Thank you. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND THE OPINION THEREOF BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.15
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following local government units:

1. 	Bukwo District Local Government
2. 	Ngora District Local Government
3. 	Nakasongola District Local Government
4. 	Arua District Local Government
5. 	Kaabong District Local Government
6. 	Ntoroko District Local Government
7. 	Amolatar District Local Government
8. 	Mukono District Local Government
9. 	Kitgum District Local Government
10. 	Kizura Town Council
11. 	Ngoma Town Council
12. 	Gombe Town Council
13. 	Nkokonjeru Town Council
14. 	Kyenjonjo Town Council
15. 	Luwero Town Council
16. 	Maracha Town Council
17. 	Kira Town Council
18. 	Rwakhakha Town Council
19. 	Kisoro Town Council
20. 	Rakai Town Council
21. 	Kiwoko Town Council
22. 	Masindi Municipal Council
23. 	Kaberebere Town Council
24. 	Kaberamaido Town Council
25. 	Tororo Municipal Council
26. 	Budaka Town Council
27. 	Bweyale Town Council
28. 	Isingiro Town Council
29. 	Rwemi Town Council
30. 	Katoke Town Council
31. 	Agago Town Council
32. 	Nwoya Town Council
33. 	Aduku Town Council
34. 	Yumbe Town Council
35. 	Bombo Town Council
36. 	Wobulenzi Town Council.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the statements on the Table.    

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. All those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back to the House. 

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION OF MEMBERS OF THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS ON A MISSION TO ZIMBABWE TO STUDY THE HIV/AIDS TRUST FUND

3.19
MR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA(NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, between the 10th and 16th of March this year, I led a delegation of Members of Parliament from the Committee on HIV/AIDS of the Parliament of Uganda to Zimbabwe to study the establishment, operations and management of the AIDS Trust Fund there. The parliamentary delegation consisted of the following members: Hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar; the honourable Dr Medard Bitekyerezo; hon. Naome Kabasharira; and the honourable Dr Elioda Tumwesigye. The parliamentary staff who accompanied the Members of Parliament included Dr Robert Tumukwasibwe and Ms Josephine Watera. I led the delegation.

The delegation was also accompanied by UNAIDS Coordinator, Uganda, Mr Musa Bungudu; the Director-General, Uganda AIDS Commission, Dr Kihumuro Apuuli; a senior medical officer from the Ministry of Health, Dr Shaban Mugerwa; and the representative of HIV/AIDS development partners in Uganda, Ms Mary Aduku. 

As per rule No. 32 of our Rules of Procedure, I am required to lay on the Table a report by the delegation of members of the parliamentary Committee on HIV/AIDS on a mission to Zimbabwe to study the HIV/AIDS Trust Fund. Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. A date will be appointed for its discussion. 

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE INTER-PARLIAMENTARY UNION ASSEMBLY AND RELATED MEETINGS HELD IN ECUADOR FROM 22ND TO 27TH MARCH 2013

3.22
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I want to lay on the Table the report of the delegation of this Parliament to the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) Assembly held in Quito, Ecuador in Latin America from 22 to 27 March 2013. This delegation was led by the Rt Hon. Speaker. Other members of the delegation included hon. Jalia Bintu, hon. Betty Amongi, hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Julius Maganda. The subject of discussion was: “From Unrelenting Growth to Purposeful Development: New Approaches, New Solutions.” Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, a date will be appointed for its presentation and debate.

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO INDIA OF MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH 

3.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the report of the delegation of the Committee on Health which was in India between 4th and 13th December 2012. I led the delegation that was composed of hon. Margaret Iriama, vice-chairperson of the committee; hon. Naome Kabasharira; hon. Sarah Lanyero Ochieng; the honourable Dr Lulume Bayigga; the honourable Dr Medard Bitekyerezo; Mr Bisase Tusubira from the Budget Office; and Dr Robert Tumukwasibwe, the committee clerk.

The purpose of the delegation was to understudy the healthcare delivery system in India and see how we can make services in the health service sector the way our people who have been going to India have found them. I beg to lay a report on lessons learnt from the study visit to India by the delegation of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. A date will be appointed for presentation and discussion.

REPORT OF THE DELEGATION TO THE FOURTH EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SCIENTIFIC CONFERENCE HELD IN KIGALI, RWANDA FROM 25-29 MARCH 2013

3.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I led a delegation of Members from the Committee on Health to the East African Community Health and Scientific Conference held from 25 to 29 March 2012 in Kigali. The delegation comprised of some members of the committee and some members of staff. This delegation also undertook a study and benchmarked the performance of the Rwanda health system, especially some success stories that we could learn from Rwanda. 

I beg to lay the report of the delegation on its findings and lessons learnt during the Fourth East African Health and Scientific Conference and also the benchmarking of the Rwanda health system. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. A date will be appointed for presentation and discussion. 

Honourable members, before we go to the next item, I have received a request from the Committee of Science and Technology for extra time. We committed a Bill to them on 5th February and 45 days have now elapsed. Under our Rules of Procedure, they are requesting for permission to extend their time. I now grant permission to your committee to complete the work. There are also other committees, which have work that they have not reported on. I encourage you to report so that we can formalise your extension. Thank you.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 60/01/09 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

3.27
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa):“In view of a circular by the Minister of State (Economic Monitoring) to district chairpersons and Members of Parliament regarding the constitution of district road committees: 

1. 	What is the distinction between district road committees and the district sectoral committee on works and infrastructure? 
2. 	What is the functional relationship between the two committees? 
3. 	What efforts are being made to harmonise the roles and mandates of these committees?”

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our response is as follows: the district road committees are established under Section 25(2) of the Uganda Road Fund Act, 2008, which states, “There is hereby established for every district a committee to be known as a District Road Committee, which shall be composed of –
(a) 	the chairperson or mayor of every local authority in the district; 
(b) 	all Members of Parliament from the district; 
(c) 	the Chief Administrative Officer; 
(d) 	the district roads engineer in charge of the district; 
(e) 	the district secretary for works;  
(f) 	the municipal works engineer.”

Sub section (2) provides that, “The District Roads Committee shall appoint one of the members under (a) or (b) to be the chairperson of the committee”. Subsection (4) says, “The district roads engineer shall be the secretary to the District Roads Committee.”

The District Roads Committee shall have such powers and perform such functions as are conferred on it by regulations made under section 49 of the Act or any other law. The functions referred to under section 49 of the Uganda Road Fund Act provide for financial procedures; monitoring and evaluation of the operations of the Fund; investment of surplus funds; collection of revenue; procedure for determination of levels of road tariffs; procedures for developing road maintenance budgets; procedures for the allocation and transfer of funds to designated agencies; structure and functions of the secretariat; details of the annual road maintenance programme; and prescription of penalties in respect of any contravention of the regulations.

Madam Speaker, on the other hand, district sectoral committees are established in accordance with the Local Government Act, 1997, which requires that each district form a district sectoral committee to oversee the implementation of projects under works and technical services. These district sectoral committees report to the district council and are composed of district councillors, technical staff and ex officio members. So, the distinction is that whereas the district sectoral committee is mainly concerned with the approval of district plans and supervision of road works including road construction, the district roads committee is responsible for planning, monitoring and accountability of the district roads maintenance operations only.

Madam Speaker, the functional relationship between the two is that these two committees complement each other although both of them have a common component of monitoring and implementation of road works. The need to have a separate district roads committee was in recognition of the important role that roads play in economic growth in ensuring that produce reaches the market on time, reducing on transport costs and ensuring that the value added services are brought closer to the people. 

The efforts made to harmonise the roles and mandates of these committees are being championed by the Uganda Road Fund. The Uganda Road Fund has drafted regulations to ensure this harmonisation is done with the local government laws. Section 10 of the proposed regulations, for example, provides that the functions of the committee are as follows: 
a) 	To receive the views and complaints of road users related to the functions of the Fund; 
b) 	To promote accountability; 
c) 	To exercise oversight of the activities of the designated agency; 
d) 	To ensure the agency fulfils its obligations; 
e) 	To review and consider the proposals of the designated agency to designate sub-agencies prior to submission to the board; 
f) 	To cause the designated agency to prepare and submit annual road maintenance programmes to the board; and 
g) 	To consult the designated agencies on the road maintenance plans under Section 25 of the Act and inform the designated agency of its reviews for further consultation. 

Madam Speaker, the draft regulations are currently being shared with the Solicitor-General so that they can be completed. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kabahenda, do you have any supplementary questions?

MS KABAHENDA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for the response. However, I would like to ask a supplementary question. We have a practice of forming sort of parallel structures. Let me use the example of NAADS, if we can learn a lesson from it. When NAADS was introduced, it created structures of civil servants who would go for advisory services alongside the traditional extension workers. This created a withdrawal from the traditional structures. 

Currently, the local government financing is limping and councillors hardly get money even to monitor what they deliberate upon in councils. In the event that this roads committee comes and is funded in meetings and then they go out for monitoring, and yet it is councillors who influence decisions in the council - this roads committee may not go to influence decisions in council - isn’t this going to create a withdrawal again of the sectoral committee of council? The roads committee will take its own decisions that will not be debated in council. That is my fear.

Secondly, clause 4(2) of the proposed legislation requires that at least this roads committee sits once every three months. However, the money from the Uganda Road Fund is very unpredictable. This financial year, for instance, they have only released once. Therefore, how do they expect this roads committee to sit once every three months? Thank you.  

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I said that the role of these committees is to complement each other although both have a common component of monitoring and implementation of road works. The need, as I said, was necessitated because of the importance roads play in economic growth. 

While considering the implementation of the Uganda Road Fund Act, it was found necessary to complement the sectoral committees under the Local Government Act so that we ensure that there is optimum supervision and monitoring. This will ensure that funds that are released from the centre are put to good use. Putting into account the membership of the district road committee, being that at the centre we have people like Members of Parliament; the heads of administration, that is, the chief administration officer; the head of the engineering section, the roads engineer; and the district secretary for works, we thought that it is necessary that we have another leg of supervision. 

On the issue of availability of funds to fund the two committees, Government has endeavoured at all times to fund its activities. In case these funds are not available, this activity is not implemented. Just like in any other MDAs, when there are shortages of funds we ration and release what can be done at any one time. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, three of you wanted to raise some other issues. I will give hon. Mwiru, hon. Ssebagala and hon. Sebuliba-Mutumba three minutes each. (Interjections) No, there is no debate on the road fund. Bring a statement on it and then we shall have a debate.

3.38
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to raise a matter of national importance. For over two weeks, I have been watching Bukedde 1 Television and I have picked interest in the manner in which the Uganda Police Force, which is supposed to protect people, has been raiding places and arresting people, beating them up and using all sorts of forms of harassment.

I have addressed my mind to Article 20 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and it talks about the fundamental and other human rights and freedoms. It states thus: “The rights and freedoms of the individual and groups enshrined in this Chapter shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.” Article 24 talks about respect for human dignity and protection from inhuman and degrading treatment. I am also aware that Article 28 of our Constitution provides for presumption of innocence and fair hearing.

What actually takes place in our country is that whereas the intention may have been good – to curb crime – the manner in which these police officers are executing their duty is wrong. They indiscriminately jump into an area, arrest anybody around, without following any intelligence. I am aware that Article 212 of our Constitution gives the Police the mandate to detect and prevent crime. However, we have appropriated money in this House to organisations of the state like ISO and Government has got other organs like the GISO and local councils. What actually happens is that these police officers – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Mwiru for giving way. I want to inform him about the way the Police arrest people who drive while drunk. You see, whenever you are carrying out anything, you must do research first. Today when you talk about the boda bodas, the reality is that they ride recklessly. However, if you set up a roadblock and arrest someone, take him to court – sometimes they do not even take them there – and charge him Shs 500,000 for driving while drunk yet one time it was Government which reduced taxes on beer –(Interjections) - It was here in the Budget and the President emphasised this. (Ms Alaso rose_)- I am giving information. 

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order from hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, by now everybody in this Parliament knows that this country has one of the highest road accident records in the world. We die everyday first of all, because of human error and human error is largely because we have all sorts of people on the road navigating vehicles and motorcycles, some of whom include drunk drivers. Most of these accidents happen in the night. If it is not motor cycles, they are actually drunk drivers. 

It was this House that said that Government and the Police were not enforcing the Traffic and Road Safety Act. This includes analysing the breath of people driving at night who could be a danger to the rest of the population. Therefore, is my honourable brother in order to discourage Police from analysing the breath of drivers who could constitute a problem to road users?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is this House which complained that the Police was not doing their work. Now they are doing their work. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, the point I am making is that these people are rounded up in 40s and 80s. When they reach the police station, those who manage to co-operate with the same Police which has arrested them actually leave at a fee. This is the information that I have got. These people are arrested under the guise of being thieves in the localities and they end up being released and going back to the same communities. I, therefore, seek the indulgence of the Minister of Internal Affairs to tell this House whether he has sanctioned and ratified these actions; otherwise, why would these actions take place when there is a Minister of Internal Affairs? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before hon. Ssebagala speaks, I welcome the councillors from Amuria District. They are represented by hon. Ecweru and hon. Amero. 

3.44
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to supplement because my submission is in line with what hon. Mwiru has submitted on the Floor of Parliament. 

We agree that the level of insecurity has increased - people are being robbed - but the modus operandi being applied is what we are questioning. I wish the Minister of Internal Affairs comes and gives us the details of what is happening. We have got the CID; what would be the rational of arresting whole villages and at the end of the day, have them released? There are claims and allegations that they demand for money for people to be freed. I think we can work together on community policing, but the problem is that even the innocent ones are being arrested. People are asking, “is there a curfew?” Even if you present – (Interruption)

MR WAIRA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Yesterday I was in my constituency and the voters told me that when they go out in the evening to interact and take some little beer, as they go home walking the policemen still arrest them for walking. (Laughter) So, they asked me a question, which I failed to answer. Under what law are the Police arresting my voters who are simply walking, not even drink-driving? Let the minister explain to us under what law they arrest such people.

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: As I wind up, we want a population that follows the law. I would rather suggest that we work together with the leaders of those areas – (interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: The information I would like to give my colleague is that after arresting these people, however much some of them are innocent, they are not taken to courts within their areas of jurisdiction. Here in Kampala, we have two courts where these people are taken; if it is not in Matugga on Bombo Road, they are taken to Nsangi. That means they are denied the opportunity to have their relatives stand surety for them. In those courts, whoever has money is released. So, we are not fighting what the Police are doing but as my colleagues have already said, the issue is about the way they do it. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssimbwa, what is special about Matugga and Nsangi? Why not Buganda Road, Nakawa and the others? Why take me to Wakiso District when I have committed the crime in Kampala?

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, that is the question we are asking. In Makindye, we have a court but they drive people from Makindye and take them either to Matugga or Nsangi. According to the information we have from there, those who have the money are released and those who do not have the money are committed to prison. So, I think to them those are the two areas where they can do their business. 

MR SEBULIBA-MUTUMBA: Madam Speaker, we all know the level of unemployment in this country and we know the situation our economy is in. I beseech the Minister of Internal Affairs to come here with a statement so that we can look into this matter deeply. They arrested a pregnant woman yesterday and you saw how she was harassed. We need a real statement on this so that we can go back and inform our people on what is supposed to be done. These people have got identity cards and all that yet they are arrested and not taken to court but money is extorted from them. That is going to kill the entire process.

3.49
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two national and religious issues as the Imam of this institution. Of recent, we have had a crackdown on several Madrasa schools by the Uganda Police. The reason the Police are giving for closing some of the Islamic schools is that some of them are used as training grounds for terrorists and other rebel related activities. 

To my disappointment and dismay, the children who attend these Madrasa schools are between the ages of three to eleven years old. I am disappointed to hear that if I have to recruit terrorists or rebels, I have to target young ones of four to eleven years old. This is an abuse to the Islamic community in Uganda. Madrasa schools have been here for centuries. I believe that if the Police have any issues as far as the running of these schools is concerned, we have leaders whom they can contact. Arresting Imams on the grounds that they are teaching only the Quran and hadiths, that they are teaching Islamic principles – (Interruption)

MS ABIA BAKO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give my brother is that the Ministry of Education is actually grappling with these Madrasa schools because instead of the children being in the normal formal of school system, they are being taken to these schools. So, these children lose a lot of school time or learning time in these schools. When you tell the parents to release these children from these schools and take them to the normal formal schools, they resist. So, it becomes very difficult for the law enforcers and the ministry at large to try to bring up these children in the normal examinable school curriculum.

The issue now is: how does the ministry handle the situation? Do we leave out these other children from three years to 11 years? In Arua, for example, many children do not go to nursery schools but they start school in P.1 at six years old. If you delay them in this religious school system, you are denying them the opportunity to go through the formal school system. The ministry could request that if you want this, you should then do it during the weekend. It is a very big challenge for Government and at the same time for the Ministry of Education. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I think Members need to be educated in as far as Madrasa schools are concerned. The reason that I heard the spokesperson of the Police, Madam Nabakooba, give the day they arrested the Imams from Bweyogerere is that they were training or recruiting terrorists.

We are not saying that we do not know the secular part. Madrasa schools have been here for many years and as Muslims, the way we can train our young ones is at a tender age. I believe that the moment the Police comes out to openly close these schools on the grounds that they are training rebels, it is an insult to the Muslim community. 

We know the standards and we are now above that. Muslims are now educated. I do not think that there is anybody who can now try to teach us about education. We know what Muslims are doing in as far as Madrasa schools are concerned and we do not need any education on that. Madam Speaker – (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that there is a very brilliant Sudanese Muslim leader called Hassan al-Turabi who has been building schools around the world including in Uganda but with a specified mission. This specified mission is to establish in the long run - his dream is to get from South Africa upwards - an Islamic state across Africa. Therefore, the idea is to start getting these children when they are young and tame and direct them to be – (Interruption)

MR HARUNA KYEYUNE: I thank you. Madam Speaker, I have heard about very many Christian schools. Missionaries built schools here and I wonder whether their mission was to train crusaders -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, is hon. Reagan Okumu in order to insinuate that these schools that are being built in Uganda have a main purpose to train – Is he in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he was talking about the schools established by Hassan al-Turabi. Those are the ones that he is worried about and not the ones established by you. 

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I think that the honourable colleague has raised a fundamental question. He should not be lost because here, we have got the Madrasa and then we have got the terrorist aspect of it. Is it really true that they are training rebels or terrorists? I think that these are some of the things that we need to investigate and where the minister should come in and also clarify. 

Yes, we have the curriculum but that bit that is being tagged on a sect, that it is training terrorists, is really very dangerous. Many of our sheiks and imams are going to be arrested on flimsy grounds. So, I beseech you, Madam Speaker, to implore the Minister for Internal Affairs to come out and be clear on this; otherwise, people are going to be arrested without being investigated.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssebagala, what is your second point?

MR SSEBAGALA: But before that, my chairman has a point –

THE SPEAKER: The chairman of -

MR SSEBAGALA: The Chairman of the Muslim Parliamentary Caucus –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Hood Katuramu. 

MR HOOD KATURAMU: I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. First and foremost, I wish to echo the views raised by the Imam of Parliament, hon. Ssebagala. There is currently national discomfort among the Muslim community in Uganda because of the issue of the closure of Madrasa schools and the arrest of Imams or teachers teaching the children in those schools. 

Unfortunately, my sister has raised other issues that are actually puzzling us. She is saying that these schools are not to the standards as required by the Ministry of Education. How does that tantamount to breeding schools for terrorism? I thought if these schools are not up to the standards as required by the Ministry of Education, what would be done is to help these schools to come up to those standards that are required in this country – (Interjections)- Please, can I first deliver my speech? 

If the Police can say that a child of two or three years is being trained for subversive activities, we are really puzzled about this. We want to have an official statement from the Minister for Internal Affairs on this matter because, colleagues, this country has people of different religions and tribes. One of the colleagues here said that the Christian missionary teachers built churches and schools and they also had objectives; for example, one of the – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you are debating. Honourable members, I think you want a statement from the Minister for Internal Affairs. You have made your point and we shall debate this issue when he brings the statement on why they are closing the Madrasa. Hon. Ssebagala, give your second point quickly.

MR SSEBAGALA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues for all the information that you have given. I have to add that as Muslims, we are uncomfortable with the way the Madrasa schools are being closed. I do not think we can run a dual legal regime. I believe that we are always interested in being members of the Organisation of Islamic Conference (OIC). We are achieving a lot from being members of the OIC. So, I would not like member countries to learn that Muslims are under fear and their Madrasa are being closed down as it may really hinder our good working relations. 

Madam Speaker, the second issue is about -(Ms Huda rose_) – Hon. Huda - (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: That is the Muslim network. (Laughter)

MS HUDA OLERU: I thank you very much, colleagues. Madam Speaker, I just want to add information from what was in the media, especially on NTV, when this issue of arresting Imams started. The first was that the Imams who were arrested were those ones participating in child murdering. This was one of the issues before the issue of the terrorists came up. When they started arresting these Imams, the first issue was child sacrifice but now it has been followed by them training terrorists. 

Madam Speaker, as Muslims of this country, we are not happy if this is the way the Police is going to treat us. We are not comfortable. I think the Constitution has given the right to any citizen in this country to worship in whichever religion he or she wants to. Therefore, we urge the Minister for Internal Affairs to give us a clear statement and give us reasons that truly, all the children that have been sacrificed in this country have been sacrificed by the Imams. Thank you.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, because of time, let me go to the second issue- (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you. I want to thank my neighbour for letting me seek clarification and I think this is very important for us to move forward. The first bit of it is that I really need the Attorney-General of this country to explain to us how a country becomes a member of the OIC given that our 1995 Constitution says that we are a secular state. I think that statement will be very helpful to me to understand the issue of Uganda’s membership to the OIC.

The second one is that I would like the Minister of Education, in regards to the Madrasa schools, to again explain to this country what guidelines one ought to follow in setting up anything called a school. Whether it is a Christian founded school or an Islamic founded school, are there some minimum guidelines in that working environment which we need to subject our children to. Those are the two clarifications I will appreciate. Thank you, my neighbour.

THE SPEAKER: There is information from the border.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to sympathise with my brother for the arrests being occasioned to Muslims, particularly those who are conducting Madrasa and if they are doing it for a good cause. 

However, I would like to inform my colleague that what has happened in Busia is that there were Madrasa schools being conducted within mosques. Children were even sleeping there. They had turned them into dormitories. So, another section of Muslims rose up and attacked the Muslims who were conducting Madrasa schools in the mosque. This was properly displayed on NTV for those of you who watched the footage. 

It was brought to our attention, we downplayed it and we left it to the Chief Kadhi to handle. Eventually, they even took pangas and there was going to be violence until the Police swung into action and arrested the Imam who had gone to put up a Madrasa school in the mosque. By the way, the Imam who had gone to conduct the Madrasa school in Busia was from Bugiri. So, the people wanted to lynch him. The other Muslim Imams wanted to lynch him for conducting a Madrasa school within a mosque. So, really, there could be those incidents that you are talking about but some other arrests have been occasioned by the conflicts that exist between the Muslims themselves.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Go to your second point.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I think the Minister for Internal Affairs will have to make a formal response to our concerns. 

The second issue is about our fifth pillar. The fifth pillar of Islam is performing Hajj, going to Mecca and Medina every year. Madam Speaker, last year we were banned from performing that fifth pillar on clear grounds, because of Ebola. To our disappointment, up to now the ban has not been lifted by the Saudi Arabian Kingdom and yet the Saudi Arabian Kingdom is just a custodian of the holy places. In fact, Muslims performing their Hijjah is not a privilege; it is a right. 

I have written to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to intervene because we have contacted the Embassy of Saudi Arabia here and there is no response and Muslims are preparing to go for Umrah in the coming two months. Those who wanted to go in February were denied visas. I would like to inform the public that if the Minister does not respond in as far as informing the kingdom that this country was declared Ebola-free late in November last year, if they have not done that and those are the same grounds the Saudi Government is using to deny us visas to perform Hijjah, we are going to stage a peaceful demonstration at the Saudi Arabian Embassy on 10th May this year. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister for Internal Affairs, we want a statement on the manner of arrests, the bribes and the issue of the closing of the Madrasa and the rest of the Imams.

4.08 
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Members for their comments. I would be prepared to make a statement but I cannot make a statement on generalities. I need specifics by name, time and incident so that I can come with detailed information. (Interjections) The statements which have been made here are general. They are talking of villages, they are talking of this; there are no specifics. That is one.

Two, the business of opening and closing schools is the business of Ministry of Education and not the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We are not closing any schools. What the honourable member from Busia referred to have been incidences of clashes of Imams. They agree to put on- (Interruption) 

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, the minister should not misinform and mislead this House that they are not responsible for closing the Madrasa schools. The first school, which was closed in Bweyogerere, was closed by the Police. Indeed, the Police spokesperson, Afande Nabakooba, was the one who came out to say that they had closed it because it is a training ground for terrorists. I am aware that the Minister is very busy with the Public Order Management Bill; maybe, he is not aware of what is going on.

MR JAMES BABA: Madam Speaker, as the honourable Member from Busia has said, in some cases there have been conflicts in these mosques. The mosques are built for prayers and then some Imams use them to recruit students and even put them in boarding. So, some members of that mosque come and complain and therefore, conflicts arise and the Police have to come in if people are taking to pangas and trying to fight each other.

On the issue of closing mosques, I am not aware and it is not a general issue for us. What we are interested in is that there is peace, law and order in places of worship - in mosques and churches - and that is what we are doing.

Finally, I would like to thank hon. Alaso for the great work she has been doing on public safety and on road traffic. I think since she raised that issue on the Floor of Parliament, we have been invigorated, the Police have been invigorated; so, let us allow the Police to do its work. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Foreign Affairs, the Hijjah issue. 

4.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS)(Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Latif Ssebagala for raising that very important issue. I got a copy of hon. Ssebagala’s letter complaining about the denial of visas to Muslims that intend to go for Umrah and Hijjah. Umrah is a small pilgrimage where you go to Mecca and Medina during any other period other than the period of the month of Hijjah.

I have taken up the matter. However, as a matter of fact, I had got this complaint much earlier from a number of Muslims, particularly those who provide for people who go for pilgrimage to Mecca. The matter is being handled. I am in touch with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia. I have already talked to the deputy foreign affairs minister of Saudi Arabia on this matter. I can report that it has been taken up by the Hijjah ministry in Saudi Arabia. I am sure, God willing, we shall have a solution sooner than later. On that basis, I want to assure hon. Latif Ssebagala and the Muslim fraternity that Government is already aware of this issue and the matter is being handled.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Attorney-General on the issue of the OIC.

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY-ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, Article 7 of the Constitution is in respect of the non-adoption of a state religion. It says thus: “Uganda shall not adopt a State religion.” I do not think Uganda’s membership in the OIC is an amendment to this Constitution. I believe, and we all know, that it is trite knowledge – I do not have the figures – that the Muslims are the minority as far as religions in Uganda are concerned, particularly the main ones, the Catholics, Protestants and then the Muslims. It is also trite knowledge that Uganda is a secular State. So, I do not think there is any problem with Uganda being a member to the OIC. That is not an amendment to this Constitution.

THE SPEAKER: Also, Attorney-General, I think our membership to the OIC preceded this 1995 Constitution because we were already members at that time.

4.14
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance. I want to start by reporting that there is a lot of unrest, accusations and counter-accusations in my district over the creation of Kakumiro and Kagadi districts.

I would like to implore you to appreciate the fact that the issue of Kakumiro and Kagadi has become a political issue and a political trap especially for us, Members of Parliament from that district. There are a number of communications that came from Government, which I request that I lay on the Table –

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you just come to the Table with all your papers?

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, on 5 February this year, there was a letter written by hon. Matia Kasaija to the LC V chairman of Kibaale. The letter is headed, “Allocation of funds from administration to road repairs and maintenance in Kibaale District.” The letter says, “As you are aware, Kakumiro and Kagadi districts will not start this financial year. You will also recall that this ministry, under a directive from H. E. the President, had allocated Shs 2.2 billion for the start of Kakumiro and Kagadi districts in July this year. While meeting with the President on 8 January, the Bunyoro Parliamentary Caucus proposed…” Madam Speaker, we did not propose this. This was a total lie. (Laughter)

I want to report that this letter has brought a lot of unrest. The minister wanted to propose that this Shs 2.2 billion should be transferred to road construction in Kibaale District. However, I want to make it clear that as people of Kibaale, we asked for the district - (Laughter) - we did not ask for roads. We know that it is the role of Government to provide roads. These districts were supposed to have started from July last year, but they are nowhere to be seen and now they want to reallocate our money. Let me lay this on the Table. 

Madam Speaker, there is also this letter from the Minister of Local Government dated 29 June 2012. The subject is, “Creation of Kakumiro and Kagadi Districts.” The letter says, “As you are aware, H.E. the President pledged to create Kakumiro and Kagadi districts way back. The purpose of this letter is to inform you that the ministry has taken the following steps: 
1) a technical team from the Ministry of Local Government has carried out all the technical studies and found that the counties of Buyaga East and West, Bugangaizi East and West qualify to be elevated to district status...” 

The letter goes on to say that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has made a provision of Shs 2.2 billion in this budget that we are about to end. It says that the provision of that money was based on the technical studies that were done by the Local Government Finance Commission. The minister went on to say that he had reflected the said Shs 2.2 billion in the policy statement to commence the operation of Kagadi and Kakumiro districts come July 2012. The minister goes on to say that having cleared all the hurdles, Cabinet sat in July last year and approved the same and that the minister further brought a motion to this Parliament. With your permission, Madam Speaker, let me lay this letter written by the Minister of Local Government on the Table. It is dated 29 June 2012. 

As I said, a motion was brought to this Parliament on 17 July 2012. This motion also indicates that these districts were to become effective from 1 July 2012. The motion enumerates them as follows: “Kagadi currently part of Kibaale consisting of Buyaga East and Buyaga West; Kakumiro, currently consisting of Bugangaizi East and West…” 

During that debate, the Deputy Speaker referred this motion to the Committee of Local Government. However, since 17 July last year to date, that committee has never submitted a report to Parliament despite the fact that they were given only two weeks within which to report back – (Ms Bako rose_) – Why don’t you allow me to finish? I will give you time. I want to lay on the Table a copy of that motion as was moved by the Minister of Local Government on 17 July 2012.

In addition to that, as Members of Parliament from Kibaale, we brought a petition to this House complaining about the delay and questioning why the Committee of Local Government was not submitting a report to this House. I recall that, Madam Speaker, you directed – you, yourself, you can imagine –(Laughter) – that a report be brought to this House in two weeks’ time but it is now coming to two months with no report coming.

I want to now question if this is a deliberate effort. Our councillors in the districts no longer go to council. Is it a deliberate effort to make us lag behind in terms of development? I know that all Members who have been to Kibaale all sympathise with us; it is like we are not in Uganda and everybody knows that. Madam Speaker, if you can allow me to move a motion -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, of course, I want you to move a motion and I want you to get your district but I want you to get it properly. So, when we resume plenary, we shall allow you to move a motion with the participation of the Minister of Local Government and the Prime Minister. It should be done formally.

MS NABBANJA: Why doesn’t the Minister of Local Government at this material time come here to explain? 

THE SPEAKER: If he were here, I would have asked him. Prime Minister, you can see the Member is very unsettled. 

MS BAKO: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the passion with which my sister is talking about the creation of the two districts. Not so long ago, we met the President as a committee over the matter of creation of new districts. I can assure you, my sister, the time when districts used to be districts and created for a purpose has expired. I am telling you this because it was very clear from the President that his attention has shifted from creation of more districts to wealth creation. As a result, he said this quest for more districts must stop and so as you struggle with bringing a motion here – (Interruption)

MR HARUNA KYEYUNE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is clearly known that it is the mandate of this Parliament to create new districts. Is the honourable member in order to say that the President refused the creation of more districts?

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I would like to guide my colleague giving the point of order that whereas it is legislatively correct to say that Parliament creates districts, those are matters that have financial implications so that at the end of the day, you must bear in mind the provisions of Article 93 of the Constitution. The creation of districts has got financial implications and, therefore, must be moved by the Executive in this House. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Prime Minister to alleviate the pain of hon. Nabbanja. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We all know what our sister, hon. Nabbanja, is going through. I am sure the roads they are talking about are in Kibaale where the same Kagadi and others fall, and I am sure the roads they are going to make are the ones you use. However, you should know also that when you create a district, you are adding more administrative costs. Administrative costs call for more money and we must tax people and divide the small allocation and that is why we have a problem with bank interest. The interest rate is high because public expenditure is increasing everyday and making the cost of finance high. That is why some Members of Parliament are unable to service their loans. So, I plead with you that much as you are crying, you should wait a bit for the envelope to increase. We shall be happy. 

4.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to re-state the well known policy of Government that we are determined to take all the steps necessary to improve service delivery to our people. One of them, actually, is to create convenient administrative units. The Constitution is clear about the criteria for creation of districts and any part of Uganda that falls within the category of the criteria that exists in our Constitution for the creation of new administrative units should be assured that this Government will do it. 

As hon. Nabbanja said, the motion she referred to was a motion of Government, it was a motion of the Executive, which was presented by the minister having been passed by Cabinet and by the President. The point the President made recently, and the reason we reviewed that decision, was not to depart from the obvious need to create districts in areas where the creation of new districts will enhance better service delivery. What we said was that because of the financial constraints now, if we create districts for which we do not have adequate provisions for the intended service delivery we are engaging in an act of futility. 

We therefore said that we shall put a hold on the creation of new districts. We are going to give priority to areas like infrastructure and so on, which we have listed, which are going to come up. You have seen the budget framework which was presented yesterday, which we are going to go through together. The time for creation of new districts obviously will come. 

I want to assure hon. Nabbanja that Kagadi has the greatest sympathy as a district. The challenges they are facing are known. We are now going to start the construction of the tarmac road from Kigumba through Masindi, Hoima. There are a few other things we are going to do. We do not have enough money to create districts where we will be required to raise our public administration costs and we do not have enough to improve services like health care, which we talked about. So, I want to assure her and others that this is not a departure from our policy but it is a practical reality, a decision that we have taken in order to improve services. Thank you.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate that Government needs to do better in service delivery. I was in my constituency recently and I went to a place called Kikaada. It is 12 miles from Kakumiro, 13 miles from Kasambya and 11 miles from Mataale. They do not immunise their children and there is no primary school. When I inquired why from the DMO, he said they do not have enough money under PHC to go that far. 

I went to another place called Kitaboona in Nalweyo and the same applies. We do not have roads, schools or UPE. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, the roads they are talking about- Madam Speaker, can you protect me?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please understand the tribulations of the honourable member.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I am at pains. Kibaale District has been supporting this Government for a long time. We have always provided 99 per cent. During the time that other districts were being created, they deceived us that our people were fighting the Bakiga and Banyoro. Now there is no fighting. We are yearning for services; we also want to develop like other places. The Committee on Government Assurances got –(Interruption)

MRS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. I appreciate the pain my sister has and I share it with her. In 2011, we received copies of a letter, which was written by H.E. the President to the Prime Minister instructing him that while allocating resources to districts in this country, he should consider the big districts. I have been watching the allocation of resources to our districts specifically Mubende, Kibaale, Ntungamo and Wakiso and unfortunately, the increase is very minimal. 

If I may give you an example; Mubende District is five times bigger than Kyenjojo but when it comes to district quota, they give us 11 students and Kyenjojo gets eight. Look at my sister from Kibaale, which is much bigger than Mubende, when allocation of road units was being done, Mubende got one and Kibaale got one. I spent this morning at UNRA headquarters as I had photographs which were still on my camera to show them. Children are drowning in water and there are no roads. The Mubende-Kibaale Road has been in the budget for the last four years but no work has commenced. 

Honestly, Madam Speaker, it is like Kibaale and Mubende are forgotten parts of Uganda. Honourable colleague, the information I wanted to give you is that the Prime Minister cannot allay your fears because he has not done anything to improve our situation. Thank you very much.

MS NABBANJA: Madam Speaker, I think she has put it ably. Recently, MPs were allocated Shs 5 million. The Woman MP from Budaka who has just four sub counties is given Shs 5 million. Hon. Nabbanja with 37 sub counties is also given Shs 5 million. What criteria do you use?

Honourable members, and especially those of you who have already been given districts, I want you to feel for your colleagues who are still yearning for services. The other day, I was in Kyegegwa - (Ms Opendi rose_) - No, you are a minister. (Laughter) Let me suffer with my issues. Let me summarise. 

I want you, Members of Parliament, who are also Ugandans, to feel for my people. When maize in Kampala is being sold at Shs 7000, my people are given Shs 300 just because of poor roads. If only the money they were talking about could go to buy equipment -(Honourable Member: “The Shs 5 million”) – What can the Shs 5 million do? Madam Speaker, I am being interrupted.

We also do not have enough teachers. I even have a letter here that I wrote to the Minister of Education stating that we have a deficit of 600 teachers. We have 622 schools and the DEO cannot supervise all of them. If a councillor wants to go to Kibaale District Council, he or she uses over Shs 70,000 and in return is given Shs 20,000. 

My prayer is for you, honourable Members of Parliament, to feel for the people of Kibaale and also help us to be like you. Madam Speaker, we are yearning for your support.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I want to reassure hon. Nabbanja that she has all the sympathy and support from this House. Believe me, if the motion comes, I think yours will be the first. We really support you and we know you need it. 

Let me ask hon. Akol to announce the AGM for the pensions’ scheme and then move to the Order Paper.

4.39
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to inform Members that tomorrow, Friday 12th at 9.30 a.m., we expect you to come to the conference room at the President’s Office and attend the very first AGM of the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme. It is very important that you attend because issues to be discussed concern your retirement. When you are no longer a Member of Parliament, you need to know what happens thereafter. How will that pensions’ scheme look after you? That is the reason we are calling you tomorrow. Please, be there and you are most welcome. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I also remind Members about our meeting to deal with gratuity on Monday at 10 o’clock. I will keep you only for one hour. Let us dispose of the Prime Minister’s statement then go back to education. I think he has some copies.

RESPONSE BY THE PRIME MINISTER /LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS TO THE ISSUES OF PUBLIC IMPORTANCE RAISED BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

4.41
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, I must apologise that the copies were not available and I have been given the reason why, which reason I do not have to give here.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on February 7th 2013, hon. Nathan Nadala-Mafabi – (Interruption) - I gave him a copy right from the beginning; do not give him two copies. He was the first one to get a copy. I thought he was my friend - (Interjections) - but he kept quiet when you said you did not have copies.

On the 7 January 2013, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, raised a number of issues in this House which he considered to be of public importance and required a response from Government. He first referred to the older issues which he had raised on 30th October last year but because of the heavy load on the Parliament programme that time, we had not been scheduled to make our response. 

I have a very long response – it is 37 pages – and I want to seek the indulgence of colleagues that with your permission, Madam Speaker, I will just give a summary. The old issues included the following: the UN Group of Experts report alleging Uganda’s involvement in the M23 rebellion in the DRC; killing of Muslim clerics; the alleged arrest and detention of Opposition members by the Police and in the so-called “safe houses”; kidnap of Ugandans; preventive arrests; corruption “which is on the increase”.

In addition, he wanted Government to make responses to the following allegations: coup threats; efforts by the President to control all pillars of state; removal of the National Budget from Parliament and the media as partners in development. Madam Speaker, I have written a comprehensive response with many mistakes, which I hope we will be able to correct as we go along.

Uganda’s stand on the allegations made by the UN Group of Experts about Uganda’s purported support of the M23 rebellion in the DRC. I remember vividly that I made a clear statement here; I was not sure that I should repeat it. However, I have repeated it in writing for the record. Nevertheless, I do not think it is necessary for me to read it. And therefore, allow me to go to page 7 –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: That statement was given; the Prime Minister responded and we had a debate here.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, if I could go to page 9 – I remember making a comprehensive statement informing Parliament that we had sent a delegation led by Dr Rugunda to the UN and so forth. So, if I may go to page 9. Colleagues, in doing this, we only wanted to remind the UN about the rights of the people of Uganda, which are the reason we have been keenly spearheading the regional efforts to find a lasting solution to the insecurity in Eastern DRC. It is not in order for the DRC in partnership with MONUSCO – the United Nations Forces in DRC – to maintain terrorists against Uganda by allowing ADF to freely use the DRC territory to train, receive arms and to launch assassination attacks on Ugandans. Some time back, three Muslim sheikhs were assassinated in Uganda and our suspicion was on the ADF based in Eastern DRC. What did the UN do about this? Our view was to use dialogue to help DRC to resolve the issue of the M23, which is a recent complication in the endless DRC situation, and then using the neutral international force and MONUSCO to get rid of terrorists from the DRC territory.
Some of the actors seem to have a different opinion and after sending our letter to the UN, I am glad to say that the UN group of experts has since been restructured with new members on the team and others have been dropped. Since the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region to renew this mandate that Uganda – maybe I should have said this because it comes prior to this; you remember the condition we had given was a fresh mandate by the ICGLR about our mandate to mediate – I am happy to report to Parliament – I think I did report already that indeed the ICGLR renewed the mandate of Uganda’s mediation role and agreed that the chairman of the ICGLR, President Museveni, should continue with the diplomatic and political engagements in order to find a comprehensive solution to the crisis in Eastern DRC. And since then, we have continued and the following have been accomplished: 

    1. The parties have adopted the rules of procedure and the agenda for the dialogue; 
    2. The parties concluded the first cluster on the agenda, namely, review of 23 March 2009 Agreement between the DRC Government and the CNDP in accordance with the rules of procedure. 

In summary, both teams agreed that 15 provisions of the Agreement were fully implemented, eight of them partly implemented while 12 were not implemented at all. At the end of the review, a joint report was initiated by the leaders of delegation and the facilitator. 

The dialogue was adjourned on 18th March to allow for consultations in view of the following: The signing of the Addis Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the DRC and the Region; infighting and division within M23 partly as a result of one of their key figures, Bosco Ntaganda has now surrendered to the ICC.

The UN Security Council was discussing the implementation of the Addis Ababa Agreement including the intervention force. The council subsequently adopted Resolution 2098, creating an intervention brigade under the direct command of MONUSCO force commander to, among other things, neutralise the armed groups in the DRC – which had always been our demand. 

Furthermore, the UN Secretary-General designated former Irish President, Mary Robinson, as his special envoy for the Great Lakes Region with the responsibilities that include leading a comprehensive political process involving all relevant stakeholders to address the underlying root causes of the conflict.

The dialogue resumed three days ago, on 8 April 2013, with a new leadership in the M23 rebel group. It is our assumption that the necessary linkages will be established between all these frameworks – the ICGLR, the accord signed in Addis Ababa under the auspices of the AU and the United Nations to ensure that the objective of the political process, that is, sustainable peace in the DRC and the region is achieved. 

Meanwhile, the new UN group of experts has started afresh its investigations in a more organised manner. They are investigating that allegation again. They have been here and they officially met the Minister of Defence, the chiefs of intelligence and I also received and had a discussion with them. We believe this time they will come up with an accurate report.

Point number two: The Leader of the Opposition claimed that a number of prominent people who include, among others, Muslim clerics, have been murdered in cold blood and police has not arrested those perpetuating these crimes. So what steps is Government taking to arrest the situation? 

Madam Speaker, it is true that a number of people have been murdered. These however have not been limited to only prominent people, but also others from all walks of life. For instance, we have received reports about ordinary citizens in Mukono, Rakai, Luwero and other places, including students, who have been murdered either by gunshots or clobbered by iron bars. 

The police have continued to investigate all the reported murders and suspects have been arrested and taken to court and I cite a few cases there. I do not have to read them one by one, but I have given the police file number. In case anyone is interested in the detail, they are there. Now, in many of these cases, police investigations have actually led to the arrest of suspects and many have been charged in court for murder. Besides, community policing activities as well as foot patrols have been beefed up in these areas and already the efforts have gained dividends. In the last few weeks, fewer murders have been committed. 

Another horrible incident took place in Rakai which we all know about; that pastor who was killed. Police carried out investigations and a suspect has now been arrested called Nakyegwe and charged. We have received reports of other incidents of murders that occur during the night. Police have since pitched camp in that troubled village in Rakai and we expect a detailed report over these murders. 

It was also claimed that the arrest and detention of opposition politicians in police and safe houses without charges and sometimes with trumped up charges such as murder, terrorism, and simple robbery is on increase. So the Leader of the Opposition wanted Government to assure them of their safety to participate in the political activities in Uganda. 

It is true that the Uganda police have arrested and detained wrong doers, law breakers and disrupters of social peace. It is also true that some Opposition politicians have been found committing one or all of the above crimes.

It is not only Opposition politicians, however who are arrested and detained; all people in Uganda, citizens and non-citizens who come into conflict with the law or who are alleged to have committed offences are arrested and detained in compliance with the laws of the land. The same standard applies to all irrespective of their political affiliation or even inclination. 

When an offence is alleged to have been committed, investigations are done and when the evidence assembled is able to sustain a criminal charge, the suspects are produced in court; if not, the suspects are released or given police bond as inquiries continue. 

It would be going against the law of this country if Opposition politicians who committee crime are to be treated differently on the basis that they are Opposition politicians. There is no politician who has been charged on any offence or on trumped up charges. The charges against Ingrid Turinawe and other Opposition politicians are cases in point. The investigations were handled on file No. CTREF1593/2011 - that is the file reference number. The investigators gathered evidence of meetings held and strategies devised to overthrow the Government of Uganda through unconstitutional means. The DPP perused the file and established that the evidence assembled is enough to sustain the charges; otherwise, the six suspects would not have been charged. The suspects appeared in court and were granted bail. 

Another typical case was where three young men were arrested in Kawempe and the file is there. The evidence gathered only implicated two of the suspects. The two were charged with the offence of terrorism, having been found in possession of, among others, bomb making materials. 

The Leader of the Opposition further alleged that in court, some Ugandans are being kidnapped on a daily basis and relatives are not sure of their whereabouts. Can Government assure Ugandans that we are not going back to the “Panda Gali” days?

Kidnap is the forceful or tactful removal of a person from his or her environs with the purpose of depriving the person of his or her liberty to freely move and associate. Most kidnaps are associated with blackmail, revenge, sacrifice, etcetera. It is true that kidnap cases have occurred and most have been reported. But it is outrageous for the Leader of the Opposition to say that these kidnaps are made on a daily basis. There are a few kidnap cases that have been reported to police. Investigations into kidnap cases are different from other common crimes. The life of the victim is on a threat; therefore the investigations cannot be publically shared because the leads that police follow must be handled with utmost caution. However, police appeal to anyone who has information on any person that has been kidnapped to forward the same for investigations. 

“Panda Gali”, used to be state inspired clandestine arrests and detention. The kidnap we are addressing is done by non-state actors, organisations or individuals with their own private motives. Therefore, for the Leader of the Opposition to refer to these kidnaps as a slide back to “Panda Gali” days is either talking with lack of information on what actually “Panda Gali” was or he intentionally intends to malign Government by linking it to private criminal acts of individuals. 

It was further alleged that police continue to use preventive arrests as a way of curtailing political opposition activities. Prominent among these include that of Dr Kiiza Besigye, Lord Mayor Lukwago Erias; hon. Ssemuju Nganda and so forth. “Can we get assurance that we are free to carryout political activities in Uganda”? 

The police have not curtailed any political opposition activity; the circumstances under which the police used preventive arrest are justified and in compliance with the law. The circumstances are clearly spelt out in the Police Act and the Criminal Procedure Court. The purpose for instance has been to, among others, prevent the causing of unlawful destruction on highway or commission of an offence against public decency in a public place – if you look at section 5 of the Police Act, “For the purpose of preventing the commission of any cognisable offence as is provided for in the Criminal Procedure Code.”
“The IGP was invited by the committee on Human Rights but he refused to attend. Can Government tell us whether he is above the law?” First of all, there is no one who is above the law. The only invitation the IGP received to appear before the Committee on Human Rights was on October last year. It was the office of the IGP which was invited before the committee, with a big delegation of Directors and Heads of Department. Lt. Gen. Kale Kayihura the IGP, however, was not able to appear in person because he received an urgent summon requiring his presence at State House for a function there. Indeed, in readiness to attend, the IGP had already prepared the requisite report to be presented to the committee. When he could not attend at the last minute, the report was handed over to the Deputy IGP who represented him at the meeting. I actually thought that I had given this response in the House. 

When the meeting opened, the Deputy IGP conveyed the apologies of Lt Gen. Kale Kayihura and explained the circumstances that regrettably rendered him unable to attend. In fact, the Deputy IGP presented the letter of invitation to the swearing in ceremony as evidence of Lt Gen. Kale Kayihura’s presence at another official function. 

“The Minister of Internal Affairs promised on 3 October 2012 to report to Parliament within three weeks about the killings but to date no response has been made.” In the period around September 2012, a number of gruesome murders nicknamed “Kinywamusaayi” or vampire like acts took place in the areas of Wakiso, Busunju, Mityana, Mpigi, Nakaseke, Kyankwanzi, Nansana, Kakiri, Ntwetwe to mention a few areas. The gruesome nature of the murders alarmed the residents since something like this had never happened before. 

As soon as the pattern of the new murders was noticed, the Inspector General of Police sent a team of police officers who visited the areas affected, met the local leaders and gathered the necessary intelligence on the matter. 

Deployment and patrols were beefed up in the area and confidence was restored. A number of suspects were arrested and inquiries continue. Community policing in the area was enhanced and the situation is progressively normalising. This type of killings is different from other murder cases, for instance, the ones reported in Rakai, which I referred to earlier. 

It was characterised by hacking the victim and blood drained and taken away without any theft committed to the victim or in the houses where the murders occurred. This nature of killing has since – we have not received, after those interventions I have mentioned, fresh reports of killings of that kind.

“The Minister for Internal Affairs further promised to give response regarding the inhuman handling of Ms Ingrid Turinawe but to date nothing has been done.” The following is the response to that:
On the 20 April 2012, Ms Turinawe Ingrid was arrested by Police in Nansana town. After the incident, the manner in which she was arrested was a subject of debate by this House.

Madam Speaker, you may recall that I, the Leader of Government Business and Prime Minister of Uganda made a formal apology regarding the manner of the arrest. When the matter was raised in this House, the information available was still scanty and the Government promised to investigate the matter and report back to Parliament before the 18 May 2012.

I am glad to report that formal inquiries into the matter were conducted by the Professional Standards Unit and the Special Investigations Unit of the Uganda Police. You will recall that one of the hot issues raised on this Floor was that it was a male police officer who effected the arrest and not a female officer.
This was after the Leader of Government Business mentioned that the information he had from the Inspector General of Police was that the officer who arrested Ingrid was a female police officer. This was an easy matter to prove and indeed I am reporting that the officer who effected the arrest was/is a female officer.

This revelation, however, is not intended to justify the manner in which the arrest was conducted but to respond to the query concerning the gender of the arresting officer.

I need to emphasise that the Uganda Police has clearly laid down procedures that govern the manner of effecting arrests. One of the requirements is that a female suspect should be arrested by a female police officer. It is for this reason that Ingrid was arrested by a female officer. I recall that Parliament very much desired to know the name of the officer who effected the arrest. 

While the relevance of knowing the name is not clear other than giving a clue to the gender, the same can be given if it is still required. The name of the officer is Woman Police Constable Irene Alinda. Police Constable Alinda is very remorseful, and regrets what she did. However, she still acted unprofessionally, and out of tune with the standards of the Uganda Police in carrying out arrests or using force. Her action was -(Laughter)-

THE SPEAKER: That is the ongoing rehabilitation of Parliament and it is not harmful.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay. Her action was unnecessary, improper and unacceptable and she must be held to account. For that, we are deeply sorry to Ingrid Turinawe, her family, her friends and indeed, all womenfolk and the country at large.

In line with the recommendations of the investigation team, the IGP has ordered that Alinda Irene be tried before the Police Headquarters Disciplinary Court on charges of discreditable conduct and of behaving in a cruel, disgraceful and indecent manner, under the Police Act Code of Conduct.

Madam Speaker, having said the above, I wish to make some comments on the incident which led to the confrontation between Ingrid Turinawe and the Police, indeed, which led to the 
incident under investigation. 

Some people, political leaders included, seem to think that they are not obliged to follow lawful instructions of a police officer. In fact, some have tended to act and behave as if they are above the law, and that is where the problem is.

From the findings of the inquiry on this occasion, Ms Ingrid Turinawe’s driver obeyed the instructions of the Police and refused Ingrid’s insistence that he ignores the Police. In fact, she took over the wheel of the vehicle precisely because her driver refused to defy the Police. Had she cooperated with the Police, as other political leaders did during the same occasion, the question of her arrest and the subsequent incident in question would not have arisen. 

Indeed, Ingrid defied the directive of a police officer who was managing traffic. Not only did she refuse to follow his instructions, she actually continued to drive her vehicle into him. This is very clear on video footage which by the way, NTV conveniently left out. 

Here, Ms Turinawe drove into one of the police officers repeatedly and in fact, this was a serious assault and it was therefore appropriate that she be arrested. It should be noted that the commander in charge, on the scene, ordered four female officers to make up the arrest team and despite being correctly informed that she was being placed under arrest, Ms Turinawe again defied Police and resisted to leave the vehicle. Indeed she struggled with them, grabbing the steering wheel and hitting and biting the officers.
Therefore, while acknowledging that Police Constable Alinda Irene acted unprofessionally, we must not lose sight of the genesis and background of the incident, especially the circumstances surrounding the incident, and who had primary responsibility for its occurrence.

Ingrid sought to attend an illegal assembly organised by an unlawful society. When this assembly failed to take off, she refused to comply with lawful instructions of a police officer performing traffic management duties. She used a motor vehicle to physically strike a police officer repeatedly. When informed that she was to be detained, she resisted arrest. She hit and beat police officers. This is all clear on video footage. These are plain facts. Indeed while they absolutely do not excuse the misconduct of one police officer, these facts are nonetheless relevant material. While we hold our Uganda Police to high moral and professional standards which we should, at the same time, we should expect our political leaders to hold themselves to equally high or even higher standards. Ms Turinawe is an aspiring lawmaker; it is expected that she should desist from her usual practice of being a law-breaker.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I wish to assure the country that the Uganda Police Force aspires to maintain the very highest professional, ethical and behavioural standards and to respect and uphold rights of individuals and groups. The Police continue to protect and serve all in Uganda including those who criticise, insult, defy and assault them. 

It is obvious that police officers in the course of carrying out their duty of protecting life and property, ensuring law and order and preventing and detecting crime, are usually compelled to deal with people who do not respect the law. However, because of their training, they always aspire to exercise professional restraint and act within the standard operating procedures in managing situations.

The following is a response to the fresh queries raised by my colleague, the hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition. He stated that of recent, His Excellency, Yoweri Museveni, the President, the Minister of Defence and the Chief of Defence Forces have been quoted by the media issuing coup threats to Parliament. And I quote him, “It would appear that the President and his Executive are planning to execute a palace coup against Parliament like it happened in Russia under President Yeltsin.” 
I would like to calm down the minds of all those who were upset by the misrepresentation of what happened in Kyankwanzi in the media. First of all, I would like to assure hon. Nandala-Mafabi that the situation which led to the palace coup in Russia in 1993, when President Yeltsin wrestled with the Supreme Soviet Union of Russia and the Congress of the People’s Deputies for control over Government, cannot arise in Uganda. 

I would like to support him when he says, “We the people are empowered by the first Article of our Constitution and we can never allow such baseless rumours to come to pass.” Yes, those were baseless rumours. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is absolutely right. They were not only rumours, they were actually baseless.

I would like to put on record that when we were in Kyankwanzi during the NRM retreat where I happened to be, the President said that some people have been compromised by the behaviour and utterances of some honourable members in Parliament. The President said that if we do not change our behaviour of irresponsible political talk and acts, good people who do not want to associate themselves with such bad behaviour will shun politics. When decent people begin to shun politics, this will lead to bad people taking over politics. If bad people seize control of politics, this will invite the Army to come back into active politics. He was not saying that it is happening now or that it is about to happen; he was simply saying that if a situation like that occurred, where good people shun politics, then what would you expect? That would be the problem.

Our history is that the Army had been a political army as you know, but by our reforms we have professionalised the Army and put it under civilian control - make that correction there; civilian government is alright but I am saying civilian control. We have no reason to threaten Parliament because after all, the Army is well represented here as you know very well and I would like to assure the country that the Army, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces, will continue with the constitutional mandate assigned to it under Article 209 of our Constitution. 

On the separation of powers, the Leader of the Opposition stated and I quote, “It is very wrong for the Executive to gag Members of Parliament on how they discuss national issues in the House. Members of Parliament are voted by the people of Uganda, not the Executive. The Executive should do their work and let the other Arms of State do their work as spelt out in the Constitution.”

These statements by the Leader of the Opposition in Parliament were made after some hon. Members of Parliament protested the forging of their signatures and others sought to withdraw their signatures which had been unduly obtained in the recent fruitless effort to recall Parliament from recess. 
The issue of separation of powers between the three arms of the State is a political doctrine which must be upheld by all the politically sober states. I have endeavoured in those many pages to discuss the theory of this doctrine in order for all of us to come to terms when referring to this principle, so that we are all on the same page. But allow me, Madam Speaker, not to read it. I invite you, colleagues, to go through that when you have the time. 

If we turn to page 25, the third paragraph: Madam Speaker, all the above are modifications intended to make the doctrine workable other than leaving it in its strictest raw form which the Leader of the Opposition implies in his question. This is a doctrine that has required modification to suit the modern government and its realities. Consequently, the doctrine as envisaged by Montesquieu does not exist anywhere in the world because there is no government that observes the strict separation of powers as stipulated originally by Montesquieu. The focus has come much more on the spirit of separation of powers.

Montesquieu did that because his main concern was tyranny of the absolute monarchy in France where he came from, which was the dictatorship of the day. This is a doctrine that was designed as an anti-dictatorial mechanism. Apparently, it is more accurate to state that what he had in mind was a system of checks and balances between the three organs of Government rather than the pure doctrine so that none of the organs would usurp the powers and authority assigned to the others; that while accepting the sphere of influence of each organ, its operations should be with the consent and cooperation of the other two organs.

There must be consultations all around. If the Executive wishes to adopt a policy, it must first publish it so that it is in the open and subjected to comments and debate. The policy must be considered, discussed and passed into law by the legislature. Any individual aggrieved by the policy, either as proposed by the Executive or the laws enacted by the Legislature, should have access to courts for the purpose of determining the validity, legitimacy and constitutionality of the policy or laws passed.

We can still speak of separation of powers with regard to the process of determining the public policy to be adopted. In considering the policy to be proposed, the Executive should not be unnecessarily hampered by interferences from the Legislature or the Judiciary.

Madam Speaker, when Members of Parliament arranged to petition the Speaker for a special sitting of Parliament, the Executive was aware that the matter that the Members were pursuing, for example, discussing the cause of death of a colleague, was not in the ambits of Parliament. The Executive had already ascertained that some Members were merely pursuing their political agenda and so, the Executive had a right to comment on this kind of fuss. This matter is already in court and those who care to follow the proceedings of court can be witnesses that indeed some honourable members were fussing with an issue that needed to be handled by other competent organs of the State.

Experience has shown that the functions of Government are best performed in a climate of the Constitution and cooperation between the organs of Government. This experience has been accumulated over many years. But there is also the realisation that it is not always easy to identify and distinguish powers, which are purely judicial, administrative or executive and even if this were possible, whether it is desirable, that they should be exercised by one organ rather than the others.

Under quasi legislative and quasi judicial functions, the Executive copes with a great deal of work, which would be impossible or incomplete if we were to adhere strictly to the rules of the doctrine of separation of powers. Certain public activities may need the framing of laws involving knowledge of technical matters and therefore call for the expertise of an administrator rather than a legislator. Similarly, sometimes rules and regulations may require judicial experience to make, even if they are strictly legislative.

A critical look at the provisions of our Constitution suggests that in each of the above three Arms of State, we find an element of the powers of its sister institution. This is not by accident but was intended by the framers of the Constitution and the Constituent Assembly.

The Judiciary in certain instances performs quasi legislative functions while many times the legislature sits as a judicial body. For example, in the various adhoc and permanent committees, the Legislature operates like a court. They gather and analyse evidence, determine and pass judgments. Could we call such an arrangement usurpation of the judicial powers of the Judiciary?

Similarly, the Executive has legislative powers because in every Act, there are ministerial powers of legislation by way of statutory instruments, ordinances, order or otherwise, as the Constitution says. This is what is collectively referred to as system of checks and balances, which is, in my view, the modern modification of the doctrine of separation of powers.

Finally, under this arrangement of both self and external regulation, the courts have a fundamental role to play. Courts are the ultimate checks on the excessive abuse of powers by the other organs. This means that the decisions of court must be respected by the other organs of Government.
Article 98 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda creates a central authority of Government. The Executive power is invested in the President. Article 99 says that the President may exercise this power indirectly through the officers subordinate to him/her and in carrying out its mandate, the Executive carries out an oversight role over other organs of the State in the ways I have listed on page 29.

All these, if I can go back to the fourth paragraph on page 29, and others are clear manifestations that there is no absolute separation of powers between the organs, but a system of checks and balances. It must be noted however, that the Executive has the powers of not only the instruments of coercion but the superintendent of the Consolidated Fund and so forth.

In conclusion on this issue, it must be observed that the doctrine of separation of powers and its modification are a means of democratic governance. Therefore, separation of powers came about, initially as a convenient device for division of labour. The idea that separation also discouraged operation and tyranny came in as a byproduct of the necessity to diffuse the powers of Government for efficiency and effectiveness.

Nowadays, however, the doctrine has come to be accepted and seen as a means of fostering democracy, justice and liberty in the land. It should therefore be employed practically, but not theoretically as my good brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, seems to imply.

The Leader of Opposition also expressed fear that the NRM Caucus has taken over the work of budgeting. He said and I quote: “The work of appropriation or sharing out the national cake is the work of a whole Parliament. No party caucus has such powers.”

I would like to inform hon. Nandala-Mafabi and all those who share his sentiments that the ruling party should have no hand in the formulation of the national budget; that Uganda adopted a multiparty dispensation under the 1995 Constitution as amended in 2005. This means that at one point, only one legitimate political party will be in government - in governance - because all of us are in governance together - please correct that to read Government.

Since 1996, every five years, different political parties have been coming out to solicit for votes - no, it is since 2006, sorry about the errors – from the people to enable these parties come to power. People have been electing parties of their choice depending on the conviction they receive from the way these parties have presented themselves.

In 2011, in which we did the last general election, the NRM together with several other parties, each presented their manifesto to the people and the NRM manifesto at page 231, had those listed chapters. In the introduction of the manifesto, the National Chairman of the party, among other things, said and I quote: “NRM is seeking a new mandate based on the strength of its record of performance to consolidate security, continued stability and to enhance service delivery and job creation.”

The last paragraph in that manifesto states and I quote: “Throughout this manifesto, NRM renews its determination to implement the promises that have been made to the people as stated in the manifesto” - the covenant between NRM and the people of Uganda to make appropriate allocations of resources.
I would like to bring it to the attention of the Leader of the Opposition that sharing the budget process is not something unheard of. He is well aware that in Uganda, we have what we call the Partnership General Budget Support (PGBS). This began in 1998 with the funding of the Poverty Action Fund. Since that time, the Government of Uganda with the development partners share in the budget planning and allocation in the key sectors. Does that mean that the development partners have removed the budgeting process from Parliament?

I would like to assure this House that what the NRM budget caucus is doing is a legitimate part of the budget process which intends to put emphasis in the priority areas for service delivery. I want to add that the law regarding budgeting still stands and is conformed to. There was never any intention by the NRM to take away the powers of this House and all those who are empowered to do the budgeting under the law. We have no intention of doing it and obviously the only way we could do it is to have amendments which we would have to bring to this House to amend. So, that is not our intention.  

The Leader of the Opposition has also made several remarks on the relationship between Government and the media.

 (i) 	He said that some sections of the State and Government gag the media and stop them from doing their work;
(ii) 	That persons thought to be holding strong dissenting views on Government are not allowed any space or airtime in the media.
(iii) 	That some media houses are facing closure from Government if they do not stop publishing critical material to the powers that be.

The allegations against Government were based on rather uninformed parameters and a lack of realistic appreciation of Government-media relations and operations in Uganda today. However, in order to understand the issues raised and Government’s commitment to developing the media industry, it is important to highlight briefly, the history of the media in Uganda.
By 1990, the media in Uganda was largely state-owned. Radio Uganda and Uganda Television were the sole local broadcasters since the 1960s. The New Vision, a government newspaper, was the main daily broadsheet newspaper. The public media served a mainly informative role to rally citizens for national programmes.

By 1993, the media sector was liberalised. Liberalisation by Government attracted heavy investment in the media with multiple private actors, particularly in print and broadcasting. Today, we have 244 operational radio stations and 44 television stations in Uganda. There are 67 publications including newspapers and magazines operating in print and some on-line. Social media is now gaining popularity and I am impressed that the Leader of the opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, is on the social media. He is on Twitter although he is not very active. (Laughter)

Proliferation necessitated requisite regulation. This expansive growth of the media necessitated requisite regulation. The Press and Journalism Statute, 1995 established the Media Council which regulates the print media while the Electronic Media Act regulates the electronic media/broadcasters. The statute spells out, among others, a code of ethics for journalists, disciplinary committee to mediate between journalists and the State; and between journalists and the public.

The Electronic Media Act provides for a Broadcasting Council to regulate broadcast media, for example, Radio and TV; it spells out modalities for acquiring a broadcasting license and frequency. It highlights a code of conduct for broadcasters. Those from East Africa are bound by this code. The Act also spells out sanctions for errant broadcasters. Parliament has recently merged the Electronic and Broadcasting Acts.  
So, in response to the allegations: “That some sections of the State and Government gag the media and stop them from doing their work,” the government has good intentions towards the media. For the last 27 years, this Government proved and demonstrated the close working relationship it has had with the media. The media industry in Uganda enjoys far much unprecedented freedom today than at any time in its history and the Uganda media industry is the most free not only in the region but in Africa.

Throughout history, journalists have played an important role in society. They are a vehicle to information delivery through the print and electronic media. However, the quality and manner in which they disseminate the information determines the quality of the society they serve. They may either destroy or develop the society. It is the responsibility of the elected government to enforce the law where the media is over-stepping its mark, not necessarily on the government, but the prevailing peace and stability in the country. 

Rather than inform, educate and entertain the public, some media in Uganda are characterised by engaging in sensational reporting, lack of investigative journalism, political compromises and blackmail coupled with corruption – thus disseminating false information which may be harmful, destabilizing and inciting and conflicting and so forth. 

Lack of Professionalism – one finds some Disc Jockeys (DJs), comedians, masquerading as journalists and these are the majority on FM stations countrywide. (Laughter) There are some DJs who are perfect, there are some comedians who are okay on radio or television stations but there are some who masquerade as journalists when actually they are not. We all know this is the truth.  

When the government attempts to enforce the law as is required by the Constitution with regard to the media, cries of gagging the media come up. It is unfortunate that our dear friends in the Opposition only look at one side - the media - insensitive to the larger masses who may be affected by the negative intentions of some media houses. Some reporters or quasi journalists in media houses have been hired to fight personal wars of different people. Therefore, whereas the media is credible in many ways and with good intentions, it is sometimes their methods of work which raise eyebrows. Government does not gag the media.

On the allegations that persons thought to be holding strong dissenting views on Government are not allowed any space or airtime in the media; Madam Speaker, the relationship between Government and the media still goes far and beyond allegations by members of the Opposition. To date, we have more media houses opening up in both the electronic and the print sectors. However, it should be noted that Uganda is one of the few countries in Africa where the media is flooded with practitioners that are not well qualified. Government has often been flexible in enforcing certain standards just because the media is still young but now it has come of age and should make every effort to comply with the law, as laid down, to avoid unnecessary conflicts, which are many times taken advantage of by selfish politicians who exploit the media to disseminate harmful information.

Some media houses have specialised in disseminating information, which Government and the larger public consider inciting and harmful to the prevailing peaceful conditions in the country. Government has not directed any media house not to grant airtime to anyone holding dissenting views on Government. Rather, in some instances, where the person to be hosted or otherwise is suspected to have messages that may fault the terms and conditions of the media license granted, it is up to that particular media house management to take appropriate action.

Where the political temperature is considered high, then Government, as mandated, has to maintain law and order. The media should also avoid putting selfish commercial interests ahead of good quality journalism that develops this country. Money is admittedly hard to resist for them because many of them have invested in media as a commercial enterprise but national interests should be at the back of every media practitioner’s mind. The media should avoid hosting guests whose business is to ferment chaos in the name of practising free speech.

On the allegations that some media houses are facing closure from Government if they do not stop publishing critical material to the powers that be - unless a media house contravenes its operating conditions thus violating the Constitution, I wish to state categorically that Government has not, nor does it have intentions of closing down any media house critical to the powers that be, as the Leader of the Opposition states.

Several so-called anti-government media houses are operational today; Monitor Publications, KFM Radio, CBS, Suubi and so forth. (Member, “Kanungu”) Even Kanungu actually. That is true, I should have added Kanungu. It is true that even some government owned media are anti-government in terms of the activities that are carried on. It is not the institution itself that is government but those who use it.
It is true that the media should enjoy freedom but this freedom must be enjoyed within the context of the broader provisions of universal human rights. It is not right for anyone, including the media, to enjoy rights well beyond that which is permissible by law. It is not in order for some people to mislead the public into thinking that human rights have no limit. As a Government in charge of this country, we emphasise constitutionalism and if there is need to call some media houses and persons to order, Government will do it within the provisions of the law.

Therefore, the notion that to be a journalist, one must be on a collision course with the government of the day is misplaced. There are some media houses that deem themselves as the de-facto opposition. The media industry should adjust its mind set and practice good journalism to be able to play its role as a partner in development. 

There have been isolated incidences where the law enforcers have conflicted with journalists. This has happened in times of heated exchanges between the law enforcers and law breakers like rioters. This is one instance where the journalists are called upon to be more logical than following their instincts to capture pictures and stories. 

I understand that one of the dictums commonly preached in journalism schools is that “No story is worth your life”. Journalists and mere media personnel should desist from being overzealous and in the end blaming the custodians of law and order. In settling riots, tear gas will not discriminate or exempt a journalist and a rubber bullet will not turn corners to avoid a journalist. We would not want the gains made by the media over these years to be reversed. Equally, we must resist an anarchic media because we know how much harm it can cause and the genocide in Rwanda immediately comes to mind. 

I would like to remind you colleagues that for the last 27 years, only one paper has been banned in Uganda. It was banned in the early days and this was the action of the minister responsible without getting Cabinet approval first.

The Uganda Government appreciates the media as vital partners in nation building through their informative, educative and entertainment roles but emphasises responsible journalism. We also need an enabling and synchronised regulatory framework to build a responsible media industry that flourishes and serves Uganda and beyond. Thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister, for the response. Honourable members, we did debate all the areas prior to page 29. If there are any comments, I feel they should deal with the fresh - start from page 20 because that is what is new. The others had been handled in previous debate. Any comments, or are you overwhelmed with information? Nothing useful to add?

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek some clarification from the Prime Minister. On page 21, paragraph two, he quotes a statement by the President, “When decent people shun politics, this will lead to bad people taking over politics and if bad people seize control of politics, this will invite the Army to come into active politics.” The clarification I need is, I do not know whether bad people have already taken over politics or not thus necessitating the Army to take over. Thank you.

5.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI): Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to thank the Prime Minister for his elaborate presentation. Given the fact that this issue is 30,000 pages and we have just got it and it is quoting the law and what should be done, I think we need to go through this document and also consult the law so that we can debate it from an informed point of view. I would plead with you, Madam Speaker, that the debate on the Prime Minister - (Interjections) – yes, it is a response, which calls for debate. It is not a personal statement but a government response, according to our rules.
So, Madam Speaker, I would plead that you allow us to study this document and research because he has quoted a lot of things. He may have told us a true story which will require us to research so that we can come back here and debate from an informed point.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the last comment from hon. Ssimbwa then we can give you that opportunity to go and read.

5.52
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Prime Minister for a well-researched paper that he has presented; it is educative – mostly to those who thought that he could not make such a response. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, I wish to comment on the media. I support what the Prime Minister has said. In many of these media houses – whether radio or TV, there are Opposition members who have got permanent programmes on media houses that belong to Government or where it has a stake. For example, hon. Nabilah Sempala has a permanent programme on Bukedde Radio on a daily basis and we appear together. So there is no way the Leader of the Opposition can say that the Opposition is not given time on air to share their views. Even the FDC vice chairperson in charge of Eastern Uganda, hon. Salaam Musumba, has a programme on Bukedde Radio. That shows that even radios where Government has a stake, invite Opposition figures to share their views. In that sense, I support the presentation by the Prime Minister, especially regarding the media.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we thank the Prime Minister but I will accede to the request of the Leader of the Opposition that Members be given time to read this lengthy statement, develop ideas and a date will be appointed for the debate. So I wish to thank you all for today’s work. As I indicated earlier, I will suspend plenary for two weeks so that we resume on 25th April. But now the sectoral committees should start work on the Budget process. I think I will have to suspend the work of standing committees for those two weeks. However, we shall meet you on Monday – (Interjections) - Tomorrow’s meetings? Okay, the meeting on Monday will also be in the other hall at the President’s Tower. Time is 10 O’clock and we shall only keep you for an hour. Sorry, it will be at 9.30 a.m. Thereafter, you can go and carry out your other business. The House is adjourned to 25th April. Thank you.

(The House rose at 5.55 p.m. and adjourned to Thursday, 25 April 2013.) 

