Thursday, 7 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are welcome. Today in the public gallery we have a number of important visitors and these are our children. We have children from Sir Apollo Kagwa Boarding Primary School, with their teachers. (Applause) 	 Our guests, I want to welcome you and to thank you for considering to come and visit us.  

I also wish to announce to you that Parliament’s Planning and Development Co-ordination Office has, with the support of the American Embassy Information Resource Center, organised a photo exhibition of the human tragedy in Northern Uganda. The exhibition will be staged beginning Tuesday, 12 April 2005, at 11.00 a.m.  It will run through to Thursday, 14 April 2005. It will be set up adjacent to the Member’s Lounge, 3rd floor, facing the West Wing of Parliament House. You are all invited to go and see what is exhibited and notice the tragedy that is facing our brothers and sisters in the North.  

Also, the Appointments Committee will meet tomorrow to consider the important appointments that have been made by His Excellency the President, and this will be at 10.00 a.m. Thank you.

2.47
MS SAUDA NAMAGGWA (Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be guided on the voters’ register, whether the deadline is still April and whether there have been some arrangements to improve on the arrangements that were made before. When I was in Masaka last week I found that there was a lot of outcry from the public that actually when the people went to the centers, nobody was there to attend to them. As a result people were not sure whether they were on the list or not. 

So, I would like to find out from the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs whether actually there is going to be an extension and whether there has been some improvement in the arrangements. I understand that about two people were sent from the Electoral Commission to verify the registers but these people are never available for the public. So, I would like to find out what has been made so far in terms of progress. Thank you.

2.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, yes, the extension is on. The extension lapses on the 8th of this month, that is tomorrow. But that extension notwithstanding, the problems members raised here continued to persist. That is our observation as a ministry, and the Electoral Commission concedes that indeed the exercise has been marred with a number of irregularities.  

Consequently, the Cabinet set up a Committee of Cabinet Ministers and officials of the Electoral Commission to review what has happened in this exercise and work out more concrete proposals to ensure that the forthcoming up-date - because there will be another up-date of one month, after this one - to ensure that the problems that were encountered are avoided in the forthcoming up-date exercise. For instance, if there were insufficient cameras, government should look for money to get enough of them to the sub-counties. Insufficient remuneration of up-date officials will also be addressed. 

So, Mr Speaker, until this committee completes its work, I am unable to give you more concrete proposals that government will propose to improve the process. The problems were noted and as I said there is a team looking at all these problems and sooner than later this team will complete its work and make its recommendations to Cabinet. My ministry will come with a report to this Parliament for your information.

THE SPEAKER: What I can also say is that my office has received complaints from all corners of Uganda and the sum total from these communications received is that there has not been any exercise to talk about.  

2.50
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Because of the kind of schedule we members of Parliament have, the honourable minister could make provisions for the second time for the registration of Members of Parliament from within Parliament here because the problem still exists. I beg for your guidance.  

2.51
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukhooli County North, Bugiri): There are two important exercises that constitute a free and fair election. One of them is registration and the other is polling. Often the Electoral Commission invites agents only at polling, but we would like, especially political parties, to also have agents during the registration process so that it can be monitored to the full satisfaction of all the competitors. Will this be possible, Mr Minister?

2.52
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is very good that you have noticed this. Where I come from most of my sub-counties are hilly and there are places where from the day the Electoral Commission announced that it is going to register people, there has never been any person to take the exercise there. Does it mean in that area people have not reached voting age?

Two, we have children who are now students in secondary schools, even in primary some of them are of voting age –(Interjection)- Mr speaker, I want to be safeguarded. You know that recently there was an old man of 71 in primary 7, so what I am trying to talk about is a true story. To add to that, in my district in Sironko there is a councilor at the district who has just finished primary 7. What I want to raise is, what provisions has the Government put in place to handle registration of students who are at school but now are of voting age? Now the exercise is ending before holidays are on and this is a serious matter.  

The committee, which the Government has put up, does not need to take time. It is common knowledge the exercise has had problems, you just decide that such and such a day between this and that period we shall do the exercise. One, increase the number of cameras; two, increase the number of people who are carrying out the exercise; three, put in place a provision for those who are not around, like students, so that the time when they come they are registered. Thank you.

2.54
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for having conceded to the problems that have been raised in this House in regard to the registration process. He has notified this House that an inter-ministerial committee has been formed to look into these problems.

When is the minister going to come and - this is almost mid-April and he says the registration exercise is going to resume in May. Does the minister intend to come back to this House to tell us how the problems that this House has identified are going to be rectified before the exercise starts? The Electoral Commission should not repeat the same mistakes that they have been making.

THE SPEAKER: What I would say is that the Electoral Commission is an independent body, which should carry out its functions. These functions are not carried out by the Executive, so if there are problems of this nature, I urge the Committee of Parliament in charge of the Electoral Commission to call the Electoral Commission and tell it about these problems. If you give this function to the Executive, some other people in future may query what has been done. So, I think that the Government committee should only be working to assist but the main responsibility is that of the Electoral Commission and our Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee to meet. You summon these people and tell them what you have heard so that the commission itself tells us what it intends to do to solve the problems it has faced.

2.56
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would also like to inform the minister and the House that it is possible the laxity to update the voters’ register by the agents is arising from the fact that those who participated in the photographic voter registration exercise some time around 2002 have I think up to now not been paid. So, the agents are actually so disgusted that they are being used for free and more or less as volunteers. 

I hope this ministerial committee that has been set up will also look into the issues of remuneration of those who did the job and were not paid, before we even consider the issue of emoluments –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The ministerial committee does not pay employees of Electoral Commission. The Electoral Commission pays its employees.

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, just a few minutes ago I do not know whether I heard correctly but I am requesting to be clarified whether what you said in essence is an instruction to the Committee of   Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to take charge of the rot, which is going on the Electoral Commission? Can I be clarified? Are you now ordering this committee to take charge so that things do not go wrong before the referendum? That is my understanding of your statement.

THE SPEAKER: No, my statement is to guide you. The Electoral Commission is an independent body but the Minister of Constitutional Affairs is answerable to it. I was only saying that the best way to deal with this matter is for the committee of Parliament, which is also in charge of the Electoral Commission, to call the commission and inform it of the queries we have heard from the public and try to find out from this commission what it intends to do. 

As I have told you, I have received a number of letters from all corners of Uganda on this subject and I told you my conclusion from these letters. So, let us also assist the minister by using our committee to call the commission so that we hear from them, then the committee will report to Parliament what it has heard from the commission and solutions that have been suggested. That is what I am suggesting. 

MR AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Going by your directive, we are going to summon the Electoral Commission so that they appear before the committee on Tuesday and by Thursday we should be able to report to this House. 

2.59
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, but I am worried. Much as your word can be taken for guidance the whole thing is about money. Is the minister aware that the money is not enough? As much as the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee invites the Electoral Commission, we will come to the same thing. I suggest that the Minister of Finance should just release the money and the exercise goes on as it is supposed to. Otherwise, even if we set up these commissions, the time is flying, elections are about to come, and it is money. We should just get the figure and the Ministry of Finance should be instructed to release the money.

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, what we want to hear from the commission itself is that the problem is money that has not been released, then we shall deal with that. But we cannot talk for the commission until we have heard about from them. 

3.00
MR KEN LUKYAMUZI (Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I have two concerns. One concern alludes to what the Chairman, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee has said. While we are expecting to speak to the Electoral Commission, it is not enough for us to be sufficiently expectant in view of what is happening in our respective areas. There is a big mess related to registration. Can I put it to the minister concerned that we cannot have the pending election until such a mess has been cleared? That is one.  

Two, the minister has said that the initial deadline was supposed to be tomorrow. He also says that there is another exercise. Does that exercise refer to the pending referendum elections, or to the coming parliamentary and presidential elections? Those are my concerns. 

THE SPEAKER: Honorable member, as you have heard from the chairman, we will get the reports from them next week, but let us conclude this.

3.02
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Terego County, Arua): Mr Speaker, we seem to be underplaying the problem at hand. A few of us have gone to the field, have moved in our constituencies, and the problem is more grave than we seem to make it. For example, for the last two weeks I was in Terego County, I moved from sub-county to sub-county and the funniest aspect of it is that in a county with a population of over 200,000 and with six large sub-counties, there were only three cameras. These cameras were entrusted to personnel who were ill facilitated to traverse the vast place and with what is happening now it is quite true that many people out there, who are eager to have themselves registered, do not have the opportunity. 

If we really expect to have full participation of eligible Ugandans in the forthcoming referendum and subsequent elections, there is much more that we as a country need to take into consideration. While I appreciate the input and assurance by the Chairman, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee that they will be able to make a report to this House on Thursday next week, it is not a report that we are interested in. We are more interested in the continuation of this exercise. Let us as a government consider this matter. And if it were possible let the committee, together with the Electoral Commission and the line Ministry of Finance, as expeditiously as possible sit and reconsider their positions. Otherwise, the problem out there is very grave.  

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, do you have anything to say or we end here? Okay then, let us move to another - the committee will handle this and inform us some time next week.

MOTION SEEKING THE APPROVAL OF THE HOUSE TO WITHDRAW THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

3.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Constitutional Amendment Bill No. 2 of 2005 be withdrawn.  

As you are aware, upon completion of the constitutional review process by the Constitutional Review Commission, the Government embarked on amending the Constitution in order to give effect to the following: the report of the Constitutional Review Commission, the proposals of Government to the Constitutional Review Commission, and the recommendations in the White Paper. 

Mr Speaker, the Government considered very seriously the question of whether the Constitution should be amended by three separate Bills under Articles 259, 260 and 261, or to amend the Bill by one Bill commonly referred to as the omnibus Bill. After much consultation, the Government decided to adopt one Bill, which has become popularly known as the omnibus Bill. 

The advantage of the omnibus Bill is that all the provisions of the Bill are enacted and they come into force at the same time. Additionally, Article 259, on the referendum, and Article 260, on ratification by district councils both require voting to be on the Bill that contains the amending provisions, and not on separate, individual amendments. Incidentally, the Referendum and other Provisions Act of 2005, which was recently passed by Parliament, had been tailored, among other things, to accommodate the omnibus approach to amending the Constitution. 

For those reasons, government introduced in Parliament on 15 February 2005, the Constitutional Amendment Bill No.2 of 2005, and the Bill was read for the first time here and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. However, after wide consultations with leaders in government and having listened to the concerns raised by members in this House and outside this House, and in the interest of cohesion and consensus in the House and outside the House, the Government has decided to withdraw the omnibus Bill from Parliament.  

I would like to, however, mention that the omnibus Bill is a legally sound procedure for amendment of the Constitution. Therefore, in spite of government’s decision to withdraw it, my chambers will continue to vigorously defend the Bill in the Constitutional Court. Government has, therefore, decided to proceed with the constitutional amendments and the transition as follows:

As far as the constitutional amendment exercise is concerned, upon withdrawing the omnibus Bill government will introduce two separate constitutional amendment Bills in Parliament. The first Bill will cover amendments to be passed under Article 260. This Bill will amend provisions, which are intended to introduce the regional tier system of governance.

The second Bill will cover amendments, which are to be passed in accordance with Article 261 of the Constitution. Those are the Articles that are passed without a referendum or ratification of districts councils but which will be supported at the second and third reading by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament.

As far as the transition from the Movement to multi-party political system is concerned, government, having withdrawn the omnibus Bill, will move a motion under Article 74 of the Constitution for Parliament to pass a resolution to request the Electoral Commission to hold a referendum for the change of the political system from the Movement political system to multi-party political system as under Article 74(1)(a). 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Constitution (Amendment) Bill No.2 of 2005, be withdrawn. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

3.11
CAPT (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I have heard the hon. Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs and I have always heard him even before this omnibus Bill. He is the same minister and the same hon. Adolf Mwesige, with his legal mind, who relentlessly defended the introduction of the omnibus Bill in this House. It is in the Hansard. And hon. Adolf Mwesige, if you were a commander on an operational field you would be put to the firing squad for misleading and for wasting time. You should be put to the firing squad or the guillotine because hon. Adolf Mwesige, the man who came here and defended this omnibus Bill, is the same man coming here without telling us these concerns.

I want hon. Adolf Mwesige to take up the microphone again to tell us the concerns raised by honourable members and the concerns of people of Uganda outside this Parliament. We do not want to be taken for granted, Mr Speaker, to come here –(Interruptions)

DR PHILIP BYARUHANGA: Thank you very much, hon. Capt. Gumisiriza for giving way. I am just seeking clarification because the member on the Floor has just said that if hon. Mwesige were a commander leading an operation, he would be put to the firing squad straight away. I am trying to find out whether he would be put to the firing squad without any trial. Can Capt. Gumisiriza clarify whether hon. Mwesige would just be put to the firing squad without trial? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I have to advise that each member is given five minutes and, therefore, you should put the five minutes to maximum use. The issue now is whether to permit or not to permit interruptions. You should concentrate on that because with these interruptions, a member may really lose his time. So I advise you to put the five minutes allotted to you to maximum use.

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA: Mr Speaker, let me make one or two statements and I yield the Floor. We come here to discuss serious matters and I respect hon. Adolf Mwesige, he knows his law. So I want him to tell us the concerns raised by members of the House and Ugandans out there about this omnibus Bill. It is not a matter of coming here to say, “Having listened to the concerns of members here and people outside …”. What are these concerns? 

Yesterday you were a very strong advocate of the omnibus Bill. Now you want Parliament to support your motion for the Bill to be - and it took a lot of time, a lot of energy, a lot of sitting, a lot of money above all for the same law, which hon. Adolf Mwesige was defending. That is why I am saying that if you were a military man on the operations, you would be put to the firing squad. Hon. Dr Byaruhanga, whatever he is saying -(Interruptions)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, the honourable member is on record for being a very strong Movement supporter. At the moment he talks as if he is not, which would indicate there has been change in his attitude. Is he in order to imagine that human beings, on seeing a new reality, cannot change?

THE SPEAKER: Really, I cannot rule on that because it is a situation of individual assessment.

CAPT. (RTD) GUMA: Mr Speaker, these abilities to see new changes all of a sudden all the time, hon. Kabwegyere is very good at that, having extra ordinary abilities to change with changing circumstances. 

All I am saying is that I want the concerns of members in the House to be explained in some reasonable depth by hon. Adolf Mwesige; and the concerns raised by some other Ugandans outside this House. Before I support your move to request this House for your Bill to be withdrawn, I want these concerns to be given. Some of us take time to listen to professionals. If a lawyer is talking about a legal thing, I use a lot of my energy to listen and understand. There are some people, who are talking about this two-thirds business at the committee stage; I saw you yesterday raise your arm against it. You will be the same person Adolf Mwesige, when you are taken to court, to come here to start pleading with us. That is my problem, hon. Adolf Mwesige. Thank you.  

3.19
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion. This motion is well intended. I am surprised that any member of this House would oppose this motion, because the process of constitutional review has been in place for quite some time. We have some important exercises that must be conducted following a particular timetable. We must have elections on time and we need the Constitution reviewed. The separation of the Bills gives us members of this House an opportunity to vote at the second and the third readings, on issues that are related, separately. 

The two Bills that have been suggested, one is for amendments brought under 260 and another amendments under 261. We can handle the two, and for the one that –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and thank you very much, hon. Kizige, for accepting this point of clarification. I wish you could put me in the picture. I have attentively heard you justify why there is now need to have two separate Bills. What I would like you to clarify is why the same reasons you are adducing now could not have held water yesterday, but only today. What went wrong? Is it because of the litigation, which is on going in the Constitutional Court? Can you please, clarify?

MR KIZIGE: Mr Speaker, as a scholar of contemporary management, I know of something called a paradigm shift. It does not require a lot of time for it to take place. So, for anybody who can conceptualize issues at any moment in life, you can always have a paradigm shift. I do not see anything wrong with that.  

But who in this House does not know that some of our colleagues in this House have gone to court? This process has to continue, even the Constitutional Court has wisely ruled against an injunction to stop this House from proceeding with the constitutional review process in that Bill. But who knows that people could appeal to the Supreme Court for the same injunction and then the process is stalled? I know the omnibus Bill is not illegal in any way but it is necessary that this exercise continue expeditiously. For that matter I urge all members in this House to support this motion, give it all the blessing, and we hand the two Bills presented before us expeditiously and we move on schedule. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.26
MS SARAH NAMUSOKE (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wish to first of all thank the minister for coming to this House and, let me say, swallow the pride and say, “We are withdrawing this thing”. However, I think he would have gone ahead and confessed and apologised to this House for wasting our time and for really being bigheaded. While the House said this thing is wrong, the minister stood here and everybody - including my brother, hon. Kizige, said that the thing is okay. Now they are standing up to say, “By the way, we want to withdraw the thing”. Surely, confession is good for the soul and I think it is good for the soul of this House and the soul of this nation to say, “Look, we were wrong. We want now to work together and go forward as one team. We need to work together”.  

I want the honorable minister to clarify to me, we have moved from the huge minibus - like the villagers call it - but we seem to be going into the smaller minibuses. You have moved from the big Bill and you are saying now you are bringing two smaller Bills. How sure are we that these ones will also not be contested? Can you clarify that what you have done – because people raised concerns and now you have come up with what you think is going to be good. From what I hear you are saying the bigger one was also okay but we are anyway cutting it into smaller ones, yet people said that the bigger one was not okay. Are we sure that these smaller ones are not going to be contested in court?

Will you not come back here to defend your little minibuses and then eventually withdraw them? Can I be clarified and assured that if I am going to support the withdrawal, it is going to be genuinely well researched and they are no loopholes, and there will be no people taking government to court? 

Of course we know that lawyers of government have lately not been doing very well in court; surely we do not want to go in that direction. I think that is why the minister is coming here to withdraw it because he knows the case would go against government. Please, assure me if you can. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to clarify so that this does not come up time and time again?

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE, JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Well, I have said in my statement, Mr Speaker, that the Government will continue to defend the petition that was filed to challenge the omnibus Bill because we are convinced that the omnibus Bill had merits. But the constitutional amendment process we are going through is not for the Ministry of Justice alone. It is for Parliament and it is for the people of Uganda. So, if people think that by splitting the Bills, that is the best procedure to go - and we think even with three Bills there is nothing fatal that we commit in amending the Constitution. If the three Bills can bring consensus in this Parliament, why not have them? 

If that approach can bring consensus so that even those who had petitioned - who are members of this House anyway - can go along with everybody, why not take that approach? So, the change of heart is not out of concession, defeat or fear. That is not true. We have won the first round in the courts of law, hon. Namusoke Kiyingi knows that very well. The application for the injunction was dismissed and we are pursuing the second round, which we think we will win because we are very clear that the omnibus approach is a legally sound approach. But because by splitting the Bills every Member of Parliament will be on board so that by amending of the Constitution we will have consensus, we think we should go by that approach.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think her clarification was that you are moving from a coach to a 28-seater, isn’t it omnibus, and won’t it be challenged as omnibus to 28-seater? (Laughter) 

MR ADOLF MWESIGE:  Mr Speaker, how big is omnibus? How omnibus is omnibus; that is the question. How many clauses should a Bill have in order for it not to be omnibus? In my opinion even a 2 Clause Bill is an omnibus Bill for as long as it contains different clauses. So, if we were to follow that line of argument that even the 3 Bills will be Omnibus in themselves, that means we would never pass any law in this Parliament. 

Last time we passed the Land Act here, in which Act there is customary tenure, leasehold tenure, mailo tenure, freehold tenure; all those provisions are in the Omnibus Land Act. So, so as long as we have separated the procedures through which these Bills will go through, they are omnibus to the extent that they contain many articles. Of the course, the alternative would be to bring a Bill on each amendment. I do not know whether that is the approach Parliament would like to adopt; I do not think we would succeed in that. 

So, while there are many clauses, like the first Bill will contain provisions that will seek to introduce the regional tier; although we are amending four clauses, that is  clause 5, 178, 176 and 189, the subject matter of the Bill is the same namely, the regional tier.

MR AWORI: Thank you, Mr Minister. As you have rightly put it, this matter is still a matter of litigation before the law courts and you have said among other things, that you will continue to defend the position of the government. In other words it is still before the bench. When is the doctrine of sub-judice applicable? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, the doctrine will not be applicable in this case because the court itself in its ruling allowed you to continue debating the omnibus Bill.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Speaker, I am happy that the minister is withdrawing the Bill although it will have been more gentlemanly to accept that one of the reasons was because of the court case.  However, isn’t it better at this stage to negotiate with the people that have taken government to court so that you settle this matter out of court rather than pushing it when you know very well that this, although you have not mentioned it, is one of the reasons why you are withdrawing the Bill?

THE SPEAKER: Have you finished, hon. Sarah Kyama?

MS KIYINGI: Yes.

3.32
MR DANIEL KIWALABYE: (Kiboga County East, Kiboga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank government for having again exhibited that characteristic of listening to the alternative ideas from the people. There has been a lot of talking on this so-called omnibus Bill. For those with legal minds, I think they have been having a lot of problems with us who are not lawyers, trying to find out the best way forward. Should we support the omnibus Bill and amend it and then afterwards be embarrassed when this thing is taken to court and it is over ruled? But now when the government reconsiders the position and says, “No, let us withdraw”, it is a sign of compromise and I would like to thank the government for that. 

However, Mr speaker, I would have also liked the minister to tell us and tell Ugandans what would be the cost for this in terms of time, because yesterday here Members were very much concerned. In fact, we amended our rules simply because of the question of time. We wanted to handle this exercise expeditiously so that we transit smoothly and in time. With this proposal to withdraw the Bill, what will be the cost in time? How much time are we going to lose by doing so? And how do we minimize on the loss of time?

Secondly, I would also have liked the minister to let us know whether there is any cost the taxpayer is footing because of this. That is the concern of our people, that it is again costly. 

Mr Speaker, when I read the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee on the White Paper, the committee took time to regroup these Articles which are going to be amended, and I was expecting that maybe when the Bill would come, it would also reflect that arrangement. But then I was assured and when I am assured by not less a person than hon. Adolf Mwesigye, I am comfortable as far as that legal aspect is concerned. I thought we were on the right track. But now I think there is a cost; the minister should tell us how much the country is going to lose simply because of that. Otherwise, I thank the government for this reconsideration of their position. I thank you.

3.35
MR WILFRED KAJEKE (Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I thank government for having realised the mistake and come to this House to withdraw the omnibus Bill. Mr Speaker, I support the motion for the simple reason that in the first instance this Bill should have not come to this House. 

Mr Speaker, I think this House and the Executive should not take this House for granted. In many instances they have misled us and we have been embarrassed. Mr Speaker, you remember last time when we lost the Attorney General, hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi was nominated Attorney General, but he was not approved by Parliament. 

Unfortunately, hon. Adolf Mwesige was supporting the appointment of hon. Amama Mbabazi as Attorney General without approval, but it was later proved to us that hon. Amama Mbabazi was not approved as Attorney General. In fact, as far as I am concerned, he has never been an Attorney General and he should stop purporting to be a former Attorney General because this House never approved him as it did to hon. Prof. Edward Khiddu Makubuya.  

Mr Speaker, I do not know whether it is a coincidence or not, the same hon. Adolf Mwesigye was appointed Deputy Attorney General, a post that does not exist. (Laughter)  Mr Speaker, all these point to the fact that the Executive should become serious, they should not lead us into making mistakes so that we can avoid so many embarrassments. 

Mr Speaker, I support the motion that the Bill should be withdrawn because it was not supposed to be here in the first instance. I thank you.

3.39
MR CHRISTOPHER KIBANZANGA (Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this motion. Sincerely speaking, I wanted to support the motion, but I have a feeling that hon. Adolf Mwesige has moved dishonestly and I have never known him for this, I am surprised.  

Mr Speaker, one of the prayers of the petitioners was that the court should give an order to stop the process; it was denied. He comes here and says they are withdrawing the omnibus Bill, which is the basis of the petition, and that at the same time he will continue vigorously defending the petition for which basis he has withdrawn. This is being dishonest and confusing the country unless –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, so far this issue of whether omnibus Bill is constitutional or not has not had a legal interpretation, and we are not stopping amending the Constitution today. There is need for us to get guidance from the proper authority so that in future we know what to do.  That is why it is necessary that since the matter went to court, to have an interpretation that will guide us in future. We cannot say now those who went to court are right or those who started the omnibus Bill are right until the court has made a pronouncement on the constitutionality of the Bill.  That is why I think it is good that the court proceeds with the case and gives us guidance.

MR KIBANZANGA: If that is the case, Mr Speaker, then we better get the best reasons why it is being withdrawn because there is nothing wrong with it. According to him, he will even win the case unless it is to delay the process and at the end of it all they accuse Parliament for delaying the transitional process.  I have a feeling that they are withdrawing it in bad faith and they are not moving honestly. If I am told the truth, I am ready to support hon. Adolf Mwesige. I thank you very much.

3.43
CAPT. CHARLES BYARUHANGA (Kibale County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also have loved to support hon. Adolf Mwesige, but I am very hesitant that he is withdrawing the omnibus Bill and continuing to defend it; I think there is something he is hiding from us.  

Mr Speaker, one politician by the name of Steven Fortune said the biggest mistake one can always make is to be right; to think that you are always right is the biggest mistake; that is the biggest mistake hon. Adolf Mwesige has.  

Mr Speaker, before I support him, I want him to be clear to this Parliament because we are time bad. We are moving towards the end of the Parliament and towards elections; we have very many laws to make, but the Minister is not telling us when he is tabling the two Bills he is thinking of bringing. That is my fundamental problem. If he thinks this Bill is right, why don’t we continue with it, because he is not telling us when he is bringing the other Bills? 

Winston Churchill said, “If one is going to hell, let him continue going.” You continue, if you think you are actually right. Mr Speaker, if we allow this Bill to be withdrawn and we are not told when he will bring the other bills - and yesterday we were here thinking of how to change our rules to expedite the process, now the Minister has halted the process by withdrawing the Bill we were anticipating to handle first. So, what are we actually doing?

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, we know we are short of time, and this Bill was brought to this Floor by the Attorney General. He himself has for one reason or another found that it is not serving the purpose. Even the honourable member holding the Floor right now is aware that he was not happy with this particular Bill. Is he in order to start suggesting to this House that we should now ask for more debate on the need for withdrawal so that we are convinced, when we all know that this Bill is not good and it should be taken away so that we go to the next subject? Is he in order to waste the time of Parliament and to insist that we should debate more about the withdrawal, instead of actually approving the withdrawal and we go to the next business? 

THE SPEAKER: Since the Minister also justified his motion, I think a Member is entitled to seek further clarification to be able to support it.

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling.  But, Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MRS SARAH NYOMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been listening carefully to the contributions made by Members of Parliament, and I feel we are discussing hon. Adolf Mwesige as a person whereas we know the Bill belongs to Government? Is it procedurally right to discuss people?

THE SPEAKER: Well, some people are like that, they do not consider principle, they consider personalities, and what do I do?

CAPT. BYARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, Winston Churchill once said, “Courage is what it takes for someone to stand up and speak and again courage is what takes someone to sit down and listen”. So, Mr Speaker, what I am trying to get from the Minister is as to when we can get Bills so that we support his withdrawing of the Bill, I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.51
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take the Floor to support the hon. Minister regarding the motion to withdraw the Bill that has been before us. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues in the House, our country at this time of history is experiencing something we have not seen before. First, that we are amending our own Constitution through a fairly lengthy process and we are having participation virtually by all sectors of our society. The Executive has brought the Bill, Parliament is actively discussing it and even the courts are participating as you have seen both formally and through the Judges coming to give evidence before the committee. 

Civil society, mainly our colleagues at the universities, have also been very active, coming to the committees, going to the newspapers, to give very strong arguments one way or the other and it is correct following democratic paths that all of us should listen to each other.  It would be incorrect for Government to hear strong arguments from all these sectors of society and remain adamant on an issue that requires consensus.  

So, on this issue of whether we should go omnibus or not, really the Government has listened to everybody and our reading is that for us to increase consensus, we should compromise with the rest of the society and withdraw the Bill from the form in which it is.  

As hon. Adolf Mwesige has said, the reasons are not purely legal; they are more political so that we are all seen to be moving in the same direction.  But as we do so we have to keep in mind that our key objective is to improve governance and move quickly to develop our country and therefore, time is of the essence.  So, when there is an issue like this where we have argued both in the House and outside and we have listened to other people’s voices, I think it is in our interest that we dispose of such an issue fairly quickly and move on to the next stage.  

So, I would appeal to my colleagues in the House, that on the issue of withdrawal of the Bill, we should be together, it is not a question of scoring points; we think we are moving in the direction that is going to give us higher consensus.

This is not the first time, Mr Speaker that a Government is changing positions on certain points after listening. Even at the point of the White Paper you recall for example, Government had proposed that the office of the IGG should be merged with the office of the Human Rights Commission. 

In the same White Paper Government had proposed certain amendments as far as management of our land system is concerned, but society spoke, MPs spoke and Government, not because things were in court, changed its position on these issues. We withdrew our position on the land amendment and also we withdrew our position that the office of the IGG should be merged with the office of the Human Rights Commission.  

Therefore, it is not correct for us to say the Bill is being withdrawn because there is a case in court. But even if that were the case, the issue why one is here either supporting or opposing a position is to get to a better position.  So, even if it was because a case is in court then Government concedes, then we are better off because we are moving to a position that we all thought was more desirable.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, without really taking a lot of time, I want to appeal to my colleagues in the House, that let us spend our afternoon very well, let us support the Minister unanimously and we dispose of this motion and we move on to another stage. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.53
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for catching your eye -(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: I have to balance up; I have been concentrating on the right hand side, I think I have to give some opportunity to these people on the other side. But for regional balancing as somebody raised, let us get hon. Odonga Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO:  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for according me an opportunity to debate on such a sensitive issue. I sympathize with the Minister, hon. Adolf Mwesige; it is a very tough moment. And by the way in life it is only honest people who feel bad, if you are dishonest you will not feel bad. So, I am seeing the Front Bench being uneasy but that is what it takes to be on the Front Bench.

I rise to support the motion to withdraw the Bill. I imagine those who went to court went to seek redress; they did not go to block the Bill. Once you file a case in court you put your prayers to court, so for us to argue as if hon. Adolf Mwesige is now running away from the court case, destroys the same spirit of those who went to court. 

I am glad none of the people who went to court, is in this House but I guess that is not the spirit in which the issue was taken to court. Anyway it is a Government Bill, you can withdraw it and proceed with it, it is not a Private Members’ Bill. But at the same time the Minister should know that when you are testing deep water, you do not use both legs; you first put one leg and see how deep it is before dumping in the other one, because as of now you are almost politically drowned. I sympathize with the position you are holding. 

I sit on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs; we wasted 40 percent of our time on the issue of omnibus. If the Government had lawyers who could sense this in advance we would have used that 40 percent of our time doing other things.  

Hon. Minister, I still feel you should go and read the Bill because next time you might have to come and present three or four Bills. I am not a lawyer, I am just a paralegal, but I want to caution that you may have to bring three or four Bills because this one, the courts might find some little work to do – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, how are you paralegal? (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Speaker, by default I have really heard these lawyers in the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to the extent that some people even think I am a lawyer. (Laughter) Besides that I am in Law school so I understand some of these issues.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe you are on the way to becoming legal.

MR OTTO: Yes, I am on the way to become legal, but I know there are many people here who are even not paralegals. 

But, Mr Speaker, I want to seek your guidance. Will the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs again sit to start listening to this Bill if it is brought back? I see this Parliament losing another two months. I know it is going through the first reading, then we shall get to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, are we going to pre-suppose that the hearings we made are already enough? That one can be a matter of consensus, but legally I see a situation where the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs must begin fresh hearings and we are time bad. I do not know, Mr Speaker, the Minister might have to make a comment because there are people saying it is a new Bill, and the fact that it is a new Bill might come after this is withdrawn.  

Lastly, I want to say, hon. Minister, hon. Adolf Mwesige, you should not feel bad in any way for what you have done. During the past regimes where hon. Sam Kutesa was the Attorney General, they would not even think of coming to Parliament; they would find other illegal means of solving the problem.  So, the fact that you have come to us, we feel so good that at least there is some legal coherence, not like the regime of hon. Sam Kutesa there.  Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

3.59
MRS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to speak. I thank my colleagues, who have contributed to this motion, and I support the motion moved by the Minister.  

Mr Speaker, I find it rather ironical and contradictory or a contradiction when my colleagues wonder why the Minister is withdrawing the Bill. I am wondering because I would have expected my colleagues to commend the Minister for doing so after listening to the views of the people of Uganda. I would like to commend him for withdrawing the Bill because it is a sign that this Government takes the views of the people of this country very seriously. I urge my colleagues, therefore, to support the Minister in his endeavour to withdraw the Bill because he is doing so in the interest of the people of Uganda.  

Mr Speaker, we all know that change is a fact of life, and in any case if we do not allow him to change, we all know that if we are not ready to take change, change will change us.  Therefore, Mr Speaker, once more I would like to urge all my colleagues in the House to support the Minister in withdrawing the Bill so that we can move expeditiously towards amendment of the Constitution.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.02
MR WAGONDA-MUGULI (Buikwe County North, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I stand to support the motion because I think this is a procedural matter, which should not bog down the House. It is necessary to remove the Bill for the House to move forward, and that is very straightforward. We do not have to waste time because we either support the Government or oppose the Government; this is not a matter for partisan division.  

But what are we learning from this? The discussion of the omnibus Bill started right from the time we had a workshop in Hotel Africana, and many people raised objections for having the omnibus Bill. It took even people who are on the Bench to come to the Committee to give their views that the omnibus Bill was not the best way to go forward. 

When we were discussing the Political Parties and Organizations Bill, I remember we pointed out to Government that there were certain issues that were not right. But because Government was convinced of the correctness of their position and the numbers they had in the House, they went ahead and passed the Bill with all the inadequacies it had. It had to take a legal battle to reverse the position.  

Why does Government always have to wait for people to go to court before it can take seriously the views of Ugandans? I would, therefore, like to commend our colleagues who saw it fit to go to court to find redress to this omnibus Bill disease.  I want also to commend the Civic Society Organisations for coming out and condemning the omnibus Bill.  This is a time for Ugandans to come out and defend constitutionalism; and constitutionalism cannot be realized if the procedures are going to be manipulative or they are going to be fraudulent. 

Kim Ill Sung, in his Jushe idea wrote,” Shame is a revolutionary sentiment.” It is high time our Government started feeling shame when it has done anything or acted in a manner that the people of Uganda do not approve of. It is not a sign of weakness to admit that you have erred. So, I commend Ndugu Adolf Mwesige, although he has not said it, but he would have earned more credit if he had said, “Well, comrades, we did not seem to be very right. Now we have seen the light and we have come back to the straight path.” I think everybody would support the motion. 

So, as we arrange to give this Bill a decent burial -(Laughter)- let us move swiftly, have it withdrawn from the House and then we start on business in a straight manner. I hope that the Government will continue to be sensitive to the people’s views. I hope that the Government will one of these days come and tell the House that after hearing the objection to the third term project, they have also now changed their mind about it. I think that could be very good news for the people of Uganda. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.06
MR ANTHONY YIGA (Kalungu County West, Masaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the withdrawal of the omnibus Bill from Parliament. Much as some of our colleagues expressed their concerns about the omnibus Bill, but I can recall that formerly as Parliament we have never actually pronounced ourselves over this issue.  So some of our colleagues who earlier on were given opportunity to talk, talked as if Parliament had the opportunity to pronounce ourselves over this Bill, and I have been regularly attending this Parliament, that opportunity has never been the case. 

So let us not talk as if the Minister never heeded the advice of Parliament yet the advice of Parliament has never been formally communicated.  Because we have never sat as Parliament to advise the Minister over the omnibus Bill.

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the government for listening to informal opinions from the sections of the public and some of our colleagues who in various seminars, voiced some of their concerns and reservations about the omnibus Bill.  

Mr Speaker, change is inevitable and a wise man always changes, and since our government is composed of wise people, then I commend them for having taken over this virtue and accepted to change.  So I salute them for being honourable and accepted to change and heed to the concerns of the sections of Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, I have a problem of time.  Now that it appears we are going back over the whole process of constitutional amendment as far as presenting of Bills is concerned, I know that, Mr Speaker, you set up a committee recently to advise Parliament on how we are going to handle the transition, and that committee has not yet finished its work.  But now I can see once again we are going back to have a new introduction of the Bill; the whole Bill is for constitutional amendments.

Then, Mr Speaker, I can also see that time is also running out. We have been complaining about registration of voters, yet we are supposed to have the vote on the referendum on the amendment of the political system passed in the fourth year of Parliament.  So Mr Speaker, I suggest that you impress upon the committee you appointed to move in very fast, such that may be next week they advise us on how much time we need to handle the enormous work we have for constitutional amendments. 

I also urge Government to move speedily so that may be tomorrow or next week they present the new bills they want to present so that we are able to move very fast in this important exercise of constitutional amendment. They should also consider availing money to the Electoral Commission so that they register all those who want to participate in the referendum exercise in June, so that no body gives an excuse that he was left out because of such and such reasons. Mr Speaker, I thank the government for withdrawing the Bill and I support the withdrawal. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, AGRICULTURE (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been taking a roll call and I have been tallying and the data I have is that three quarters of the honourable Members of Parliament that have spoken to this issue, have actually supported this motion.  Is it procedurally correct for us to continue labouring this point when there are all indications that everybody almost supports the motion? I thank you, Mr Speaker.  (Laughter)

4.13
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oulanyah): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to make a short statement on the motion moved by the hon. Minister for the withdrawal of the Bill.  

Mr Speaker, the committee I chair listened to over 53 groups of people, 20 Members of Parliament who came in with proposals to improve on the Bill, and was ready to report on the Bill as it is.  But Mr Speaker, the indications from sentiments that had been raised by the public and Civil Society Organisations and in the spirit of moving together in this process, I commend the hon. Minister for taking this decision to refocus our attention on how we deal with the amendment of the Constitution. 

Mr Speaker, it reminds me of the biblical story of the prodigal son. The prodigal son was big headed; he thought he was bigger than his father; he walked away. When the realities of the world set upon him, he decided to go back home. When he came home, his father could not even listen to any apology. His father ordered for the biggest bull to be slaughtered because his son had finally come home.  This House is the father of the hon. Minister. The prodigal son has come back with torn clothes even if his suit looks very nice. But in my mind I see a very shuttered young man running back to his father. (Laughter). This House should just slaughter a bull and receive the prodigal son and proceed.

Mr Speaker, as the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, we have absolutely no objection to the move that has been taken by the government and we support the motion for withdrawal, and Mr Speaker, I propose that the question be put.

THE SPEAKER: There is a Motion that I put the question. Let me then put the question on the proposed motion that I put the question.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

(Question agreed to)

THE SPEAKER: Now I put the question on the motion by the Minister to withdraw the Bill. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: The position is as follows: Against – none; Abstaining - one; For – 124. The Bill stands withdrawn. (Applause)

(Question agreed to)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I make this statement to answer a statement that was delivered yesterday by two hon. Members of Parliament as was promised yesterday.  

Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, some time last week we received information that a group of individuals were planning a demonstration on the streets of Kampala as a way of expressing their views on the third term issue.  Two other demonstrations had previously been held in succession.  

Honourable members, Chapter IV of the 1995 Constitution provides for the protection and promotion of fundamental and other human rights as being inherit and not granted by the State.  However, Article 22 provides that these rights shall be respected, upheld and promoted by all organs and agencies of Government and by all persons.  

It should be noted that the rights and freedoms of individuals do not exist in a vacuum, they exist vis-à-vis the rights of others.  So, where in the process of enjoying one’s rights and freedoms, he or she infringes on the rights of others, the State will always come in to regulate the enjoyment of those rights so that no individual is prejudiced.  

Honourable members will note that section 33 of the Police Act, 1964, mandates the Inspector General of Police to regulate assemblies, processions and demonstrations. Section 33(2) provides that- I quote: “If it comes to the knowledge of the Inspector General of Police that an assembly, procession or demonstration is being organized on any public road or street or at any place of public resort, and the Inspector General of Police has reasonable grounds for believing that the assembly or procession is likely to cause a breach of peace, the Inspector General of Police may by notice in writing to the person responsible for convening the assembly or forming the procession prohibit the convening of the assembly or forming of the procession.”  This was the case in this case.  

It is under this provision that the Inspector General of Police prohibited the demonstration of the 31 March 2005 organised by some individuals. This was done in writing and delivered to the organizers.  Despite this, the organizers went ahead to assemble at the City Square in disregard of the prohibition by the Inspector General of Police, and as a result they were dispersed. 

I wish to mention here, Mr Speaker and honourable members, that some demonstrations in the past have inconvenienced lawful activities of other law-abiding citizens, especially in urban centres.  This is confirmed by the recent petition of traders to the Inspector General of Police expressing their grievances against demonstrations, which resulted in their shops being broken into and generally disrupting business activities.  

Mr Speaker, the Inspector General of Police has got the duty to protect, not only the rights and freedoms of those who are not involved in the demonstrations, but also those who are participating in the demonstration so that nothing harmful happens to them.  It is for this reason that the mandate in section 33 of the Police Act was given to him, and on the occasion of the 31 March 2005 he exercised it lawfully.  

Mr Speaker, and honourable members, let me take this opportunity to reiterate the fact that as we enter the period of political transition to full multiparty politics, it is crucial that all our people play a more active role in determining the future course of democratic governance of our country.  This should be done in an organized manner, consistent with the public good.  In this respect, Mr Speaker, even the rights of others should be respected as we yearn to enjoy our own rights.   Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I beg to move.

4.24
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I would like to react to the statement by the Minister of Internal Affairs.  Mr Speaker, to me the statement is inadequate. It has not addressed all our concerns as we ably put them yesterday in our statement. 

Mr Speaker, when you look at page two of the Minister’s statement, on the second last paragraph, the Minister is telling us that the intended peaceful demonstration was organized by some individuals when actually we wrote to him as distinguished members of this country. We wrote to him, informing him that we are organizing a peaceful demonstration. So, the Minister is not quoting us, honourable Members of Parliament, who wrote to him and is calling us individuals. I believe that the Minister would have really got a courtesy of informing this House that they received a letter from honourable Members of Parliament requesting for the demonstration. 

We informed the Inspector General of Police in time. In fact two weeks to the demonstration and on the eve of our one million-match demonstration, which was code-named “Operation Knock Out Ekisanja,” as we were in our preparations- in fact the officer who delivered the letter found us in a serious meeting organizing a one million match. 

Mr Speaker, sincerely how could we expect the organizers to call off a one million match when people from over the country were already moving towards town?  If the Minister had communicated to us a little bit earlier, maybe we would have communicated to people in Mbale, in Kisoro, in Kotido and elsewhere that, please, do not come. But it was too late to communicate to these people because they were already on their way. The Minister of Internal Affairs denied Ugandans a chance of experiencing a one million match against the third term.

Secondly, Mr Speaker, we all know that one of the cardinal roles of our Police force is to keep law and order. There is no way how the Minister can tell us that they were not in position to keep law and order as one million people match along Kampala streets when they have the capacity to keep law and order of the entire nation. I believe the decision by the Minister was intended to frustrate all efforts especially by those who are saying no to third term.

Mr Speaker, if you may recall the same Minister allowed a peaceful demonstration against the court ruling. Can you imagine people demonstrating against the court ruling! The Minister gave them permission and when others are demonstrating against third term, you are saying, “No, you are not doing it orderly.” 

I believe that the Minister had bad motives. The way people who had gathered for the peaceful demonstration – and indeed you cannot talk about a million because the Minister of Internal Affairs - the Inspector General of Police had to put police officers on all entry points to Kampala. On Entebbe road they were there. Those who were coming from Masaka, Mbarara, Kyengera, there was roadblock. Others who were coming from the other side, all entries were blocked. 

Mr Speaker, when those who really perceived to come and demonstrate, they were dispersed with tear gas and we are still investigating about the tear gas which was used. We are carrying out investigations and when we are through, we shall present our findings to this august House. 

Finally, our good intentions were to test whether the Movement Government is in for total democracy and indeed they totally failed that test not even with an F9, but with an X. We achieved our objective to show Ugandans and international community that in Uganda if you talk about peaceful demonstrations against the Government, you are treated like they treated us. 

We were on CNN for three days, BBC for a full week, Voice of America and other stations. So, Mr Speaker, I believe that justice demands that the Minister apologize to one million people who were going to match and also for the inconveniences the Ministry caused to our brothers and sisters in the business community. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.30
MR MICAH LOLEM (Upe county, Nakapiripirit): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister for this report. You know to avoid doubts, it is better to bring things clear such that even the doubting Thomas has to understand. 

It was true, because you recall when - I think it was FDC that demonstrated - It was very peaceful, police did not disrupt them. Why specifically this other one of 31 March 2005, because it was illegally organized by some individuals not a party? 

Please, tell us which party organized for the demonstration of 31 March 2005? The Movement Government has given people a chance to express all their views even at times some hooligans- I am sorry- if you follow the demonstration of the 31 March 2005, it was not a party. These were some individuals who organized it outside the law. Why don’t you accept that it was outside the law and apologize, not the Minister to apologize? You are supposed to have apologized to Government. That was just a mere treatment. 

MR KIBANZANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my neighbour for giving me an opportunity to really be clarified.  He is saying the demonstration was dispersed simply because it was organized by individuals.  The clarification I am seeking, is there a law that stops individuals from demonstrating?  One day, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi demonstrated alone as an individual. So is there a law or a procedure that stops individuals from demonstrating?

MR LOLEM: Mr Speaker, I just want to tell my neighbour, that when you quarrel in the house with your wife, just because the wife has refused to give you a bed, you just come out and expose; that is ignorance.  So, it was a mere understanding between you and her.  

The content of the matter is that the demonstration of the 31 March 2005 was illegal because the Government has given us - Conservative Party, that is, hon. Ken Lukyamuzi, was given a go-ahead to demonstrate about the power tariffs and it was his freedom to go to all corners.  So, I really want my brothers who really say that the Government should apologize- I really request them that they should apologize for organizing illegal demonstration against the Government.  Thank you very much.

4.30
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  All peace loving Ugandans are in agreement with the Minister that law and order has to be maintained at all times.  But the concern of many Ugandans is that this is being done in a selective manner, some citizens are being treated as second class.  

When 15 ladies of FDC wanted to attend the Women’s Day, they were told that their dressing was improper because they were putting on certain T-shirts.  But other ladies, who donned themselves in banana leaves were said to be dressed properly and they were allowed entry. The 15 women dressed in T-shirts were deemed to be able to cause insecurity.  Now, this is rather selective to any average thinking person.  

MR OPANGE: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way.  I wish to inform my honourable colleague, on 27 May 1980 and subsequent years, all people used to go to Bushenyi dressed in red, but you could not see any green colour in that function. This is what is happening.  Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have listened to this statement.  The issue, which you have to address in this matter, is the law, which you made, and see whether it may cause a problem and therefore suggest how to solve it. In this statement the Minister quotes section 33 of the Police Act and it says that, “If it comes to the knowledge of the Inspector General of Police that an assembly, procession or demonstration is being organized on any public road or street or at any place of public resort, and Inspector General of Police has reasonable ground for believing that the assembly or the procession is likely to cause a breach of peace, the Inspector General may by notice in writing …” – this is I think the problem that there were powers given to the Inspector General of Police to assess the situation.  It could well be that it is not the 15 people who are going to cause the breach of peace, but the other ones in the Ebisanja, who are several thousands, that may cause a breach of peace when they see these who are not donned in the Ebisanja.  

So this is the problem, which I think you have to address and see how these powers given to the Inspector General of Police should be exercised, or if they have been exercised, how they can be questioned.  It is important you address this issue because I personally think it may cause you the problem, which you are talking about –(Interjection)- no, he is still on the Floor. I just wanted to point out an area, which I think he should address.

MR ARUMADRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for broadening the argument.  But I think at an opportune time, this House in its wisdom will find time to plug the loopholes in some of the laws, which are still in our books.

I want to end on the use of violence against peaceful demonstrations by citizens. In my years as a student, I witnessed many riots.  The worst riot was when I was in the University of Nairobi with my senior colleague, the hon. Minister of Works, hon. John Nasasira, in the 1970s.  In 1972 –1975, we almost had riots every term, but I did not see the kind of violence, which is being meted out here.  They would use water to disperse people, but not tear gas - I understand very reliably that it is now being classified as a possible weapon of mass destruction.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much honorable old boy for giving way and for reminding me of what happened to us whenever we had illegal demonstrations at the University of Nairobi. There was tear gas, there were water canons, there were batons and sometimes there was rape and death. All these records are there for anybody to see what happened during those riots at the University of Nairobi.  

I for one, in one of the riots that took place in town, – do not worry about these- hon. Aggrey Awori, you are too old to remember.  I did not participate in that riot in town. I was playing tennis with one of the lecturers, Dr Luka, for those who know him, is an uncle to hon. Mao. The police came and found us in the tennis court and throw tear gas in our court, tear gas chased us from the court and we started running.  I fell in a ditch and by the time I got out of the ditch, I was clobbered. So, if you ever see a limp in me that was part of the riot where I never participated.  There were all sorts of violence meted to us by police, maybe the tear gas only water. I wanted to remind my O.B. Thank you very much.

MR ARUMADRI: I am not going to take issue with my O.B on that, but we were in different parts of the campus. What he experienced I did not see on the part of the university I was staying.  But suffice to say that we are in the habit of using excessive force to disperse peaceful demonstration.  

At Makerere live bullets are used, at MUBS the same, at the Constitutional Square people are shot. Ministry of Internal Affairs should device peaceful ways of dispersing crowds. These are citizens or tax payers, if we are going to handle them so roughly and tomorrow you want votes from them, I think these two do not go together.   I hope the hon. Minister will consider the points I have brought across to him specifically selective application of the law and excessive use of force on peaceful Ugandans who want to express their will. Thank you.

4.46
MR SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Speaker.  Let me take also this opportunity to thank the Minister for trying to give us an explanation as to why a peaceful demonstration was quelled using what tantamount to brutal force.  

I wonder why the Minister and even the police having been communicated to prior to the event that took place that time, they never responded in time. This shows bad faith.  The way I see things, the level of intolerance is penetrating inch by inch, warming or penetrating even the little institutions we have to safeguard in this transition.  At this rate we are going to use the machinery in place to murder others claiming that we are quelling illegal demonstrations.

Mr Speaker, you have alluded to the Police Act. If you look at Chapter 1, of the Constitution, particularly Article 2, somewhere it says, customs or laws that are inconsistent to the Constitution are rendered null and void. We are quoting the Police Act.  The people who sought permission, I think they read the Constitution, particularly Article 17, where it says: “It is the duty of the citizens of Uganda- to protect and preserve public property.” I think they had that in mind when they took pen and paper and even time and resources to communicate to all those responsible such that they get a positive response.  They never got any reaction or positive response.  

Mr Speaker, what does Article 29 say, it says somewhere that all of us have a right to assemble and demonstrate together with others peaceful unarmed and to petition. What kind of gauge did the Police or the Inspector General use to foretell like a prophet that where these people are going before even they assemble they are going to create chaos?  

If we continue like this- I remember hon. Minister we were together at campus, academic staff, you remember when we had a sit down strike and they threatened to push us out. You remember the MWASA strike, if they had used the same dose on us, I wonder whether you would be alive now. 

The amount of tear gas that was minted out to innocent people, even mothers having babies to me was unwarranted.  That is why, Mr Speaker, this statement is still wanting and we are just testing the little institutions we have whether they can withstand the institutions that we have today.  

At the on-start even before we have amended the Constitution or gone into a referendum, tear gas has come out. Everybody now is suffering from things similar to influenza. They poured some of the tear gas clusters on the tarmac; some went into air. 

I think it is better you come out clearly. Mr Speaker, the Minister has said, they will network with all the departments as we go through this transition.  But I see the level of intolerance that is itching its way through most of our institutions. We are going to end up with murder.  

I end with this quotation from the Exodus. Uriah, he was a Jew, the man who wrote this book. He said, “When they went for the trade unionists I knew I was not among the trade unionists, when they went for the communist, I was not a communist, but when they came to me that is when I knew that these guys were terrible.  Wait, hon. Minister when they come to Masaka and they tear gas your house or bullet your house that is when you will know that the statement you have given us is wanting.  

We have got children and your children will get children, let us play fairly well for the betterment of this country. Otherwise, if we gloss over these issues, these are some of the things you are creating.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.51
MR PATRICK MUSISI (Busiro county South, Wakiso):  Thank you very much Rt. Hon. Speaker.  In legal philosophy there is what we call an immoral morality. This originates from what happened to the Germans.  At one time they thought that they would create a beautiful German and all they did by that time was to kill all the other German young males born who did not look like the healthy Germans. What they were doing was immoral, but it was done across the board.  

What we are doing today is to abate something that is wrong hoping that one day it will not catch with us.  We find all the good reasons of doing something wrong. Government has all the good reasons of doing something unwanted. 

I was on Kampala road in the Chambers of Donge and I got out of the Chambers because the place was not air-conditioned.  The whole place had been bombarded by tear gas, but we were not part of the demonstration.  I was amazed and I said, “What is all this about?”  The whole of Kampala road and Kikuubo was just being fired by tear gas. I wonder if that is the type of demonstration that honourable Minister is trying to allude to!  

Therefore, it is only fair to this country that all that is bad, is bad for each one of us. This question of saying that we can hit the FDCs, we can hit the people in Jinja as they did to us when we were attending the PAFO workshop, and at the end of the day come up here with good reasons to explain about the evil, it is all bad for each one of us.  

What I gathered on that very day, the Uganda Young Movementists wrote to the Inspector General of Police. Their purpose was to pre-empt an earlier application that had been given by hon. Michael Mabikke and hon. Latif Sebaggala so that there is sufficient reason to deny an earlier application for a peaceful demonstration.  These were just fake and false applications.  

Therefore, I find no genuine reason where the Inspector General of Police would have come up to cancel out a peaceful demonstration.  What the Minister has done for us this evening is read the law as it exists, but he has failed to specify or to indicate the threat to peace and the rights of others.  

In fact what happened on that very day is that the Police went out just to terrorize the general public, to create fear. I think we have seen some of these things in the past. We have been around when we were being terrorized; some of us have got scars on our bodies because of this type of terrorism.  

Honourable Minister, I just pray and hope that you will not be among the Ugandans that will be judged.  I said the other time that some people have been stigmatised for carrying acts that definitely hurt the rest of us.  I mentioned names here. I need not do the same again.  But please, this country belongs to each one of us and if you are entrusted with any power, any responsibility, execute the same with bit of honour.  Thank you.

4.55
MR MICHAEL MABIKKE (Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I think this House should not condone the misleading statements made by the hon. Minister State for Internal Affairs.  You know, one of the problems dogging Ugandan politics is that individual players fail to acknowledge mistakes, and they keep on doing the same mistake on and on.  What we went through on the 31 March 2005 has been done by many other Ministers in the different regimes that have led this country.  

Mr Speaker, the fact of the matter is, and as the Minister pointed out, the first demonstration was organized by a pressure group. This pressure group was called Patriotic Citizens. The records are there with you; you know this very well.  Our demonstration was organized by a pressure group, a pressure group in the names of Forces for Change.  The application was made on the 23 March 2005. I have got a copy of the application.  On the 29 March 2005, a follow-up letter was written to the Inspector General of Police.  

On the same day I and three others met with Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala.  Maj. Gen. Katumba Wamala said, “Gentlemen, I cannot comment on the planned demonstration until I talk to my boss, the Minister.”  Then we asked him, “Major General, are you in charge of the Uganda Police Force or somebody else is?”  He said, “Yes, I am in charge, but the decision that is going to be taken is not going to be mine, the decision is going to be the Minister’s decision”. This meant that the decision to allow or not to allow demonstration was a political decision.  

Mr Speaker, with me here is a copy of the letter that was written to us by Mr F. X. Rwego for the Inspector General of Police. What did he say?  He said: “Refer to your letter dated 23 March 2005 addressed to Inspector General of Police over the above mentioned subject”- The above mentioned subject is: Peaceful demonstration on 31 March 2005 in support of Ugandans against the third term.  

Your intended demonstration cannot be allowed due to the reasons highlighted in the press release issued today 29 March 2005 by the Minister of Internal Affairs on the same subject.  

Attached is a copy of the press release for your detailed information.  Signed, F. X. Rwego for Inspector General of Police.”  

F. X. Rwego did not quote any law. In fact this statement was a better improvement of this because of the statement we made yesterday.  Otherwise, the letter refusing the demonstration quoted no law, but it quoted a press release. I have got a copy of the press release, Mr Speaker.  The press release by the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs quotes no law; it is full of politics.  

MR KIWALABYE:  Mr Speaker, I want to be clarified by the honourable member on the Floor as to whether he also heard on radio that a former presidential candidate in the names of hon. Aggrey Awori was lifted soldier-high and something was picked out of his pockets. I understand ugshsillings 110,000 and a phone was about to be got out of his pockets, that is when he realized that the demonstration was not only after what hon. Michael Mabikke probably was pursuing, but also certain other things were taking place.  

Don’t you think politically it was important for Government to intervene in case something happens to such an important person in Uganda, a former presidential candidate, because someone could have come with a sharp knife and pierced hon. Aggrey Awori and then Government would be condemned or blamed for that.

THE SPEAKER: Sorry, hon. Aggrey Awori, if it happened. 

MR AWORI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my hon. Colleague that indeed somebody who may not have been part of the demonstration, but took advantage of the demonstration to take away my property.  

I would also like to inform my honourable colleague, this is not confined to demonstrations only.  Nowadays thieves penetrate Cathedrals and take ladies’ handbags, mobile phones, shoes - I have seen a lady going home with one shoe - it is not matter of demonstration.  So, please, do not infringe on my honourable colleague’s rights by saying that I lost money. Indeed I lost Ugshs 100,000, but that is no problem, that is nothing comparison to my rights.          

MR MABIKKE: Thank you very much hon. Aggrey Awori for that clarification.  I cannot read this press release because it is a long press release, but it contains no quote of any law -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: You see, honourable member, that is why really I told you to mention the section. For him, he does not have to quote law, he acts. It is for you who is affected by his action to ask him, under what law? It is for you to go and challenge him so that he can substantiate his information. But as far as he is concerned, he makes a decision because he is equipped with the law and he does not have to tell you. It is for you to say, but under what law are you saying that? He says, section 33. But what are the circumstances? I think you do not have circumstances justifying you to make this. 

So, maybe what you have to do, where do you go to question the decision of the Police when it does that? That is why I said, maybe you have in future, not now, to address yourself to this particular issue so that you streamline it and it does not prejudice your –(Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: By way of summary, I want to say that it is exactly based on those reasons that you have given that in our exchange with Mr Rwego, and Mr Rwego having failed to quote any relevant law, we proceeded with the demonstration. The day after the demonstration, the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs went on radio, but he quoted no law. His excuse was, “You know, Uganda Police has got capacity of only 15,000; we have had enough demonstrations and this city is so congested”. How can this city have accommodated one million matchers? We simply had no capacity.” That was the excuse of the minister. 
 
But we are saying, Mr Speaker, that hon. Kezimbira Miyingo and hon. Ruhakana Rugunda cannot be judges in their own case. All of us know that this was an anti-third term demonstration. Hon. Kezimbira, hon. Rugunda are known promoters of kisanja. There is no way these gentlemen would have allowed a demonstration against the kisanja. But we are saying that Police, according to the laws of Uganda, is not empowered to give permission.  Police is only duty bound to keep law and order.  

We are going to organize many more demonstrations, we are going to notify Police as indeed we did, but we will not expect Police to give us permission.  If President Museveni had asked permission from Milton Obote to invade Kabamba, he would not be a President today. We are not kidding; we are very serious. I want to thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.07
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to convey my sympathy to the people who suffered the effects of that demonstration, which took place on the 31st. I regret that such an incident happened to our citizens in the country. But, I think that we as law makers, we have left so much open as to what we regard as democracy. The democracy in Uganda has no limits and it is very difficult to interpret to most of the citizens thereby making people over stretch in some areas. To this, I would like to pray that this House gets time to find a way as to how we can regulate democracy.

The Ugandans, we normally talk of democracy and freedom of expression or association or doing anything. But I think we took this over from the British who were our colonizers. But, Mr Speaker, as I talk now, in Britain there are regulations as to how far one can stretch with democracy.

Mr Speaker, when I look at the minister’s explanation and as he quoted Section 33(2), I feel that may be the Inspector General of Police was threatened by the numbers when it was publicized over radio that one million people were going to match in the streets of Kampala. I recall the biggest gathering I saw moving, was during the registration of the presidential candidates in 2001, and we were told that the numbers nearly approached 500,000 people. So, I feel that when the Inspector General of Police compared what he saw from Nakasero matching up to Kololo, when there were no cars moving, even a bicycle could not move, even people on foot found problems in moving, I think this scared him. 

He imagined a million people matching on all the streets in Kampala. This was going to paralyse all business in town, it would have paralysed all the movement in town and I think it would have brought a lot of accidents, a lot of hazards would have happened just as we have been given an example. This is because hon. Aggrey Awori was a former presidential candidate, may be that is why his case was noted. But I would imagine how many people suffered losing their mobile phones, maybe the women lost their handbags, some men maybe their coats were torn, this could have been some of the reasons as to why the Inspector General of Police had to come with such a statement, taking it in mind that he already knows that in Kampala, we are already overwhelmed by the numbers of people that move whenever there is a demonstration. 

Much as these problems would have happened, maybe it was foreseen that a lot of public utilities and possibly private utilities would have been destroyed. Because of the numbers matching along the shops, matching along our streets, there would have been a possibility of looting and maybe vandalizing some of the utilities, which are of importance to the nation.  

Considering the way Uganda Revenue Authority levies taxes to our business people, the business community could have been paralysed because I foresee a scenario where no trader would be trading because of the numbers of people along the streets, and maybe taking chances to go into the shops.  

So, Mr Speaker, I wish to plead to this House that let us, as Members of Parliament, take it upon ourselves that in the near future we should find a way of regulating these demonstrations. Not only this one, but time may come when everybody feels like demonstrating, and it could turn out that each day of the week there are demonstrators. How will government operate and how shall we carry on our work when people resort to demonstrations?  

So, I think it is upon Parliament to come up with some regulations as to how far people should go with demonstrations and what we should look at as democracy because democracy as of now, each one interprets it in his or her own way and it is so vague to the masses. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: But really, we have gone over an hour on this, what do our rules say? But let us hear the former Minister of Internal Affairs.

5.14
MS SARAH KIYINGI NAMUSOKE (Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no capacity in this House for former ministers so I am not going to speak as a former minister. But I just thought that I need to make a contribution to this issue, and basically to say two things: One, is that indeed like you have said, Mr Speaker, the law is so wide; it can be used for good, it can be used for bad. I think that is the main issue, and I think the law needs to be amended or we need to give some guidance on what exactly can go for this discretion of the Inspector General of Police.

When you look at what the minister has quoted it says: “If it comes to the knowledge of the Inspector General of Police that an assembly, procession or demonstration is being organized…” and so on and so forth, then it says, “If the Inspector General of Police has reasonable ground for believing that the assembly or procession is likely to cause a breach of the peace, then the Inspector General says you cannot hold this demonstration”; because he think or in his mind it looks like it may cause a breach of peace. So, that is so open to a very wide interpretation, which I think maybe needs to be looked at. Of course, this Parliament will be the one eventually to amend the law, but the government has to come up with that kind of amendment to see how it fits us.  

But the main issue the people that demonstrated are trying to put forward is the selective manner in which the Inspector General of Police uses his discretion to allow or to deny a demonstration. I have not had opportunity to look at the press release, but my colleague, cumbersome lawyer, hon. Michael Mabikke, says that the press release was full of politics.  

So that is where the crux of the matter is; that if the people who are not in support of a government position organize a demonstration and by use of this wide discretion by the Inspector General of Police, they are told, “No you cannot demonstrate”. Then those who are in support of government are allowed to demonstrate, however many they are, and they are deemed not to be in breach of the peace. This causes bad faith. It causes a feeling that people are being stopped simply because they are demonstrating against a position of government.

I think as we go into this transition and as we think about returning parties where ordinarily you will have some people believing in a certain position and others not, it is very important for the good of this nation that we look at some of these issues and really be more reasonable than we are now to allow everybody to demonstrate. By the way, when people go on the street and demonstrate, you may still keep to your position, but they will feel good. And I think that is also good even for government that people have demonstrated and gone away feeling good, whether you change or not, but it is good to release pressure and to stop people from being very desperate.  

Mr Speaker, I want to urge government to look at the Police Act and see because the way it is now, indeed as my colleague who has just left the Floor said, the Inspector General of Police can very easily be scared by one million people getting on the street because they are not well equipped, they do not have much resource to control such a huge demonstration, so they think, “What can we do, well, we can use section 33 and say they are going to breach the peace.” 

So, we need to look at these things and I think it is very important that government does that, especially as we go into a situation where almost at every single issue there will be one side saying this and another side saying that it is not right. I think we are going to see more demonstrations, but it is important that we control the demonstrations but also give people the freedom to demonstrate against things they think they ought to demonstrate against.  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Certainly I am going to end this debate.

5.20
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank you for drawing our attention to this section 33, which apparently was enacted in 1964. I do not know what the political situation at that time was.  Sometimes when you look at laws, you can also look at the political environment of the time when certain laws were passed. But I think it is important as you said, Mr Speaker, that this matter must be revisited. 

You see, today we may be in a government and be pleased to apply such laws and be happy and control other people. But the business in which we are as politicians, one day you may be on the opposition, and the very law you would have had the opportunity to change may be the same law that may be applied against you. So, I think it is important that this law as you advised should actually be revisited. 

You know, I was going to ask the minister whether the Inspector General Police had shared with him what reasonable grounds that he applied in order to stop the demonstration. But then the answer was given by hon. Mabikke because after all, there were no reasonable grounds. The reasonable grounds were that the minister had instructed him on the basis –[Mrs Betty Akech: “Point of information”]- I can have the information.

MRS BETTY AKECH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wanted to inform the House and hon. Mwandha that government gets to know even before a letter requesting for a demonstration is given to it. It gets to know from the time the demonstration is being planned, who is planning it, what is the motive and what do they intend to do. If government did not have this machinery, definitely everybody would be doing anything they wanted. 

So, on the basis of intelligence collected we are, therefore, able to advise in what we call the National Security Committee where I sit, where Internal Affairs Minister sits and Defence and the Attorney General to say, yes, the Inspector General can take this decision to stop this demonstration on the basis of what we have already found. So, really this is how it is done; it is not the inspector General to make a decision arbitrarily. He makes it on an informed basis. Thank you, Sir.

MR MWANDHA: But the information by the Minister for Security does not help me because the hon. Mabikke - unless she is doubting the hon. Mabikke - is saying that the Inspector General of Police was given that directive because the circular the minister had issued was the basis for it, and yet the law talks about the Inspector General. The law talks about the Inspector General, but whatever that may be, that is not here or there –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Can we know the contents of the circular because if somebody writes as in the circular, you read the letter in conjunction with the circular?

MR MABIKKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me opportunity to read these two communications. The circular, which is quoted by Mr A. F. Rwego press release reads. In fact, he says here that it is attached because he says:

“Refer to your letter dated, 23 March 2005 addressed to the Inspector General of Police over the above mentioned subject.

Your intended demonstration cannot be allowed due to the reasons highlighted in the press release issued today, 29 March 2005 by the Minister of Internal Affairs on this same subject.

Attached is a copy of the press release for your detailed information.” 

Then the press release reads:

“As we enter the period of political transition to full multiparty politics, it is crucial that while our people play a more active role in determining the future course of the enjoyment of democratic governance, they do so in an organized manner consistent with the public good. 

The Movement Government is on its part committed and as in fact demonstrated in its political will to the achievement of a peaceful political transition. The two peaceful public demonstrations by the pro and anti presidential term limits on the streets of Kampala is one of the examples of this political commitment.

You will recall that the demonstrations were a response to the utterances made by the Irish Star Bob Geldof against the removal of presidential terms in Uganda. This was during the launching of the British Sponsored Africa Commission. The first demonstration held on 21 March 2005 was against Geldof’s utterances. It was held by those in support of lifting the term limits. The second one held on the 24 March 2005, was by the group of six political parties under the political pressure groups. This was in support of Geldof’s utterances. Government wishes to commend the organizers of the two demonstrations for the peaceful management of those events. 

It is, however, important to appreciate that demonstrations are not the only means of expressing strongly held views. Besides, demonstrations at times inconvenience lawful activities of other people especially in urban centres. This is confirmed by the recent petition of the traders to the Inspector General of Police expressing their grievances against demonstrations, which resulted in their shops being broken into and generally disrupting their business activities.

The recent Makerere demonstrations, which resulted in extensive loss and damage of property, is another case in point. Now that the two parties to the constitutional amendments contention have expressed their opinions through public debates and demonstrations, the conduct of a multiplicity of public demonstration is not necessary. In fact, it could be a recipe for disturbance of law and order. Since the matter is before Parliament, interested parties are advised to present their views through their Members of Parliament. 

As a ministry responsible for the maintenance of law and order, it is our responsibility to ensure public safety and order for all people in this country. The ministry, therefore, advises not bans, advises against endless demonstrations over this particular matter of presidential term limits in respect of which demonstrations for either view have already been expressed. It is public knowledge that this matter is currently being handled by Parliament. I, therefore, wish to advise fellow citizens, that we should conduct our politics in an organized, mature and peaceful manner consistent with mutual respect of our rights and responsibilities as free citizens of this country. Such responsible behaviour will promote a peaceful transition and consolidation of our democratic gains and rule of law. 

Signed hon. Dr Ruhakana Rugunda
Minister of Internal Affairs.” 

No law is quoted in here; this is mere politics.

THE SPEAKER: No, no. You see, honourable member, the law need not be quoted. I think what you have to do is to see whether what is stated in the press release was sufficient too. That is a different consideration. You do not have to quote the law whenever you write. The question was assessing whether those were good reasons for stopping you. But the reasons are there, whether they are good or bad, that is a different matter. 

MR MWANDHA: Well, thank you, Mr Speaker for permitting this press release to be read. Because the press release read together with this Section 33 indicates clearly that one, the Inspector General of Police did not take this matter as Inspector General of Police in the spirit of the law, and he really had no independent grounds of his own other than the press release given by the minister.

Mr Speaker, I think it is important now for us to have some kind of guidelines of how peaceful demonstrations can be conducted. Because it is no good for people to say, “Well, this matter is under Parliament”; if people want to demonstrate, they will still demonstrate.

I sit in an office, which many people on the other side of Parliament call the Luweero corner and we see a lot of people. You know, when the Moslems were passing by, they were orderly, there was no problem, the Police was there. The previous day when the other people were demonstrating, again the whole thing was orderly at least we never saw anything out of the ordinary from where we were. Now it would seem –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA: I am obliged, Mr Speaker, for hon. Mwandha to accept this information. I would like to give you my personal experience during one of the demonstrations. I was coming to Parliament, I was blocked at Crested Towers; I went down to Jinja Road, I was blocked. I got out of my car and I walked all the way to this House from Jinja Road roundabout. I know it is exercise, and even after here I am going for more exercise, by the way.

But, Mr Speaker, I wanted the honourable members to appreciate that it is not a joke when we say that the public can easily be inconvenienced by these, especially frequent and almost irrelevant, demonstrations. So, I wanted to give my experience, and I am sure this is the experience of many other Ugandans as to how they were inconvenienced. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

MRS HYUHA: Mr Speaker, I wanted to inform hon. Mwandha that in one of those demonstrations, the one so-called anti-third term, I had parked my vehicle near Nile Bank and by the time I came out of the bank, they had removed all the driving mirrors from my vehicle.

MR AWORI: My honourable colleague, the politics and the psychology of demonstrations, among other things you know, is that 22 to 25 per cent of the demonstration is supposed to inconvenience a docile society to wake up to a problem. It is not necessarily 100 per cent for the particular cause, but part of it is to wake you up and say, “So, there is a problem, how did I lose my mirror, why did I have to walk from Jinja Road?” It is to teach you a lesson.

THE SPEAKER: Is a person not entitled to remain docile?

MR MWANDHA: Well, I appreciate the information given by colleagues. But people say that if you want to eat an omelette, you cannot avoid breaking an egg and I am sure that the people, who made a Constitution and gave freedom for people to demonstrate, must have considered that certain members of society were going to have some inconveniences.  But the point is that, if we could genuinely guide peaceful demonstrations, we could minimize the inconveniences as have been mentioned.  But I want to leave that point.  

Mr Speaker, the minister did not say anything about the complaint that the nature of the teargas that was used was unusual and it could be some kind of gas, which is not the nature of gas that is used in those circumstances. So, I would appreciate if the minister can give some comments on that one.  

Finally, Mr Speaker, I did not like the expression used by the minister that ‘certain individuals,’ because the Constitution does not say that individuals do not have freedom of demonstration, and I think it was not said in good spirit and, therefore, I thought that that expression was not intended to build bridges.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we put an end to this debate, and maybe if the minister has some responses to make, let him do so and then we see how we proceed.

5.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Kezimbira Miyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and I want to thank honourable members who have contributed. I will not go one by one, but I will generally comment on exactly what is expected of the Police, and what honourable Members of Parliament expect of the Police. Because it is not the first time that Members of Parliament, individuals in their capacity, have themselves sought the assistance of the Police to curb down either crowds or sometimes for protection, and this has been offered.  

When the honourable members put in their application to the Inspector General of Police for a demonstration, the Inspector General of Police had to evaluate. Even if the Inspector General of Police does quote the statement of the minister, the Inspector General of Police is bound to know what the minister has said. If the minister has given a statement, the Inspector General of Police cannot be blind to that particular statement, so he had to quote it. But behind that, you must know that an evaluation had been done. 

The honourable Minister of Security has given you some of the insights. But I also want to let this House know that already the Inspector General of Police had an application that had been standing for over a month of traders demonstrating against taxes, and that demonstration was to take place on that same day, 31st of March, and you wanted also to impose –(Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, it is true that the Inspector General of Police had received an application by the traders who wanted to demonstrate on the same day, and in fact in one of the discussions that issue came up, and we told him in writing that our demonstration would start at 8.00 a.m. and end at 1.00 p.m. and the traders’ demonstration would start at 2.00 O’clock and end at 5.00 p.m.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Mr Speaker, there are no straight lines that can be drawn about times of a demonstration. A demonstration that you think will take one hour could take seven hours, could take a whole day. You see, the problem is that hon. Mabikke is not being very honest because, now here is one of the reasons which the Inspector General of Police did discuss with you to prevent you from holding your demonstration on that day, but you still disregarded it. 

The Inspector General of Police told you he had an obligation to man the demonstration which had been requested much earlier than yours, you did not listen to him, you went ahead to have your demonstration despite the advice. Many other reasons were given to you but you went ahead and this is not expected of a honourable Member of Parliament! (Interruption)

MR MABIKKE: Mr Speaker, it is true that the Inspector General of Police gave this as an excuse. In fact when a letter was taken to him he said, “Well, I have got two applications, but let me consult and see” and he kept on dodging until 30th when actually the demonstration was 31st. And what do we see on 30th? A letter of F.X. Rwego advising otherwise. There was no way we would –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, let us conclude this matter.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Mr Speaker, when you know that people are going to come from Kotido, you must find out how many people they are, how many people will come from Mbarara so that they make up the one million people that are coming. So, you take time to gather that and why do people say that the Inspector General of Police should not have believed that a million people were coming, and he had to wait that long in order to gather information adequately to see whether you will permit or not permit – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, wind up.

DR KEZIMBIRA: Okay, Mr Speaker, there was no selective way of eliminating them but as I have said, someone came before them and, therefore, it was according to first come first served. Then the minister has also given reason that since there had been demonstrations – in fact it was not selective because, people who wanted to demonstrate against the so-called third term and those who were for the third term had been allowed, the two groups had already been able to demonstrate. 

But, Mr Speaker, the Police Act is being amended, I am sure it is going to come to this House here. I do not think Section 33 is bad and that section is meant to create order into society and the enjoyment –(Interruption)

MR LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much.  Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order. Internationally, the role of police is known anywhere in the world, let it be in Vietnam, let it be in the US or Canada. Is it in order for the honourable Minister of Internal Affairs to make us assume or to imply that when there are so many people coming from various parts of the country, police cannot handle them when we know very well that in 1993, when the late Pope came to Uganda, he was welcomed by over one million people and police handled the situation? 

Last year, I was vice chairperson of the team, which welcomed Alhaji Ntege Sebaggala, he was received by over a million people. Is it in order for you to confuse us that police cannot handle many people? Where is the rationale of that?

THE SPEAKER: I think your point is categorizing assessment; one assesses this and the other, I cannot really rule on that. Please would you like to conclude?

DR KEZIMBIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to conclude by appealing to my colleagues that the law that is operated by the Ministry of Internal Affairs is the law that was made in this Parliament. I am sure even if it comes to this Parliament, you will find it reasonable to put the measures that were put into that law in order to ensure that there is law and order in society.  Even within the Constitution itself that we made in 1995 and is being amended now, there are provisions which limit those rights and freedoms that are given in one Article of that Constitution. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, I think we have transacted enough business for today but in view of time constraint, can we meet tomorrow for about an hour so that we can clear some of the items we have on our plate.  So, with this we come to the end of today’s business House is adjourned until tomorrow 10.00 a.m. prompt.

(The House at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 8 April 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)

