

Thursday, 12 April 2018

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like you to join me in welcoming the guests we have in the distinguished strangers’ gallery. We have a delegation from the South African High Commission to Uganda and they include the First Secretary, Mr Xolela Nofukuka; the Counsellor, Mr Radebe Jabulani; and the Third Secretary, Mrs Siameenda Drimakatso. You are all welcome. (Applause) They are here to observe the motion which we are going to move today, to pay tribute to the late Winnie Mandela, a unique and courageous African woman. 

I would also like to welcome Miss Tourism, Uganda, Ms Challa Elma (Applause). Incidentally, she is one of our own; she is a daughter to the hon. Esther Anyakun. (Applause) She is going to be marketing Uganda and is also our candidate to the World Heritage beauty campaign. You are welcome.

Honourable members, yesterday I informed you that the Fourth Youth Parliament of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (Africa Region), will be sitting here next week. Their plenary sessions will take place in this Chamber. Therefore, they will affect part of our work. At the end of the day, I will give instructions on how we will move for purposes of next week. You are very welcome.

We have guild student leaders from St Kizito’s Technical School, Madera. They are on this side. They are represented by hon. Herbert Ariko and hon. Angelline Osegge. You are welcome. (Applause)

We also have students from King’s College Budo, Wakiso District. There they are in their uniforms. (Applause) They are represented by hon. Rosemary Seninde, the Minister of State for Primary Education, and hon. Medard Sseggona. You are welcome. 

Furthermore, all the way from Ayivu County, there is a consortium of organisations reaching out to street children. They are represented by hon. Benard Atiku and hon. Mourine Osoru. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, outside in the lobby, we have a team from the Uganda Revenue Authority. They have been here since Tuesday, 10 April, to help you check on your tax compliance status, and this exercise will end tomorrow. You are, therefore, requested to use this opportunity and update your status, now that they are here. Sometimes, you get these notifications and if you ignore them, you might find yourself with some difficult assessments. Please, use the opportunity to update your status so that you are compliant and Ms Doris Akol does not look for you. 

There were a few matters of national interest. I do not know what has happened to my briefcase; these people have locked it and I cannot get my list out. I had the list yesterday. Can someone help me to open it? In the meantime, let us do some work while we wait for the briefcase to be opened.

3.12
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like once again to add my voice to the voices of yesterday on the good work you did at the Inter-Parliamentary Union. 

The matter I would like to raise is about the continuous killing of our people, particularly children, by electrocution, especially in Bugisu sub-region. Two days ago, two school-going children were electrocuted in Busulani Subcounty in Sironko District. 

Madam Speaker, it is true that this happens due to illegal power connections in different localities of Uganda. I would like to condemn, in the strongest terms possible, illegal power connections. It is a vice that we must fight as a team. The Minister of Energy and Minerals, Ms Irene Muloni, must deal with the factors that motivate our people to connect power illegally. 

Therefore, I would like to make the following prayers:

    1. The Minister of Energy and Minerals should work out affordable rates for the villagers so that they can be able to connect to power and pay for it. If we let them use Yaka, which is paid for elsewhere, it will be very difficult for them to comply.

    2. There should be efforts made to enable access to power by villages adjacent to places where power has stopped. Our people are motivated to steal power because power connections stop in the trading centres and in the villages there are blackouts. Therefore, they are motivated to steal the power.

    3. The other –(Interjection)– Let me conclude my prayers and you will give information. There should be deliberate efforts by all leaders and agencies involved with power distribution in this country to sensitise the public. They should not divorce the Members of Parliament from this, but they should involve them so that we jointly raise this concern throughout the country.

    4. The other issue is to do with the technicians from Umeme who do connections. They should be well identified. They should wear tags and be properly accredited. People masquerade as Umeme operators when they are not. This should be worked on.

    5. The last issue is about the patrols that are conducted by Umeme. While we are saying that they should put a stop to illegal power connections, there are also excesses. In my area, I have seen one community in which a lot of innocent people were harassed. They randomly arrested people who were going about their daily chores in the villages. They should follow proper identification of the criminals so that there is justice.

3.16
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, thank you. I rise to comment on the allegation that Bank of Uganda is going to take over the supervision and regulation of Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisations (SACCOs). 

Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisations are constituted by individuals who have interests and are members. They come up with regulations and policies that govern them according to their interests. I am aware that Bank of Uganda is expected to make regulations for Tier 4 institutions. However, my fear is that we might cause a collapse of the SACCOs because members can decide to withdraw their money. With a SACCO, members find it convenient to get loans, withdraw their savings and even save. When the regulations come in the way they are – there are already draft regulations – I would propose, Madam Speaker, that Bank of Uganda, through the Ministry of Finance, sensitises the members who are already in those SACCOs that have savings of Shs 1.5 billion and Shs 500 million before these regulations are signed. Otherwise, the work of the bank is going to become terrible. 

We are also aware that many SACCOs, with savings of Shs 1.5 billion, already deposit their money in other commercial banks as a safety measure, and the central bank is already supervising the commercial banks. Therefore, I pray that the Bank of Uganda, as it moves on with the regulations, ensures that members are aware.  Otherwise, we shall lose membership and the SACCOs will collapse and then the idea of the members that formed the SACCOs might die. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The minister will have time to update us on whether the banks are taking over regulation of SACCOs or not. It is very important because the SACCOs are ours. 

3.18
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Rural electrification was extended to Kapchorwa District and Sebei sub-region and currently, power is being generated in Sebei sub-region. Unfortunately, in Kapchorwa and Sebei sub-region in general, we do not have a single Umeme office. In cases where poles fall and wires are left hanging with power, our people are left at risk. At one time, a transformer caught fire and by the time we called someone from Mbale, things had gone bad.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the Ministry of Energy, and Umeme in particular, should set up an office in Kapchorwa and Sebei sub-region so that our people are not at risk. Sensitisation needs to be done because when they put power in that area, they did not sensitise people about the dangers of power. That is why we have had issues like the one the member for Sironko narrated.

THE SPEAKER: I have been struggling to ensure that there is an Umeme office in north Busoga. There is an office in Iganga and they expect a person from Nkondo and one from Kayunga to go to Iganga. This is not right.

3.19
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, District Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is to bring to your attention the numerous accidents that have happened in my district as a result of excess loading of Lorries, which are not designed to carry people. I am aware that Lorries are meant to carry produce and not people. The police have not taken serious action on people being transported in Lorries. 

For the information of this House, we have lost three students in the names of Akech Linda, who was in senior three and comes from Alebtong; Mananu Isaac from Parombo Parish; and Thojwiga Victor from Mamba in Kuchiny. Two students were airlifted, and we thank the Minister of State for Defence, hon. Okello Macodwogo, for having responded very fast in airlifting these students to Kampala. We have Paku Fiona and Ayudoth Tracy who are in Mulago, and Jonathan Uyengboth who is Nakasero Hospital on life support. I personally went to these places and saw them. They were accompanied by parents and a teacher.

Are students or people supposed to be transported in tipper Lorries even up to now? My prayer is that Government, with the support of Parliament, needs to intervene. What I am praying for is that as Government, we need to support the parents and the students who are still admitted and the families of those who have died. In addition, as Parliament, we need to regulate the means of transport of schools.

THE SPEAKER: We regret the death of these students, but I think some time back instructions were given not to carry school children in Lorries. I do not remember whether it was the Ministry of Education that gave that directive but I thought it was enforced. I do not know whether the minister would like to say something about this.

These were students of Uringi Secondary School in Nebbi. What is the position about transporting school children for different activities? Does anyone remember? The minister of state is here; will you be able to speak now or later, after you have done some research?

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Ministry of Education, I would like to express our condolences to the bereaved families upon the loss of those children. It is really sad.

To respond to the concern, it is the traffic police that are supposed to help us enforce that directive. It is common knowledge that children are not supposed to be ferried in that manner but it has persistently happened and the traffic police are not acting. Something has to be done. Police must scale up, and the internal affairs minister should answer.

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, the Traffic Act, like many laws in this country, does not allow this. It specifies the kind of vehicles which are used for specific purposes, hence specific licences. However, our people and many times our own constituents, because of necessity, by-pass these laws. Therefore, you find our children being carried in these Lorries and yet the law is clear. 

I am aware that traffic police should stop such Lorries, but the police are not everywhere. We will look into it and issue instructions very shortly. However, I hope you will support us because I am fully aware that there will be an outcry when we ban the transportation of our people in specific vehicles, not only students. If a vehicle is for transporting goods, it should be for goods –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the minister. I am happy that he normally travels on the road from Kampala to Gulu and Juba in South Sudan and he has witnessed the kind of transport that is used. You find a Dyna truck or tipper lorry carrying more than 100 or 150 people and they are passing where the police officers are. If you are travelling from Kampala to Gulu, you pass more than 10 police roadblocks or checkpoints. 

Therefore, honourable minister, you have to strengthen the work of the police officers. Traffic officers are the ones encouraging the use of those Lorries for carrying passengers. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please, conclude.

MR OBIGA KANIA: I have said we do not encourage this practice. The police do not encourage it but it is the people, because of necessity, who use Lorries or the wrong vehicles even if they are aware of the law. 

We will review this and come up with instructions in the shortest possible time. I hope you will support us to ensure that the right vehicles are used for the right purposes. It will be across the board. If your vehicle is supposed to carry three people, it will have to carry three people. Thank you.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. These children died because teachers in the school made them board the lorry when they were not supposed to be put there. The Ministry of Education and Sports is blaming the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Yes, the police are supposed to be on the roads but doesn’t the Ministry of Education and Sports take responsibility? Is there nothing they can do to issue instructions so that the teachers are held responsible and make sure they do not, on any occasion, put our children in Lorries? 

Madam Speaker, this ping-pong between Government departments does not help us. Are we proceeding correctly by putting all the blame on the Ministry of Internal Affairs and absolving the Ministry of Education and Sports?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe we should ask both ministries to come up with a joint statement and joint guidelines so that the school managers know that the police know what to do. It is inconvenient but we need to drum the message.

MS JANE PACUTO: Madam Speaker, the additional information I would like to give is that on the 17th of February when there was a fundraising at Goli for the Anglican Church, His Excellency the President travelled from Arua to Goli. It is not just about the means of transport but also the state of our roads. The President himself decried the poor state of the road and said publicly, that he was indebted to the people of Nebbi. 

Therefore, it is not only that they are using Lorries. I would like to add that the roads are also very poor. I participated in a feasibility study and the ministry, through Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), was supposed to upgrade this road in 2016. Up to today, not even the creation of awareness among the public has been done. It is not about the means of transport but the poor state of the roads. I would also like to emphasise that the ministry has authority over these head teachers.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for these outstanding issues on the Ministry of Works and Transport, can you raise them during the budget debate? When we are dealing with the Ministry of Works and Transport, bring up those issues so that the minister can give us solutions.

3.32
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Chief Opposition Whip has directed me not to go down there. Probably, next time we need a microphone for us who are in the middle to feel comfortable.

Madam Speaker, I rise on an issue of national importance. In August 2015, the report of the Inspector General of Government (IGG) indicated that some staff of Kyambogo University ought to have been dismissed because of misappropriation of funds and misconduct. I would like to report to you that those staff are still in Kyambogo University.

As if that is not bad enough, because the same staff are still in the university, students at Kyambogo University are being sexually harassed for marks, and it is going on right now –(Interjections)- As if that is not bad enough, we have –

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I have information that students who failed in their examinations have already graduated. A case in point is Sumayah Nampijja, Norah Kuteesakwe and Bony Tukesiga, who graduated in 2017 and yet they have retakes. I have this document. Madam Speaker, you will allow me to lay it on the Table. 

Honourable members, you are aware that this case of Kyambogo University came to this House and there was a power struggle between the former Vice-Chancellor (VC) –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Please use half a minute to conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was making a statement that this issue came to this House. There was a power struggle which involved the former VC, Prof. Ndiege. He was dismissed and he went to court. He was then awarded Shs 1.3 billion for being dismissed wrongfully because he was already handling this case.

My prayer is that an investigation should be conducted into Kyambogo University to unearth more of these incidences. Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to lay on the Table this document for easy reference, so that we have a full investigation to unearth these incidences.

In the same vein, I would like to inform the Ministry of Education and Sports that in Kitgum Primary School, they have recommended that they should reduce the number of female teachers since they frequently go on leave. This is another area I would like to request the Ministry of Education and Sports to investigate.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to lay on the Table this document regarding mismanagement and corruption in Kyambogo University. I also beg to lay on the Table the graduation list that was published. Further, I beg to lay on the Table the list of marks scored by these three students whose names I have already read to the House. Therefore, my prayer is that an in-depth investigation be conducted into this university. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The matters are many. I do not know whether the Minister of Education and Sports would like to say something now or they wish to study them and then respond later. There is an issue of graduating people who are not eligible, the issue of those who obtained retakes and issues of sexual harassments; they are quite many. 

3.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for raising this concern. However, this is an administrative issue and we had not received this information. I pledge that we are going to look into it and follow up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural issue. Members of Parliament know that they are entitled to raise matters of urgency or national importance. This particular matter is about students who graduated last year, in 2017. The Ministry of Education and Sports is also not very far from Parliament. The people who are complaining are bringing this matter to Members of Parliament instead of raising it to the Ministry of Education and Sports.

Madam Speaker, Members of Parliament are being used to abuse our rules and this is a serious matter. Therefore, is it procedurally right that a matter which can be better addressed –(Interjection)– I have heard you asking the Ministry of Education and Sports to handle the matter. You can even write to them and say, “Can you investigate this issue?”, whether it is a police matter, instead of coming here to raise it as a matter of national importance and yet it could have been dealt with better by the ministries, agencies or departments. Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have three roles here; they include budgeting, oversight and representation. This is a representational role. (Applause)

3.39
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the Shadow Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, I stand here to raise a matter related to killing by poisoning of our lions in Queen Elizabeth National Park. 

We have some pastoralists who have brought domestic animals to the wildlife sanctuary in Queen Elizabeth National Park, where we earn on average of Shs 3 billion to Shs 4 billion annually in income. Last week, they poisoned 11 lions yet we have a total population of 30 lions in Queen Elizabeth National Park. Out of the 30 lions, 11 of them have been killed. We are only left with 19 lions, which are not reliable, and this is affecting our tourism sector, which is bringing Shs 4 trillion to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of the economy of Uganda. This hinders our competitiveness.

In Kenya, when people go to tour or go for a game drive in Maasai Mara National Reserve, they are able to see these lions everywhere. I know that there are some donors who have invested a lot of money in research and conserving the wildlife in our national parks. However –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are supposed to raise the concern, not to debate. What do you want to be done about the poisoning? That is what you should raise.

MR CENTENARY: My prayer is that those communities that are bringing domestic animals in the protected areas should be investigated by the relevant committee of Parliament so that they are able to take away their animals from the protected areas.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member; I think that is the work of the Government. We should ask the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to address that issue. These Members do not know the protected areas. The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should address that issue urgently. I am talking about the minister who will raise the matter not the shadow minister. (Laughter) 
	
MR CENTENARY: Madam Speaker, I would like to invoke the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to address this matter expeditiously and bring the Wildlife Act to resolve the human-wildlife conflict. Otherwise, we are going to kill our lucrative sector of tourism. 

3.42
MS LUCY ACHIRO (Independent, Aruu North County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to raise an issue of national importance. 

As you may recall, in 2015 a Chinese company was awarded a contract by the Government of Uganda to upgrade the road from Gulu to Acholibur. The road is about 77.8 kilometres. The main reason as to why Government awarded the contract was to alleviate poverty and provide employment for the locals. The company was able to employ a number of local people from Aruu North. However, during their employment, these people sustained injuries as they were operating machines and they were taken to hospital and left there.

As I speak, the Chinese company has already done about 95 per cent of its work and most likely next month or the following month, they will be leaving the country. This company laid off two boys; one of them is called Okello Samuel and the other Odongo Emmanuel. My prayer is that the Government should intervene so that the wages and compensation for these two boys is paid. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is directed to follow up that issue and ensure that those young people are paid their dues. Honourable members, this matter is not for debate. We have finished that issue. 

MS ACHIRO: They did something terrible, Madam Speaker. These people impregnated a young girl and left a young Chinese baby –(Laughter)– and yet when they go back to their country, they will bring this child to me as the leader of the people.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is in charge of that area. We shall ask the minister to follow up on the unpaid dues and the child. 
	
MS ACHIRO: Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. Matters of national importance are urgent in character. However, I notice that whereas the relevant ministers on all the three matters that I have witnessed are not in the House, the Prime Minister, who is the Leader of Government Business, and his deputies are also not in the House. Is it not procedurally correct for a particular person to be directed? I can see somebody pointing at her chest, indicating –

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for General Duties in the Office of the Prime Minister is here.

3.46
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following the rains that have been going on for some time, we from the highlands have had a problem because our bad roads have become worse. There is a specific road that goes through the village where I come from, – the Kyankanda-Bwoga-Katinda-Kibalya Road – which has not been worked on for eight years now and it is in a bad shape. 

Madam Speaker, immediately you left Buhweju when you came for the International Women’s Day celebrations, there was heavy rain. As two vehicles were negotiating through a bad road, they knocked a boda boda cyclist, who died instantly. When I went back home, of course the situation was very bad. At the burial, people took a very bad decision to go and remove the bridge and declared the road out of use because it was a death trap. I actually walked from there for seven kilometres, where I got a boda boda up to Mbarara and a bus to Kampala because I could not drive. 

The residents are stuck; children cannot go to school and the farmers are suffering with their tea, which are rotting in the tea collecting centres. The area Member of Parliament cannot move. I would like to appeal to you, Madam Speaker, that we ask the Minister of Works and Transport to appreciate this as an urgent matter because the MP must represent his people, but also the other people affected must be helped.

I would like to request that we direct the Minister of Works and Transport to come to our rescue. Three subcounties are stuck and the district equipment is also down, so they cannot do anything about it. I would like to thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is directed to examine the situation of Kyankanda-Bwoga-Katinda-Kibalya Road in Buhweju and address it to the satisfaction of the citizens. Hon. Mwijukye, the walking is good exercise for you. 

3.49
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. I led a delegation from the Committee on Foreign Affairs to Brussels last month and what we found is very urgent.

One, the state of our Chancery in Brussels is extremely dilapidated to the extent that they have failed to insure that building, yet that is our embassy. Secondly, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was to allocate Shs 5 billion as part of the fulfilment of the contract that was to be given to a Belgian company. It has never been done yet we need Shs 12.5 billion to do this work. 

My prayer is that the finance ministry, without even blinking, should proceed to avail Shs 5 billion to salvage the situation in Brussels. (Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give is that when I had just joined the Ninth Parliament, we watched a video regarding the same Brussels’ building. The roof was leaking and there was a bucket. There was also an umbrella above the head of the Head of Mission inside the House.

On the issue of Brussels and other missions, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has closed its ears. I can assure you, Members of Parliament, even if a woman is beautiful but she does not wash her face, she will look very ugly. I commend the Government for the development in Uganda but so long as we do not wash our face outside, public opinion there will still remain low. Our diplomats outside there are suffering. Our prayer is that you direct the Minister of Finance to avail funds so that we clean up our face outside Uganda. 

I would also like to add –(Interjection)-  Please, give me just one minute. We are almost losing plots of land which we had paid for. We are about to lose a plot of land in Abuja. We are almost losing a plot of land in Addis Ababa which we paid for because we delayed in developing it. Some other people came and fenced it and now we have to go to court to claim our land. That is wasting money.

We purchased a plot in Guangzhou but the Ministry of Finance says there is no money. We have a plot in Abuja and they are saying that there is no money. Plots that do not have buildings and are not occupied by diplomats may be lost because they have no immunity. Can we have the Ministry of Finance really open its ears, because their eyes do not see there? Let them listen to our cries and give us money.

This money, which was supposed to come from Nairobi and go to Brussels, was brought back to the Consolidated Fund while we were expecting it to go to Brussels. We are told that it is now in the Consolidated Fund and will be sent to any other place. Madam Speaker, use your powers and use the powers of Parliament to help us.

MR OKUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I give this information because our image abroad is embarrassing. We travelled to Moscow and our ambassador there decided to take us for a party for African ambassadors. After we were introduced as Members of Parliament, the ambassadors of Nigeria, Ghana and South Africa decided to call us aside, together with our ambassador. They said, “Shame on Uganda. Uganda used not to be like this. Look at where your ambassador is living and where your chancery is. What is wrong with Uganda? Why don’t you improve the image of Africa? Uganda used to be among the forefront African nations but the image is no more here.”

We went to Rome and it was even more embarrassing. Our ambassador was travelling in a very old vehicle that got stuck in a tunnel. It caused traffic jam in the whole of Rome. (Laughter) The ambassador had to be towed through the tunnel to clear the way. That is our image.

I think there is a big problem with our image abroad. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs is being undermined and yet they are supposed to be at the forefront. Unless something is done, I do not think blaming the Ministry of Finance is enough. The President is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and he is the chief diplomat. I do not think this shuttle diplomacy, where the President goes and leaves the embassies the way they are, will have any impact. However much he does anything, I can tell you our image will not salvage us. It will be a shame for all of us as we go abroad because everywhere we go, it is the same thing, including where we went to in Geneva. When we went with you to Geneva, it was the same thing, Madam Speaker. 

Therefore, it is something this Parliament must address. Otherwise, it would be shameful for Members of Parliament to even travel abroad and claim they are from Uganda when you have a very embarrassing image. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is a matter of extreme regret that governments which were blamed for being bad were able to get us the most prestigious addresses anywhere. What have we done? We have got slums there. In Brussels, we lost the residence and now the chancery is going. In Abuja- 

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the money for repairing the mission in Brussels was got from our inflows in Nairobi. It was supposed to go to Brussels, but it came to the Consolidated Funds instead. I do not know for what reason. We want that money to be sent to Brussels and we want an answer about that next week. We want that money to be sent to Brussels and you must confirm here that it has gone. You know, we are tired of sharing the shame. (Applause) Uganda is a great country. Why-

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, I also pray that we have a full debate on the state of our foreign policy in Uganda because it is beyond the embassies. It is also about our foreign policy. These are things we must take very seriously. We have always met and we have been told the Committee on Foreign Affairs does not matter - “Why do you need a budget anyway?” These are serious issues that we need to discuss, and we need to have a full debate in this House about the state of Uganda and how it relates with the world. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we would like to know about that money. We would like to see it go to Brussels and not the Consolidated Fund. As long as you are confirming you are transferring the money, that is what we would like to hear.

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, we are aware of that Shs 6 billion which was received from the embassy in Kenya and I will make a statement to that effect on Tuesday. 

However, I would like to update the House that we have also allocated Shs 5 billion to the mission in Brussels in the next financial year. Government is working out a programme on how best we can address the renovation of all the major embassies across the world. We will be updating the House also on that matter.

I would like to also inform you that as Government and the ministry, we have now looked at the priorities of Government vis-à-vis the resources we have put in the budget. As we debate the budget for the next financial year, let us look at our priorities properly. If we really think we can readjust the budget, then we do it. Now the budget is in the hands of Parliament; we can adjust and address the current and emerging issues that we think should be addressed within the priorities.

The other point is on the issues raised by hon. Hellen Asamo about the SACCOs and the Tier 4 microfinance institutions. We passed a law here that provides for Bank of Uganda to supervise Tier 4 microfinance deposit-taking institutions. We also passed another law that provides for the Uganda Microfinance Regulatory Authority, which takes care of the other categories of SACCOs. Therefore, both the big and small ones are sorted out. 

There is also a framework on how they can be regulated. However, in coming up with the regulations, we shall involve everybody who wants to make an input so that by the time we come to lay them before Parliament, at least we will propose regulations that will not harm the SACCOs but instead promote and protect them. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, on the budget I would like you to assure this House that when we appropriate that money, you will not cut it. It is because you make fools of us when we are happy and we approve the money and then two months later, you cut it. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we normally approve this budget on the assumption that the estimates of revenue that we have approved will be collected. However, for the last three years, it is on record that at least all institutions of Government have received an average of 98 per cent of the money that was appropriated by Parliament. Therefore, it would depend on the revenues that we collect. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I construe your guidance to be an order and directive of this House. The directive to the ministry was to assure this House that they will not –(Interjection)- not even “whether”, but that when we appropriate this money, they will not touch it in light of the issues raised. 

Is the minister, therefore, in order to avoid this question which must be answered as of necessity, as to whether they intend to cut this money or not, or alternatively whether they are going to close these embassies instead of embarrassing us year after year, including the warrant that we hear of? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, after consultation with you, I can now confirm that the issue was to do with the resources to the embassies and not the general budget. Therefore, in next financial year, we will ensure the embassies receive 100 per cent of their money appropriated by Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: That is a Government assurance.

MS CECILIA ATIM: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the minister for two reasons. First, the minister is aware that as Parliament, we normally approve our budget but the ministry goes out of its way to reallocate the resources. Therefore, many of these ministries are quiet knowing very well their money is transferred to other ministries and they are not able to perform. That is a fact and he knows it. 

Secondly, -(Interjections)- I am seeking clarification. Madam Speaker, protect me from hon. Bahati’s eyes. He is looking at me with very bad eyes. (Laughter) The minister is saying when we pass the budget, we should be mindful of priorities. They are now trying to imply that it is Parliament which is responsible for all these shortfalls. It is not true. We debate what is presented to us by the various ministries and departments, how can you say we should be mindful of our priorities? Where do we manufacture priorities? You are the ones to tell us about priorities so that we can decide accordingly. 

Madam Speaker, do not let this burden fall on our laps. Let the Government carry its cross to the end. It is them letting the country down. We are always ready to support, debate objectively and give them whatever they need but it is them messing up the money. Once we give them the money, they take it anywhere they want. Therefore, it is important that as Parliament, we hold Government accountable for the money we give them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, keep your eyes open as we work on the budget; any deviation, we hit. (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.05
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Jane Aceng): Madam Speaker, first of all allow me to lay on the Table the amended regulations for the HIV/AIDS prevention and control trust fund. I am laying it on the Table because we amended it and I had not laid it here.

Madam Speaker, the issues that Parliament requested that we harmonize with the committee were three. The first was on the issue of the board of trustees for the fund, the second was on the secretariat and the third was on the fund manager. I would like to inform Parliament that we did have a discussion and we have harmonized these and what I have laid on the Table are the amended regulations. 

We agreed, following guidance from the Attorney-General, that the board of trustees should be maintained because when we create a trust fund, then we have created a trust and it should be managed by a board of trustees. That was the guidance from the Attorney-General. We also agreed that the secretariat should not be new; it should be a department in the Ministry of Health under which HIV/AIDS control falls, and we have amended it as such. 

On the issue of the fund manager, we all agreed that we should do away with the fund manager because he or she will cost us heavily. The fund will be managed in the Ministry of Health under the oversight of the board of trustees and the ministers, and the accounting officer shall be the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for finally bringing the regulations. I hope that now we can move on, on that issue. We will ask our Committee on HIV/AIDS to remain aware of the matter. Thank you. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE ANTI-APARTHEID CAMPAIGNER AND FORMER FIRST LADY OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA, WINNIE MADIKIZELA-MANDELA, FOR HER DEDICATED SERVICE IN THE FIGHT FOR JUSTICE AND EQUALITY IN THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA

4.08
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move this motion under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament.

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received the sad news of the untimely demise of the anti-apartheid campaigner, Pan Africanist and former First Lady of the Republic of South Africa, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, which occurred on Monday, 2 April 2018 at the Netcare Milpark Hospital, Johannesburg, South Africa;

AND WHEREAS at the time of her demise, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was 8l years and known as ‘The Mother of the Nation’ owing to her valiant struggle to end white minority rule in the Republic of South Africa;

AWARE that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was the first black professional social welfare worker, who meekly offered service to the needy people and devoted her energy and skill to the struggle of equality and justice for all people in South Africa.

FURTHER AWARE that in 1994, following the election of her Late husband, Nelson Mandela, as the first black President of the Republic of South Africa, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela become the First Lady of South Africa and was subsequently named Deputy Minister of Arts, Culture, Science and Technology from 1994 Io 1995, positions she fully utilized to end the then perverse South Africa’s oppressive policies;

RECOGNIZING the key role the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela played in advancing the cause of women and vulnerable persons as President of the African National Congress (ANC) Women's League in 1995;

NOTING THAT despite the persecution suffered by Winnie Madikizela-Mandela in the fight for justice, she continued to have unwavering commitment to justice;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
    1. Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends, the people of the Republic South Africa and Africa at large for the irreplaceable loss of a distinguished daughter of Africa.

    2. Parliament takes cognizance of the dedicated service and contribution that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela has, in the course of her illustrious life, rendered to the people of the Republic of South Africa as on anti-apartheid campaigner, former First Lady and a Pan Africanist.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by several Members. You can give your justification.

MS KAROORO OKURUT: Madam Speaker and honourable members, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, born Nomzamo Winifred Zanyiwe Madikizela, was born on 26 September 1936. She was a South African anti-apartheid activist and politician, and the wife of Nelson Mandela.

In 1963 after her husband, Mandela, was imprisoned, she became his public face during the 27 years he spent in jail. During that period, she rose to prominence within the domestic anti-apartheid movement. She was detained by the apartheid state security services on various occasions and very heavily tortured. She was subjected to banning orders, banished to rural towns and spent several months in solitary confinement. She was a very courageous and selfless freedom fighter and a great daughter of Africa. 

Winnie was a very strong committed woman who worked to change the lives of her people and fight oppression and injustices in South Africa. This made her rise through various leadership positions until her death. She was a selfless freedom fighter who preached for protection and promotion of rights of individuals in South Africa without any discrimination.

She has left many lessons, and her relevance to the women leaders in Uganda is irreversible. We can look at her acts, which have inspired many women especially in Africa and Uganda in particular. It is from her bold and selfless charisma that women started believing in themselves as leaders. Her charisma was positively infectious. The 1980-1985 war of resistance and liberation here in Uganda had very many women participating in it because they had an example to emulate – that women can.

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela has not gone in vain. Her persistent struggle and rise to different leadership positions inspired many African women leaders like her Excellency Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia, our very own Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, –(Applause)- Charity Ngilu of Kenya, yours truly here before you –(Laughter)- and these other women of Uganda who have been tirelessly fighting for the rule of law, women empowerment and good governance, among other attributes.

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela will continue to be remembered for her great contribution to the development of South Africa and for fighting for the freedom of South Africans and Africans at large. Her biography and successes will be inspirational to all generations in South Africa and the world. 

The Government of Uganda joins the rest of the world in mourning and saluting this fallen heroine whose contribution was recently recognised by this very Government and Makerere University when she was honoured with a doctorate degree of laws during the 68th graduation ceremony at Makerere in January, 2018. 

Madam Speaker, her biography is rich and it will pass the test of time. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, honourable minister. I invite the Leader of the Opposition. 

4.16
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to a woman of valour, an icon of the struggle for equality, a resolute activist, a lady with a purpose, a leader admired across generations, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela.

We stand with the people of South Africa and the world to celebrate a life well lived. Winnie carried a stature too big for her - family, tribe, nationality and country. She towered beyond the physical boundaries and in her honour the world is unified in acknowledging her contribution in appreciating and standing for humanity against oppression. 

She was an incredible lady that faced physical reality and state confrontation head-on. She was never limited by physical strength, emotional targeting and social injustices. Imprisonment, torture, deprivation, social denigration and marital challenges were never to deter her resolve to see the reality of an apartheid free South Africa and world.

The history of South Africa and her struggle against apartheid has Winnie’s name inked in the starting chapters and runs to the back cover. She was present when duty called and was ever willing to provide the necessary leadership for those fighting for their rights. Her mobilisation prowess came to the fore every time she stepped on the streets. Multitudes followed her without fear of betrayal and were always energised by her resilience.

Winnie Mandela proved to the world that activism with a purpose is key in securing freedom for a people under political bondage and oppression. That is why you see most of us on the streets struggling. Sometimes when we are there, they call us goons; no, that is what activism calls for and that was her. As political actors in this country, we have a lot of notes to copy from this attribute. She did not waver in her quest to secure the freedom of her people regardless of how long it took and what conditions she was subjected to. 

The support she enlisted from the masses gave her the impetus to ride on. In the life of Winnie Mandela, we have many lessons to refer to. I would like to implore the leadership in this country to note that a political opposition is for the sake of the future of this country. You will be shocked to see some of us in big offices and when you knock I will ask you to wait –(Interjection)– Hon. Bahati, why are you scared?

Madam Speaker, the world is celebrating Winnie but probably, during the years she was involved in the struggle, she was perceived by those in power and their cronies as this rough, indecent, provocative cantankerous woman whose deserved place was in the coolers. Few then would probably have seen a future First Lady, minister, women’s leader, internationally acclaimed figure and personality, and that renowned universities would award her honorary doctorate degrees in recognition of her service to humanity.

I join the country and this Parliament to pay tribute to this international personality. I pray that such moments convict us as a people to appreciate the different methods of engagement in the struggle to secure democratic growth and sustenance. What appears to be noisy today will be the liberation of tomorrow. Together we shall free humankind from the oppressive jaws of dictatorship and suppression. Her legacy lives on. Fare thee well, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. I beg to move.

4.22
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this great opportunity to join this honourable House and the people of South Africa as we mourn and remember this great fallen heroine of Africa.

As we remember a life that is impacting many of us today, I would like to make my contribution as a feminist still alive and who has had the honour to read and hear about the life and the contribution of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela and many other feminists in Uganda. We celebrate her life. She has contributed to the feminist movement in Uganda and many of the women, as the mover of the motion said, were inspired to get into leadership because of her contribution. Many organisations were inspired because of the contribution that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela made in South Africa and Africa at large.

Because of her contribution, we now celebrate a stronger women’s movement in Uganda, represented by many women’s organisations that support the work that we do. Some of them include Centre for Women in Governance (CEWIGO); National Association of Women's Organisations in Uganda (NAWOU), which is a very old organisation; Uganda Women's Network (UWONET); Akina Mama wa Afrika; Forum for Women in Democracy (FOWODE); and many others. Many of us in this House celebrate her contribution because the women’s organisations I have mentioned continue to support the work that we do as women leaders. Her life therefore continues to inspire many of us.

Once it was noted that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, in her fight for good governance and human rights, observed that women can be able to fight and she said, “With our necklaces and boxes of matches, we will liberate this country”. That was one of her greatest quotes I was able to come across. Indeed, she was able to inspire many women to use the limited resources they had to engage in the fight for the liberation of their country. That liberation has continued to trickle across the region as we have seen many women leaders emerge and liberate their countries in different spheres of leadership.

Madam Speaker, permit me to say that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s legacy should be used to emphasise the need to increase women participation and representation in decision-making processes, as well as continue to build our capacity as women leaders. These women and those outside this Parliament should be able to make a better contribution in policy-making processes as well as leadership. 

Winnie, the feminist, the social worker, the liberator and the activist has done a lot to inspire many women and such a spirit should be carried on. I would like to use this opportunity, as we celebrate her life, to request Parliament to draw relevance from her life as we continue to do work that contributes to women’s emancipation and elimination of all discriminatory acts that continue to challenge women in Uganda and Africa at large. 

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was a very courageous, selfless and strong woman with rare attributes, despite some weaknesses that some colleagues might have observed as I spoke with some of them. Every human being has weaknesses and imperfections yet those were not more than the great contribution that Winnie made to the African continent and Uganda in particular. 

Therefore, despite all these challenges - Of course, she received several criticisms, as many women do in their struggle, especially the women leaders. She received criticism from her Soweto community and the country that she led in many aspects. However, this did not stop her from pursuing her journey; instead, it gave her courage to fight on. Women leaders should be able to draw a lesson from her, that when we encounter such challenges, it should not snuff out your leadership qualities that the world should be able to celebrate. It also explains to us, women who are still leading, that the journey of leadership comes with many challenges but we have to brace on and successfully bring our calling to a logical conclusion as she has done. 

I join Ugandans, South Africans who are mourning her, Africans and the rest of world to celebrate her contribution as we mourn her. May she rest in eternal peace, having accomplished a wonderful task, walked a wonderful journey and made a wonderful contribution for the posterity of humanity. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Amoding. I would like to have the movers of the motion out of way first. Please, use three minutes. 

4.29
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to second the motion and add my voice in talking about the life of a lady who has not only been known in South Africa and the African continent, but also in the whole world.

I would like to quote some statements that have kept ringing in my mind as a woman. “To those who oppose us, we say, ‘Strike the woman and you strike the rock’.” This implies that women play a critical role in the day-to-day social, political and economic development of any nation. 

“Together, hand in hand, with our boxes of matches and our necklaces, we shall liberate this country”. That is when South Africa was facing the problem of the apartheid regime. Not only was she the First Lady in escorting her husband, she was also there to guide him and as the adage goes, “Besides every strong man, there is a strong woman.” Therefore, walking side by side with Nelson Mandela, she was able to champion the anti-apartheid campaign against the regime in South Africa. 

Another strong statement by Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was, “I will not allow the selfless efforts of my husband and his friends to be abandoned. I will continue the struggle for a free and equal South Africa.” Today, we stand as women for a cause, irrespective of its nature. We are so liberated and open-minded because we know that there are women who have done it before. In the history, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela cannot go unmentioned. 

The mover of this motion, hon. Karooro Okurut, talked about mentorship. Winnie Madikizela-Mandela mentored some of the women that we see besides us now, such as the Rt Hon. Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, who has in turn mentored me. (Applause) Much as I had never met Winnie Madikizela-Mandela in person, I believe that her acts throughout the world have changed my mind-set. Mentorship does not necessarily mean talking to the person; we are mentored through what we see on television and through acts of the people that we see in our midst. Therefore, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela has been a role model in the world and on the continent. I believe women of Africa, irrespective of their age or portfolio, have a lot to offer. (Member timed out)

4.32
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to join the whole world in celebrating a life well lived by the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. 

When South Africa was invaded by the whites, many of our people in Africa were displaced, annihilated and chased out of South Africa. The new strangers occupied the country for a very long time. During that period, the blacks could not live together with the whites. One would not eat, study nor travel in the same buses with whites. That is what we call apartheid – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogong, you could not even marry.

MR OKOT OGONG: You could not even suggest to or “eye” a white person. (Laughter) Even the look alone was criminal. That was the level of segregation in South Africa and for that reason, most of the people in South Africa decided to stand firm, Nelson Mandela being one of them. As a young lawyer, he decided to abandon the profession and start the struggle to liberate the people of South Africa. I also remember that he married Winnie Madikizela at the age of 24. Together, they started to wage a protracted war against apartheid. 

When Nelson Mandela was arrested, Winnie Mandela took up the struggle. This is a challenge to most women that we marry; when your husband dies, you must take over the role of the husband in the home by picking up the struggle. Unfortunately, for most women these days, when their husbands die, they abandon the homes and move to other families –(Laughter)– but Winnie Mandela never did that. 

I would like to congratulate her for her struggle against apartheid and to encourage all Members here to take on what Winnie Madikizela-Mandela did in South Africa. We mourn her today because she left a landmark in her struggle and life. 

Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I remember that people made a lot of statements against Winnie Madikizela-Mandela concerning her weaknesses. In my opinion, those were not her weaknesses –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: The other Members will now speak for two minutes. 

4.36
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make my submission, I kindly request that Members of the august House stand up and we pay our last respects. 

THE SPEAKER: Now or later? We shall do that when we conclude the debate. 

MS ANYAKUN: Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the mother of a nation. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because today we, together with the members of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), managed to go to the South African High Commission to give our message of condolence.

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was an African anti-apartheid movement activist and a politician. She was strikingly beautiful with a precious empathetic voice. She was not bigger or smaller than we thought but she simply occupied the space with her presence. 

She was a freedom fighter who safeguarded peace and derived positive democratic change in South Africa. She played a role in restoring the shrinking political space for the people of South Africa, who had lost it through the racist apartheid system. 

She generated human values during the apartheid era. Due to Mama Winnie’s struggle, the African woman was included in formalising negotiation for women. She inspired so many generations and she empowered us to be where we are now. We are now respected because of her cause. Rest in peace, Mama Winnie, my warrior and a survivor.

4.39
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. One of Winnie’s quotes was, “To those who oppose us, we say, ‘Strike the woman and you strike the rock’.” Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was South Africa’s first black professional social worker. She chose to save the needy people and devoted her energy and skill to equality and justice for all people in South Africa. She is being remembered as a heroine of liberation and defiant in her pursuit of revolution and redress.

A Zimbabwean activist, Pastor Evan Mawarire, is quoted to have said, “You cannot outsource your struggle; your struggle is yours.” He said Winnie did this by fighting for freedom without giving up. She made sure she was at the centre of that struggle. She refused to subcontract the future that she was fighting for to someone else or to an organisation to negotiate somewhere. She wanted to be at that table. We must be present at the table of negotiation. 

There is no way Winnie’s fight against apartheid can be divorced from that of her late husband, Nelson Mandela. We applaud her for campaigning tirelessly for her husband’s release during his 27 year incarceration, and also for the rights of black South Africans that suffered years of detention, banishment and arrest by the white minority regime that run South Africa at that time. 

We pray that she continues to act as an inspiration to our girls and women in Uganda. Let us be steadfast in our endeavours; where there is a will, there is a way. The political strength in women was explicit in Winnie and in her achievements. 

On behalf of the people of Gomba and as a member of the Uganda Association of Women Lawyers (FIDA-Uganda), allow me to pay tribute to her and to pray that God rests her soul in eternal peace. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we debate, let us acknowledge that despite the harassment, imprisonment and torture, she was still able to raise her children and send them to school. 

4.42
MS NORAH BIGIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the rest of Ugandans and our friends and colleagues from South Africa in celebrating the life of Mama Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, a mother of nations. 

One of her maiden names, Nomzamo, literally means one who undergoes trials. Indeed, she has told a life of struggle. Winnie Mandela became a symbol of suffering caused by the South African system of white minority rule known as apartheid. She became a force against it. We realise that she was one of the first black female social workers who came to Johannesburg. 

Her research into the high infant mortality rate in the black townships which she linked to poverty caused by racism, first sparked her interest in politics. In her own words, Mama Winnie Madikizela-Mandela said, “I started to realise the abject poverty under which most people were forced to live, the appalling conditions created by the inequalities of the system.”  This shows us the kind of leadership that was in her and she was determined to fight inequalities in South Africa. 

We also realise that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela lived a life of sacrifice. Despite the opportunity for her to continue her studies in America, she accepted a position as a social worker at the Baragwanath Hospital in Johannesburg, where she was the first qualified black medical social worker.

Her husband, Nelson Mandela, once said, “The wife of a freedom fighter is often like a widow, even when her husband is not in prison.” He also said, “Winnie gave me cause for hope. I felt as though I had a new and second chance at life. My love for her gave me the added strength for the struggles that lay ahead.” That was the confidence that Nelson Mandela had seen in his wife. 

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela stood out. This she did by making sure that despite the danger of her being overshadowed by her husband and his all-encompassing personality, she vowed not to lose herself. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, Mama Winnie exhibited the highest level of courage in the fight against apartheid. No amount of intimidation could deter her from pursuing the right cause of the people of South Africa in attaining their freedom and liberation. Even when she was exiled in the remote Orange Free State and confined to the area, she refused to give up on the struggle for the liberation and freedom of South Africa and its people. 

She has left a legacy and as women leaders, we shall live to emulate her. We shall forever be able to make sure that the purpose for which she lived can always be pushed ahead. I thank you so much for this opportunity.

4.45
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to also take this chance to join my colleagues to pay tribute to the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. 

When you watch the film about apartheid and the struggle, you will realise that it is worth appreciating the efforts of the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela and Nelson Mandela. These are people who stood firm amidst the harsh brutality against the Africans. They sacrificed their lives and family to ensure that Africans live a better life. Their struggle for equity and dignity can never be brushed away. Their effort is appreciated and respected.

Madam Speaker, the journey by the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela and Nelson Mandela to ensure that Africans must be treated equally was started. In my opinion, getting independence from that brutal rule did not end the journey. My question in this debate therefore is: How much shall we also contribute? As Africans, we must appreciate the fact that we are independent politically but we have not achieved independence in other aspects. South Africa is politically independent. However, we might also agree that the aspect of economic independence might have not been achieved, as well as in other African countries.

The question for us as politicians and leaders is: How much do we contribute to this struggle? Do our policies – (Member timed out.)

4.48
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and I would like to thank the Government for bringing this motion. 

The late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was an icon in fighting for truth, justice, equality and women emancipation. She fought for the rights of the youth, women and children. The late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was a strong, resilient and selfless leader. Her contribution was a sacrificial one and a monumental example. The whole world will always remember and honour her. You cannot talk of apartheid without talking about the late Madiba Nelson Mandela and Winnie Mandela. She was a true inspiration, defending her husband against all odds, and the youth and women of South Africa. 

The late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was there for her children. She raised them up and made sure that they attained the levels of education that they required and she taught them to be courageous in all respects. She stood tall and towered against all challenges. 

In the word of God, God told Joshua, “Be strong and courageous. Do not be discouraged, for the Lord your God will be with you wherever you go.” If we all trust in God, not even the sky will be the limit; we are always more than conquerors. I have said this because I know that there are so many widows amongst us in Uganda and the world. They always look at themselves –(Member timed out.)

4.50
Ms MARIA AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to add my voice to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. 

As a person, I admired the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela as a very beautiful woman. She was also an extraordinary woman. Like others have said, she was a fighter and heroin who exhibited courage and resilience in the face of death, imprisonment and banishments. She kept the late Nelson Mandela’s political dream of ending apartheid and minority oppression alive. She was the torch bearer.

The late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela fought for human dignity. She empowered girls and women to understand that they have power beyond measure. Indeed, she was a symbol of female emancipation. As the President of South Africa, Cyril Ramaphosa, said, “Throughout her life as a political activist, she did not conform to the politics of respectability and sexist gender roles. She did not see women as inferior to men. She emerged out of every situation meant to break her even stronger and more powerful, courageous and much more determined.” 

As an icon of the liberation struggle, the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela earned herself the title of “Mother of the Nation.” She indeed remained the mother of the nation until death.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to appreciate the leaders of South Africa and others around the world for admonishing those who always look out for the negatives and criticised the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. We are all human and to err is human –(Member timed out.)

4.52
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion by appreciating the mother of the world. I would like to change the title from “mother of the nation” to “mother of the world” because amongst other women, the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was so different. 

As a woman, the late Winnie went through all sorts of intimidations but she persevered. She borrowed money from banks to support the poor, something people rarely do. People normally borrow money from banks to enrich their lives. However, for the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, she borrowed money from different banks to ensure that the poor who were deprived by the whites would also have a meal.

As much as the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was deprived and charged of many things, - deprived of going outside the country, sentenced to six years imprisonment - she persevered and embarked on her profession as a social worker. When they thought she would be no more, she bounced back as the President of the African National Congress Women’s League, which was a very big position. Later, she was elected as a Member of Parliament until 2003 when she resigned. 

4.55
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to those who have spoken, to support the motion and pay tribute to this gallant woman, the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. 

She was a true reflection of a mother. A true mother does not stop her motherhood on her biological children. She mothers all the people and Winnie did this very well when she sacrificed the best part of her life to fight for the freedom of the people of South Africa.

Winnie was a true reflection of an African woman. An African woman is a beast of burden. She carried so many burdens on her back, including the marital burden of a man who was away for so many years, and she never gave up. 

Winnie was a model to women leaders. At the time when she joined activism, women were looked at as inferior when it came to state matters. Winnie proved to the world that an African woman can stand strong in state matters and be recognised.

My prayer is that all the women of Africa should emulate Winnie Mandela. We should not be let down by the small errors, the human errors, which she might have committed, because we are all human beings and we err. We, African women, should always walk with our heads high, having had Winnie Madikizela-Mandela fighting at the forefront of such a liberation war. 

4.58
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to this very distinguished African woman. 

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was a very brilliant, brave and accomplished woman. She was full of courage. Most of us, the middle-aged women of Uganda today, looked to her as a role model for everybody to copy from. I remember her as somebody who was so brave that she did not have any impediments or obstacles. She could walk through all that was put before her. 

She was also larger than life. She did not only fight for the women of South Africa, but she fought for the men and women of South Africa and to a greater extent, the men and women of Africa.

What lessons does Winnie Madikizela-Mandela leave for us women of Uganda? We have already said she was a mother, a leader and an accomplished woman. What she leaves behind, in my opinion, is that we should join together with our men and follow her empowerment principles. She did not only work with women. Winnie worked with both men and women and if we have to get anywhere in the women empowerment movement, we have to emulate her. 

I pray that her soul rests in peace and I pray that we copy and follow her legacy. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.00
MR CLEMENT ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay homage to this truly great woman, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. 

We should remember that we are talking about a very young girl, who at 22 years old married Nelson Mandela, and at 26 years she was deprived of her husband when he was arrested and jailed for 27 years. As a 26-year-old woman with two children, she was made to fend for herself, for the name of Mandela, and for the legacy of the ANC in the fight against apartheid. This is the woman we are talking about. She kept Mandela’s name alive and she became the faith of the ANC for 27 years. She did all of this while being arrested, banished and tortured. Her house was set on fire, she was imprisoned for 491 days in solitary confinement and yet her spirit was never broken. This was truly a remarkable and formidable woman. 

I had the rare honour of meeting her on three different occasions and the Winnie Madikizela-Mandela I saw was truly a remarkable person. She was a very different person from the person that history has tried to make us think she was. Did she make mistakes? Of course she did, as does everybody who is at the frontline of a struggle. Yes, she made mistakes, but who did not make mistakes in South Africa? There are only two kinds of people who did not make mistakes in South Africa, those who were in jail and those who chose to do nothing under apartheid. 

I pray that her candle waxes forever, that she may sleep in eternity with the angels. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

5.03
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Madam Speaker, I thank you. Let me appreciate and salute the mover of this motion, the Minister in the Office of the Prime Minister in charge of General Duties. I also join my colleagues to pay glowing tribute to the icon and very inspirational African woman, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. 

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela provided leadership to ANC during the very tough times of racial segregation and this challenged stereotypes. To them, she proved by word and deed that a woman can be a leader in her own right and that leadership is not a preserve of men. She proved that women should not only be companions of male leaders in order to be leaders. 

Madam Speaker, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s determination and resilience filled the vacuum that had been created by the imprisonment of her husband, Nelson Mandela, and the top ANC leaders. There is something in her that captivated me most. She was so bold that at one time, even when the whole world adored Mandela, she criticised Mandela, her former husband, for failing the ideals of freedom by accepting to take the Nobel Peace Prize alongside his former jailer, F. W. de Klerk. Many actually tried to rebuke her but she stood her ground and proved her point.

When you move around Kampala, you will see these great freedom fighters –(Member timed out.)

5.05
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity. Like my colleagues have already said, this was a great woman, a great mother and a wonderful wife of Africa.

Madam Speaker, let me read one of the posters that was somewhere in South Africa those days when you could not share amenities. This one specifically said, “For use by white persons. These public premises and amenities thereof have been reserved for exclusive use of white persons”. This was by order of the Provincial Secretary. He gave a warning and the warning was, “Danger! Natives, Indians and Coloureds, if you enter these premises at night, you will be listed as missing. Armed guards shoot on sight. Savage dogs devour the corpse. You have been warned.” 

That was the situation in which the people of South Africa lived, and Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was fighting against this type of situation, which her people were going through. 

Madam Speaker, I do not want to waste a lot of time here. The situation was actually a bad one but she stood firm. She was a strong woman and a woman who said Africans must be free to do whatever they want. She was a diligent person in South Africa. She was not a plastic politician like some people in Africa today. She was not plastic but natural. (Applause) She was a fearless person. Despite the warning, she said “we must fight to make sure we uproot apartheid in South Africa”. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to read two verses from the Bible. If you read Proverbs 12:24 –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: We have heard the Proverb; we shall read it. (Laughter)

5.08
COL FELIX KULAYIGYE (UPDF Representative): Madam Speaker, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was a very strong woman both physically and spiritually. I was privileged to shake her hands as a private soldier in 1991 when she came here with her husband. 

Forced to be a single mother at such an early age, any other woman would have got married again. However, she stayed on and brought up her children. She became the symbol of the struggle, especially after the Sharpeville massacre. She was there for the young people to continue the struggle. Winnie Madikizela-Mandela became the symbol of all revolutionary women that were struggling in Guinea, Mozambique, Angola, Eritrea and Ethiopia. Those women were in bushes and nobody knew them. Winnie Madikizela-Mandela remained the symbol of the struggling women across the continent for national liberation.

Colleagues have talked about “necklacing”. It is not the necklaces that women wear. “Necklacing” was a method of the struggle where a traitor would be identified and a tyre put around his neck and a matchstick lit. That tyre would be lit and the fellow would die in the fire. That is why she talked about “our necklaces and matches”. She meant the matchsticks. Let people not confuse it with the necklaces our beautiful ladies wear.

I was also blessed to attend the inauguration of Nelson Mandela on 9 May 1994. I also had the privilege of actually planning the security of that occasion. Therefore, when I am talking about this struggle in South Africa, I speak with fondness. 

Lastly, I had the chance to train with their officers when we were building the army, towards the independence of South Africa. She has left a legacy. Let her name live long and I pray that we emulate the strong points she had –(Member timed out.)

5.10
MR SEMAKULA LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Madam Speaker, allow me in my two minutes to give a standing ovation to you on behalf of my people of Nakaseke South for your firmness against homosexuality during the IPU meeting. Long live, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was one of the outstanding African women, specifically in politics. Africa has lost a gallant and courageous daughter. She was a resilient and selfless lady, a committed woman, full of vision. Despite all the odds during the apartheid regime, she stood her ground. She was never compromised. May her soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

5.11
MR GUTOMOI ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was a great lady. She was a nationalist who we should never forget in history. I remember she made a statement at one time that she would rather do other things by working her relationship with the truth. Through that, she applied courage to prove to the whole world that behind a strong man there is a strong woman and she proved it –(Interjections)- Not “besides”; that is your version. Mine is what I proved – Behind a strong man there is a strong woman. She proved that to the whole world. It is left to us to see if our women will do the same.

Madam Speaker, we still remember that Mandela gave her all the training to be very courageous in making decisions both during the time when she was with her husband and when she was not with her husband. She did it wonderfully and successfully, and we cannot doubt that. That is why the whole world and Uganda and this Parliament stood to appreciate her efforts when she was alive.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I think we need to put up somewhere a statute of this great lady. We need to show how she came to Uganda, how she got an honorary degree and finally she left us in this sad moment. This is very important for us if we want to make history for Africa and this Parliament. I propose that the House comes up with at least a monument to be put somewhere in honour of this lady. Thank you very much.

5.14
MR FRED MUDUKOI (Independent, Butebo County, Pallisa):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to join my colleagues in paying tribute to the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. 

I would like to say that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was an extraordinary woman. She was courageous and had a brave personality. She was an icon in the fight against apartheid in South Africa. She stood with her husband amidst the challenges at that time. It is her charisma and determination that inspired many African women to emulate her ways. Today, we now have courageous women such as you, Madam Speaker, who stand on their feet to defend the right things. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Butebo and my own behalf, I take this opportunity to thank you and pay tribute to the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela for the fight she exhibited against apartheid and for the rights of women in Africa. 

Madam Speaker, I do not have much to say but on behalf of the people of Butebo, I pay tribute and pray that her soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you. 

5.16
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not think it is possible to honour an icon of the struggle against apartheid in two minutes. However, let me try to begin by thanking the African National Congress (ANC) and the South African Government for the honour they gave to the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. I had the privilege of meeting her during the 100 years celebration of the ANC. They extended invitations to many who had been involved at different stages of the struggle. 

Often in hindsight, we pass judgments but to truly appreciate the role Winnie Madikizela-Mandela played is to see how she was thrust in the centre of the struggle without the hindsight which we have. At the time when Winnie Madikizela-Mandela became the face and the voice of the anti-apartheid struggle, much of the ANC leadership was in Robben Island. Others were exiled in Lusaka under persecution. The armed military wing was mainly active in Angola and in Namibia and Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was able to continue the struggle in South Africa and define the no-compromise position of the liberation of Africa.

Many have contributed but her contribution and the time at which she made that contribution must be taken into context. It is not a question of whether she was a woman. No person could have actually fitted in those shoes other than Winnie Madikizela-Mandela at that material time. As times changed towards the release of Nelson Mandela, there were negotiations which took place and the defiance position had to be stepped down. However, the reduction of that defiance position led to the end of the war in Angola, the liberation and independence of Namibia and the end of the war in Mozambique –(Member timed out.)

5.18
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity to pay tribute and sign the condolence book this morning on behalf of the mothers of Uganda. (Applause)

A lot has already been said about this great lady of valour, Mama Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. I would like to remember three things about her. One is that while her husband said he cherished the ideals of a democratic and free society, and he further said that it is for this that he was prepared to die, Mama Winnie said, “If I was to die, I will die for this ideal, but I will go with one of them.” In other words, she was not prepared to die alone; she would die fighting. This meant that someone would die with her. 

This is the instinct of a mother. In fact, if anyone else would like to know a true woman, the instinct of protection and fighting beyond normal comes out. Usually, women come out in hard times when men cannot stand on their feet. We have known this during many liberation struggles in Uganda. Men went into hiding but the women remained fighting. (Applause) That is a true character of a mother. Therefore, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was able to demonstrate that in hard times, we should look for a woman.

You are aware that men, from generation to generation, have fought the top leadership of a woman. It does not matter where you come from. When men see a woman coming to the top, they make sure they put her down. Deborah killed Sisera in the Bible, but it was said the commander killed him. Esther saved the generation of Israel but they said her uncle actually saved them. There are very many people who liberated this country in the name of men. That is a different story. 

However, I would like to say that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela should not be remembered as a South African mother –(Member timed out.)

5.21
MS ANNA ADEKE EBAJU (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also extend my gratitude to you and the movers of the motion. I also rise to support the motion to eulogize one of the icons of our generation because I believe that her impact is going to reverberate in more centuries to come.

It is a simple and joyful task to eulogize Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. She struck me as a very simple and true human leader. Many times, when we speak and read the biographies of great leaders, good things are said of them but that is not the case for Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. She had a taste of everything and she made us realise that our imperfections make us human. 

Her journey of self-discovery and fortitude in sustaining a struggle while her husband was in prison is what makes her stand out. There are many women who remained unsung but to me, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela is the unsung hero of the movement against apartheid in South Africa.

As women in the world, we need to recognise all those unsung heroes because their efforts are actually what yields. In 1969, she was locked up for about 491 days and not allowed access to even sanitary towels. Can you imagine the pain of a woman being locked up? She wrote a letter to her husband while in detention to express how her own children were raising themselves. The children were denied of their parents because she gave her life for the service of the country. 

Rest in peace, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. To me, she is the unsung hero who actually deserved the most credit for ending apartheid in South Africa. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Eleanor Roosevelt said something interesting about women. She said “A woman is like a tea bag - you can’t tell how strong she is until you put her in hot water”. 

5.24	
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Mityana Municipality, I pay tribute to this great fallen hero of Africa. 

She was a woman of great impact in Africa. What I remember about her in short is the eight qualities of a leader. First of all, she was confident and had a strong sense of self. She enabled positive change. She was persistent and strong with a very powerful voice like that of our dear Speaker. 

She lived a life of passion and purpose. She knew what drove her and she enabled change. In addition, she was a great lady of authenticity and willing to author her own story. Thinking and receiving support - You cannot do it on your own. Rest in eternal peace, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela.

5.25
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the Floor. I join other Members to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. I recognise the role she played in the liberation of South Africa, but also take cognisance of the fact that her own character, personality and life spread influence over the rest of Africa, that it motivated many other people to either join the struggle or to realise that they were living in situations that they could change. 

I had chance to visit number 8115, which was the house where Winnie Madikizela-Mandela and her husband used to stay. I got a fresh feel of the kind of life they went through during the struggle. I disagree - 180 degrees - with people who choose to summarise the life of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela using her shortfalls. I think we need to look at the circumstances under which she lived, especially to understand that a woman of her character, calibre, looks and stature at that time was denied her husband and father to her children for 27 years, and she did not even know when her husband would be out of prison. Two, we need to also understand a wife of a man of the character and calibre of Mandela; there is always a relationship that is supportive and positively moving forward for both of them. 

We should accept that when people pass on, we must make a balanced sheet about them. The balanced sheet is that there is the positive and the negative but the shortfalls cannot describe in totality what Winnie Madikizela-Mandela did in this world.

I stand to thank her for the great mother that she was. I stand to thank her for the mentoring she did for the young people, mainly in Soweto in South Africa. It is still fresh in their minds that she was a great leader of all times. May her soul rest in peace.

5.27
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much. I also stand to add my voice to those who have spoken in respect to the motion today. 

Madam Speaker, Winnie has died and this was a woman who fought very hard for the release of her husband. If it had been today, many women would have abandoned their husbands in prison, unlike what Winnie did -(Interjections)- What I am saying is that for 27 years, Winnie stood fighting very hard to ensure that her husband was released from jail and I think that is the credit that Winnie deserves.

The kind of woman that we are talking about today is an icon that many of us have learnt that she – (Interjections) – Madam Speaker, help me out on that. The gallant ladies who are seated in this honourable House today are a reflection of what Winnie did from South Africa. I would like to thank you, the women who have emulated what Winnie has done. (Applause) Above all, stand in leadership that this House rests on. 

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela did so much. She is not only remembered in Africa but the whole world today is celebrating her in relation to what she did to help South Africa reach where it is today. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for leading a delegation of Members of Parliament this morning to sign the condolence book on our behalf. Some of us also signed that book in one centre down there where we found it positioned. This is for all Members of this House to show that we are standing with the South Africans and Africa. Winnie, rest in eternal peace and may we find when you have cleared the way for us when we join you.

5.30
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the Catholic Church where I belong, normally the priest says, “lift up your hearts” at a certain point and the people reply, “it is right and just”. I think it is right and just that as a country and as Parliament of Uganda, we gather here together to debate this motion, which we all support and which I wish to say I do really support, to pay tribute to a gallant daughter and mother of Africa.

I would like to say that what we are doing here is a celebration of the power of a woman in looking after a home and doing the work of God to continue procreation that people may continue to live in and fill the earth like God commanded. The power of a woman to fight for justice is the power of a woman to fight for human rights. This is what we are talking about here as we celebrate the work of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela when she put aside her whole life to fight against apartheid. 

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s fight against apartheid was able to accord her the opportunity to win a number of awards. One of them was the R.F. Kennedy Human Rights Award in 1985. She won this award together with her colleagues, Allan Boesak and Beyers Naudé, for the fight against apartheid. She also won the Candace Award for Distinguished Service from the National Coalition of 100 Black Women in 1998. 

Most importantly, we would like to appreciate the very strong bond between the Uganda Government and the Government of South Africa. There was a lot which we shared in the fight against apartheid. The Uganda Government supported South Africa and the South African Government is one of the strongest allies of Uganda. For that matter, I would like to appreciate the decision by Makerere University in recognising the work of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela in the fight against apartheid when they awarded her –(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute to a gallant daughter of Africa, who made remarkable achievements at a time when very few could stand up against the apartheid regime.

I would like to first of all associate myself with what many honourable colleagues have said about the life of Winnie Mandela. However, what makes her stand out prominently is the time at which she came up to fight for the rights of the Africans. At 22 years old, coming out to engage in political activity was not a portion for women. However, she stood out and did what she did. This justifies the fact that women can be treated in the same measure as men and they can undertake a mission and accomplish it equally to men.

The second issue was the magnitude of the mission that she stood for. At a time when the husband of a young lady says that he is ready to die for such a mission, not many would endeavour to stay behind him when there is even an opportunity for them to go for voluntary exile. Winnie faced very many trials. She was even compelled to take her children to Swaziland for studies but still remained in South Africa to accomplish this mission.

If you are to apportion responsibility, I would say South Africa would not have gained this independence if Winnie Madikizela-Mandela had not stayed behind to keep the candle burning. She continued reminding the world that there was an important African who was in jail for the right cause. We know there were other young people who were part of the mission to liberate South Africa but what makes the Mandelas stand out was the fact that the wife of Nelson Mandela, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, stayed behind –(Member timed out.)

5.36
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the mover of the motion, hon. Mary Okurut. 

During the apartheid regime, South Africa was characterised by chaos, lawlessness, disorderliness, civil strife, exploitation, suppression, injustices, gender inequality, corruption, underdevelopment, disunity, to mention but a few. However, in her fight against the apartheid regime in South Africa, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela effectively used traditional leaders in order to fight against the apartheid regime. She led a group of leaders to talk to the traditional leaders who in turn could talk to the people so that the people were aware of what was going on in their environment.

Secondly, she used music, dance and drama. Remember pop star singers like Yvonne Chaka Chaka sang, “Free, Nelson Mandela”; reggae musician Bob Marley sang, “Africa Must Unite”; and Lucky Dube sang and alerted the people about the injustices being meted out on them. 

She also used churches. She would go to religious leaders like Desmond Tutu and talk about love, peace and respect in the churches. This also made the people aware of the apartheid regime in South Africa. 

She also talked to the political leaders about issues related to democracy. She talked to the people about injustices through football, athletics and netball. Through sports, she alerted the people about issues related to the injustices in South Africa. She also educated people through schools. 

In the process, she was able to bring about peace, justice, unity, and transparency. Issues concerning leadership, governance and the liberation struggle were brought to the fore by Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. She was a seasoned celebrated academician, a woman activist and a liberator. May her soul rest in peace. Amen.

5.39
MS JENIPHER NAMUYANGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to join colleagues in paying tribute to a great African woman, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. Indeed, she was an icon and role model to many of us. 

Winnie Madikizela-Mandela had a very challenging life from childhood. She lost her mother when she was still a child. To make matters worse, her mother left a baby boy in her care and she raised her young brother.

Madam Speaker, during the course of her studies, she won a scholarship to study in the USA. She knew she would be out of this very bad life in South Africa but she declined the offer and remained in South Africa where she studied to be a social worker. Of course, that meant that she would suffer with her people but it also gave her time to work and support the vulnerable, fight for the prisoners and also fight for the freedom of her people against apartheid.
 
This was a great woman. As women, we shall miss her. All we can do is to emulate her example and fight for the freedom of everybody. May her soul rest in peace.

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me also join my colleagues in supporting the motion. I appreciate the tributes which have been given by our colleagues in the House.

We are talking about a great woman. When you look at the power dynamics at the level of family or even society with respect to our gender roles, there still remains disfavour of the woman. It is a challenge we still struggle with up to today. However, when we examine the situation which was happening in South Africa, apartheid was a very terrible form of governance but you got a young lady at her age whose husband was arrested; other political activists with weak backbones fled the country and went into exile, but she decided to remain the face of the struggle in South Africa.

She disapproved these biases we have that women cannot lead or women cannot do greater things than men. Therefore, it is proper we pay tribute and appreciate her contribution while she lived in South Africa.

The power relations define very many things which happen today. When you look at the area of health, for instance, HIV/AIDS in Africa still has the face of a woman. Yesterday, we were discussing the issue of maternal mortality and the reasons women die are many. These are basically related to how we look at men and women and how the relations are balanced. 

Therefore, as we talk about the death of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, we still have a big duty as leaders to address this question of women emancipation and empowerment of women, especially in our situation as Uganda and as Africa. Winnie Madikizela-Mandela comes out as a very great example that inspires all of us. I think we feel challenged, as leaders, that we should do everything possible to make - (Member timed out.) 

5.44
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, the people of Gulu Municipality join us all in paying this tribute. 

Right from 1652 when the Boers landed in South Africa at the Cape up to today, the history of South Africa has never been the same. 

In this struggle, ever since the ANC was formed in 1912 in response to the Union of South Africa Act, 1910, which officially positioned apartheid in South Africa, I think among the women in the world, we would like to add the words hon. Cecilia Ogwal did not complete, that Winnie Mandela is a continental and global mother.

A rose has been plucked from the heroes’ garden. Madam Speaker, this was a lady who has been unwavering and resilient in all struggles and irreplaceable. She remained in the heart of the struggle. In her 38 years of marriage, she did not see her husband on a daily basis for 27 years. She remained a breastfeeding mother while struggling in the streets. She managed to keep Mandela’s political life alive when he was in prison. That is a very rare kind of character.

We have given names to streets and towns in Uganda. When I hear “Fort Portal”, I remember Sir Gerald Portal who was a Major in the British Army and his name stands as a memory in this country in the name Fort Portal. Therefore, how difficult is it to name a town or a street somewhere in Uganda as a monumental memory for this lady? It is very important for this country and Africa because Uganda was one of the frontline states in the struggle for the liberation of South Africa. I thank you.

5.46
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to join Members in thanking the mover of the motion and also paying tribute to a great woman.

On behalf of the people of Amuru, I also add my voice in saying and confirming that indeed Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was a great woman. I may not have seen her but I have read a lot of things about her. From the many things that have been spoken by my colleagues, there is one thing that has been bothering me for a very long time. I remember when Nelson Mandela was released from prison, there were allegations that Winnie was bad and that she had done some things. I asked myself, who in this world has not sinned? I then remembered the Bible quotation where Jesus said that he who has no sin should cast the first stone.

I asked myself what was so irreconcilable. It has always pained my heart. Even today, I may not have had the opportunity to tell her how I felt but as a young girl, I really felt for her. I was not yet married but I felt for her. Anyway, it is now gone and she has done her part. The challenge now remains with us, especially those of us who are women in leadership positions; what is it that we take from her?

I would like to borrow the words of one of our very great musicians in Uganda, Juliana Kanyomozi, who sang, “Woman, woman, a warrior is a woman”. This is the song that I dedicate to Mama Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. I wish I could sing it but there’s no time. Thank you.

5.49
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, what strikes me most about Winnie Madikizela-Mandela is the love she had for her country. In spite of being watched 24 hours a day, it did not stop her from moving on and pursuing the cause she fought for. She remained firm on what she believed in up to the end.

I would like to thank Uganda very much and Makerere University. On the 19 January 2018, I was in Makerere University during the graduation ceremony where she was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws. Her defiance was articulated very well. You know her action there was defiance. This is also a message to us in Uganda that if people move out to demonstrate or try to express something, there should never be teargas and guns. Some people are put under 24-hour watch. Instead of analysing why that person is defying, people decide to put him or her at crossroads.

I would also like to say that Winnie Madikizela-Mandela as an activist did her best. She even provided a clinic amidst her meagre resources. When we talk about health, it touches everybody and she did it. Winnie Madikizela-Mandela suffered very much. I do not know the number of women who can persevere being young and for 27 years pursuing a cause for her husband. Many women would just say, “I am tired; let me move on” after maybe two years or so –(Member timed out.)

5.52
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to what has already been said. 

As a student of literature, I read a book called “Mine Boy” and it spoke about South Africa and what happens in South Africa. There was a phrase in the book that said, “So is life in South Africa.” The question would be: Why is life so in South Africa? We had to read and give our comments. How I wish all of us in this House would have watched the movie Sarafina. 

Whatever happened, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was influential. Therefore, I call upon all of us women to also try to back-track and see what we can do. How can we do the things we can do? We need to ask ourselves the five journalistic questions in relation to Winnie: Who was Winnie Madikizela-Mandela? When did these things happen? Why did she do those things? How did she manage? Those are the things we need to address ourselves to.

That is the reason people are saying we need streets in the names of Winnie Madikizela-Mandela. I have a niece also called Winifred Mandela just because we appreciated her. I could not have those names because I did not have a girl in my family but for those of you who can, maybe you can start using those names.

Another issue in our lives, as we talk about Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, is that we need to do a SWOT - (Interjections)- I have not yet finished. The strengths, weaknesses –(Member timed out.)

5.55
MR SILAS AOGAN (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. After listening to everybody, I have a feeling that most of the people foresaw what I was intending to say and they decided to photocopy and paste. This does not mean I have run short of what to say. All we now need to do is to learn from what she did. 

You have talked about all the goodness. I want to encourage the men in this House to learn to empower our women. Let us give them the opportunity to rise to leadership positions. Let us give them the opportunity to get out of the kitchen and be with us. We should learn to walk side by side with the women. There are still men who want to keep women carrying a chair for them as they walk to drink. I am not going to lay any document on the Table to list such Members but I am saying, it is very important for us to move side by side with our women. 

Attention needs to be given to the girl child, be it at home or on the streets. Today, we were celebrating the international day for the street children and I expected us to raise a motion here. I do not know whether it is coming. Women are the best teachers of our children. Once they are with their mothers, you are assured of getting presidents, speakers, Members of Parliament. If you do not allow them time with their mothers, they can even become criminals and you will need crime preventers. This is a big opportunity for us to salute -(Member timed out.)

5.57
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was an exceptional woman in Africa and the whole world. She suffered very many arrests and she was banned from addressing public meetings. Despite all the torture, she remained focused and determined to gain freedom in South Africa. The result of her struggle led to the freedom they are enjoying today. 

I would like to appeal to the men. Men all over the world identify with a genius and with very good women. However, some of them do not know that for such a woman to rise to such positions where you can see the previously unseen potential in her, she must be educated. We still have men who keep their daughters at home. We have got women in our communities who have not been sent to school. We must emulate Winnie Madikizela-Mandela’s example. We can get more of her kind in Uganda. Men should stop identifying with already made women. You must also take your children to school so that men also identify with them. 

Madam Speaker, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela remains an icon of women’s emancipation. The freedom that women enjoy in South Africa today is because of her –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 40 Members have contributed to this motion and all are in support of the motion. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do pay tribute as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to extract the Hansard together with the tribute and transmit it to Mrs Mandela’s family through the South African High Commission here in Kampala. Please, inform them that the House in Uganda has paid tribute before she is buried. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INQUIRE INTO ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN INSTITUTIONS OF LEARNING IN UGANDA

6.00
MS ANNA ADEKE EBAJU (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This motion is brought under rule 55 and rule 186(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Objective XIV (b) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy mandates the state to fulfil the fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development and shall, in particular, ensure that all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education; 

AND WHEREAS Article 30 of the l995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda guarantees the right to education for all persons;

NOTING THAT Article 19 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child to which Uganda is a signatory mandates Government to take appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect a child from all forms of violence including sexual abuse; 

AWARE THAT in line with Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan II (NDP II), the Government developed the National Strategic Plan on Violence against Children in Schools, 2015-2020 whose overall goal is to ensure that measures are put in place to prevent, protect and respond to violence against children in schools;

DEEPLY CONCERNED that during the development of the National Strategic Plan on Violence against Children in Schools, it was established that violence against children in schools is widespread and children are subjected to different forms of violence; sexual violence especially among girls was on the high with 77.7 per cent of primary school children and 82 per cent of secondary school students experiencing sexual harassment while at school, eight per cent of the girls are subjected to defilement, 24 per cent are spoken to in sexual ways, 18 per cent receive marriage proposals and 25 per cent are fondled or touched in a sexual manner while 29 per cent are made to watch sexual scenes constituting pornography;

RECOGNISING THAT in the recent past, the media has been awash with numerous and repeated reports of gross acts of sexual violence in our institutions of learning at all levels;

FURTHER RECOGNISING THAT access to education is one of the fundamental rights of a person, which should be delivered in a conducive and safe learning environment; however, this right is frustrated when people are subjected to sexual violence which hence undermines the security and safety in institutions of learning as well as threatening Uganda’s path to development;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that: 

    1. Parliament sets up a select committee to investigate allegations of sexual violence in institutions of learning in Uganda.

    2. Parliament fast-tracks the Sexual Offences Bill, 20l5.”

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several honourable members. The justification, please.

MS ADEKE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I should make it known to you that this motion came up about a week ago. It was particularly focussing on the feedback from the media about what had been happening in Kibuli Secondary School and Makerere University. The motion was focusing on only those institutions of learning but Members found it wise to request for the amendment of the motion so that it would focus on all institutions of learning in the country. I think that they were knowledgeable about facts that sexual violence is not synonymous with particular institutions of learning. 

We can start by unpacking what sexual violence is. It constitutes any act or an attempt to obtain sex by coercion. It can be verbal, physical or psychological abuse and abuse of any kind that is meant to solicit sexual satisfaction. We need to recognise that our schools were originally meant to be safe zones for our children and that sexual violence does not happen to only girls but also boys, although it is predominant against girls. 

We have insisted on educating the girl-child because we deem the school environment a sanctuary, which should protect and prohibit anything that will endanger the girls’ future and their health until they are of the requisite grown age so as to start engaging in sex with their free consent. However, the school environment has become a site where sexual violence occurs. In fact, researching and investigating sexual violence in a school situation is very sensitive, taking into consideration the age of the victims of sexual violence and the effects that it could have on them. Therefore, this debate is basically geared towards us having an honest conversation as a country because the violators are our friends, relatives, voters and people in our society whom we may hold in high esteem. 

Sexual violence has been occurring at primary and secondary schools and in institutions of higher learning such as universities. I beg to particularly submit in this regard about institutions of higher learning. About a month ago, a journalist called Raymond Mujuni ran a devastating story on NBS television about a lecturer who was soliciting sex for marks. The story and the experiences shared by these girls were heart-wrenching because having to do something against one’s will has a very negative impact on the girls’ self- esteem and how they look at themselves.

Institutions of higher learning have attracted debates. Many times people say that since these girls are of age, they can rightfully consent. However, I would like to take exception to that argument because the teacher-student, student-lecturer relationship has a professional code of conduct that should govern it. Even if the girls are of age, professional ethics deems it extremely improper that lecturers should even send advances their way. 

Therefore, when it comes to sexual violence in institutions of learning, we should not even consider issues regarding age as long as one party serves in a prejudicial capacity to the disadvantaged party. It makes it difficult; the bargaining power is not the same. 

Hon. Baryomunsi has submitted about these gender struggles and we need to engender this attitude against sexual violence in our schools because it is a reflection of patriarchal political struggles - a dominant relationship between male and female, which we need to unpack. That is what I hope our investigations will do. 

There has been a consistent pattern of sexual violence. In many situations, students who have engaged with their teachers or people in higher authority than them, have been subjected to inhumane treatment. I have met and interacted with two victims of sexual violence from Kibuli Secondary School who were forced to procure abortions. They speak with very much pain and sorrow because they feel like they have lost their future. We need to rehabilitate those girls. 

Besides, let us think about the rate of HIV/AIDS prevalence and spread in such relationships. We all know that in the teacher-student relationship, the students are at a disadvantaged position to bargain for safe sex, making them very vulnerable to acquiring HIV/AIDS. I have met a victim who contracted HIV/AIDS while she studied at St Lawrence Secondary School and she shared her story. It is difficult to bargain for safe sex if the person forcing you stands in a higher position. Therefore, we need to be conversant that if we continue to tolerate sexual violence in our schools and refuse to talk about it, it is going to cost us a full generation of children in Uganda. 

I would like to report that I know of a school in Oyam District called Progressive Primary School in Loro Subcounty where the head teacher has been indicted several times and arrested on counts of sexual assault to primary school pupils. Some of them got pregnant but parents try to settle the cases out of court. These stories have gone unheard because the parents are accomplices to these issues. Prosecution has not seen the light of day. 

We need a thorough investigation. We need to call to account whoever is taking care of our children in school. We need to call out the parents who are tolerating this sexual violence that is being perpetrated against children in school. I feel that the Ministry of Education and Sports has not been well equipped to take care of this issue. Therefore, Parliament itself should inquire into it. This should not be a matter that we see being reported in the media. We see 16-year-old girls coming to bury their head teachers while carrying the latter’s babies and no one is speaking about it. We need to weed out this evil before it eats us totally.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let me invite the seconder of the motion.
 
6.14
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for the resolution of Parliament to inquire into allegations of sexual violence in institutions of learning in Uganda. 

Sexual violence is a violation of human rights and it is an abuse of a person’s dignity. It gets worse when it is meted out on our children who are in school. Sex is for procreation and love but not for sale, favours or marks. Therefore, I would like to continue by basing my support of this motion on three issues. 

The first issue is the legal framework that we have on this subject. Madam Speaker, the legal framework at the moment is not really emphatic on our children and students. In particular, we would want a much stronger legal framework because this actually involves children of tender age, both boys and girls. It is also because of their vulnerability. These are very young children who cannot negotiate and have no rights, like it has already been said by the proposer, because of the master and subordinate relationship. 

I would also want to talk about the effect of sexual violence on our children. The major effect is the erosion of our moral fibre. I will speak for Kaberamaido. Children are no longer children. They are being invited to do things that we never did as children. They are being violated. There is no child in a school that has not been approached to give sex for marks or to give sex just for the sake of it as a favour to the teacher. To make things worse, our parents and even we are no better. That is the major reason I support this and that is why we brought it to this august House. 

The other effect it has on our people is that it has completely led to the death of our cultural norms. Parents can no longer talk to their children and the teachers have refused to be parents or look after our children in schools. Instead, they have taken advantage of the trust we have given them to look after our children.

It is also destroying the future of this nation and the lives of the victims. When you look at the victims of sexual violence, they are not the same. You find that they are bitter. Some of their lives have been cut short and they have nothing else to do hence they are frustrated. They have nowhere to go. They have nothing else to do, so they drop out of school. Children are carrying unwanted pregnancies and giving birth to children and yet we are looking at it. This all happens in our schools, where we even pay school fees. Why would I, as a parent, pay school fees for my child to be abused in school? 

Madam Speaker, the other issue I would want to mention on the Floor of this House that has really affected our children is the stigma and trauma they face. Most of these advances are a shocker because they are happening to them for the first time. Some of them end up contracting HIV/AIDS and other diseases other than HIV/AIDS or in addition to HIV/AIDS. 

There is therefore a necessity for this motion. We need to get a solution to the problems of our children in primary and secondary schools and all institutions of higher learning, as it has already been said here. There are several examples that have been given to you. However, I pray that the investigations are carried out and the culprits found. If we take this seriously, it will be a warning to future or intending perpetrators because they exist. This motion has come. It is so important and timely that it is now that we should look at the perpetrators and put them to book.

We need to protect our young generation, both boys and girls. Where are we going? The future is so bleak with our children traumatised, stigmatised and abused all because of sexual violence and satisfaction of people who do not think about our children. It even goes further and much deeper when the perpetrators are actually the parents of these students. They entice the children by telling them that they will continue paying their school fees and send them to the university while violating the rights of the girl child. 

We would want these sexual violence cases investigated thoroughly and those cases, particularly rape, defilement, forced sex and the like, brought to book. The perpetrators should not only be brought to book but they should be prosecuted and punished.   

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I pray that this House considers this motion and supports us. A select committee would do better justice to this matter instead of us taking it to a committee. This is a serious issue. It is about our children and it is about time that we are seen doing something more serious and commendable. I pray that this House debates this and the select committee is formed. 
I so pray and I thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, this debate raises something interesting. Every financial year, we call upon the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us the errant accounting officers and the other day I saw a list. I hope one day we shall see a list of errant head teachers and teachers blacklisted in this House. (Applause) 

6.24
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to inquire into allegations of sexual violence in institutions of learning in Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, sexual advances and requests for sexual favours are a growing area of concern in our institutions of learning. This motion, as presented by hon. Anne Adeke, is long overdue. In the past, this used to be an allegation but today as we speak, it has become apparent that some lecturers do solicit sexual favours from students in exchange for better academic pass marks, among others. It is also sad to note that today’s marks in our institutions of learning are becoming sexually transmitted. Colleges and universities are expected to provide a conducive learning environment to all but this is not anymore. The impact and scope of this problem is high. 

Madam Speaker, no significant amount of attention has been focused on this kind of problem. Sexual harassment policies and procedures at the institutions of higher learning are not clear. To make it worse, the way institutions deal with sexual harassment issues remains vague in most of the institutions that we have today. Such conduct has an effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual’s academic performance or creating an intimidating, hostile and offensive educational environment for our children. 

Important to note also is that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination, especially to female students. Sexist statements are made to them and behaviour that conveys insulting, degrading or sexist attitudes. They face seductive behaviour and encompass unwanted, inappropriate, offensive physical or verbal sexual advances. They face sexual bribery involving solicitation of sexual activity or by promise of reward; sexual coercion by threat of punishment; sexual assaults; and attempted rape or even rape. 

Madam Speaker, there are defilement cases. While all members of the academic community are potential victims, we often get complaints from female students about these unwelcoming sexual behaviours. Given that we have a carefully drafted definition of what constitutes sexual harassment, we need a clear policy that prohibits such action. We also need an accessible grievance handling procedure. The victims need procedures that are communicated and easily understood. Efforts need to be done to educate students on the destructive nature of this behaviour. I think these together would constitute an aggressive response to a problem of this nature.

We have institutions like the United Nations (UN). They already have best practices or precedents on sexual harassment policies. The inquiry could consider looking into how the UN handles sexual harassment policies in their institutions so as to inform our institutions in Uganda. Maybe, there are some best practices that the UN applies that we could adopt. 

It is now my pleasure, Madam Speaker, to invite honourable colleagues to support this motion. I beg to second.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the seconders of the motion have spoken. I do not know –

MS OGWAL: I am seeking clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: From whom?

MS OGWAL: From the movers of the motion. Madam Speaker, I would like to associate myself with the motion. However, I am seeking clarification because since Parliament is expected to form a select committee, we need to package the terms of reference properly. 

The motion is on sexual violence. For most of us who have dealt with conflict and post-conflict situations, we know that sexual violence is used in situations of war or as a weapon of war. However, what is most popular and what mothers are crying about is sexual exploitation, which is rampant and has almost been institutionalised. When you are talking about educational institutions or the relationship between bosses and subordinates in offices or even husbands and house servants, these are the ones we have to deal with. However, sexual violence as such is a weapon of war. 

We need to clearly define this so that when these people go to investigate, they know what they are investigating. We are very concerned that children are being exploited because they are innocent and do not know. The other aspect is where a student is desperate and wants to pass with a first class degree; this is exploitation.

Can we deal with sexual violence so that we do not confuse the two, or can you define it for us so that when investigating, we know what we are pursuing and what cure in terms of law we are seeking so as to resolve the issue? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe that the general terms will arise from the debate. Members are going to contribute to this motion and it is the responsibility of the Speaker to formulate the terms of reference. However, we need to hear from the Members; do the Members agree or not? Let us have the general debate and then we shall tease out the issues that need to be handled.

6.33
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

Starting from where hon. Cecilia Ogwal stopped, I think we need to define what we are going to look at. Is it sexual exploitation or sexual violence? During the war in Teso region, sexual violence was a weapon that was used by both the National Resistance Army (NRA) and the Uganda People's Army (UPA). This involved rape, abuse and sodomy. All these were used against the people of that area. 

Sexual exploitation is a situation where we have the weaker sex being exploited because of economic might or intellectual might to the disadvantage of the weaker sex or people. It is not only limited to the girls but even the boys. We have heard issues of sodomy - young boys have been sodomised in these institutions. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to invite colleagues to support the motion. However, since we are dealing with institutions - we need to save the young generation - they should specifically deal with exploitation at institutions of higher learning. 

If we are to give the committee some work, because I know a select committee cannot have a broader approach in handling this, they can go into those areas that go beyond exploitation and include the issue of violence in other institutions.  (Interruption) 

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I would like my colleagues who have raised that issue to try to differentiate between sexual exploitation and sexual violence. They should help the House by differentiating and defining for us what they understand by sexual violence. 

If you are talking about an institution, – a secondary school, a university - if a person of below 18 years is violated sexually, wouldn’t that be sexual violence? We believe that the mind of that person is not mature enough to make a decision as to whether to engage in a sexual act or not. That is perhaps why there is still a disparity on that matter. It would be proper for those who are arguing in that way to clarify their definition of sexual violence.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, my sister. I thought I was very clear and that is why I used the example of where you and I come from. When we talked about sexual violence, I did talk about rape. In the institutions, they do not rape the girl or sodomise the boy in order to give him or her marks. The girl or boy is told, “You offer this, I give you this”.  However, I agree that there is also rape in these institutions but it is not as rampant as the exploitation. The rape is there but I was saying that can we limit this because hon. Anna Adeke is talking about institutions. When we are dealing with institutions, it is majorly exploitation. However, just in case there are those cases of violence, they can be handled on a school by school basis. 

We have had cases where students rape fellow students. The committee can cover that. However, we are dealing with exploitation and violence beyond the institutions of higher learning. That is why I was saying that the committee, if it so pleases the House, will be given a task to handle that sector.  However, in this motion, we should stick to saving the young people especially those in schools – secondary schools and the universities. The broader aspect can still be dealt with because we have had these instances even in the church and places of work –(Interruption).

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that recently, when we visited northern Uganda in regards to the nodding syndrome issue, we found many children aged between 9 and 15 pregnant and many of them were already carrying children. This is a very serious issue that needs to be dealt with exclusively for the benefit of many of our children either in school or even out of school. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to bring the House back to the debate. The theme of hon. Ebaju’s presentation is the fiduciary position in which these heads are in relation to the people who are under them. The head teachers, the sports master, etcetera. I think she said it arose from Kibuli S.S. I do not know what happened there but she said it started from there and led to the waking up of all these issues through universities.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My appeal to Members, if they so please, is for us to have the select committee deal with sexual exploitation and sexual violence in the higher institutions. There is sexual violence and sexual exploitation beyond these institutions and we also need to save those people who are outside that bracket. That is why I proposed that one of our committees that is responsible should also deal with that part. However, for the institutions, let us have the select committee in order to deal with this matter. 

It is not only girls; even boys. You heard the case of a school in Soroti where a boy was sodomised. We had the issue of the late Mukiibi from St Lawrence. There are so many of these cases in institutions and it looks like it is so rampant. 

I would like to appeal to Members to support the motion and let a select committee be formed to deal with the issues of sexual exploitation and violence in the institutions of learning. The broader one should also be handled by one of the committees of this House which handles these matters. I beg to submit and support.

6.41
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Anna Adeke for coming up with this motion. 

I would like address myself to the issue of sexual violence. We know that sexual violence includes, among other things, rape of both men and women because in the institutions of learning, we also have boys being forced into sex. It also includes marital rape, abortion, unwanted sexual advances and the use of vulgar language among others. 

Therefore, on the motion which is talking about sexual violence, I would like to address myself to the issue of sexual exploitation in the institutions of learning. I would like to narrow it down to sexual exploitation because schools are where we have young people. This is where young boys and girls are taken to get knowledge and to acquire skills.  At the end of the day, instead of acquiring useful skills, they end up acquiring skills that in a way are not helpful to their future. 

Madam Speaker, much as I support the formation of this select committee, I would like to start by saying that the bulk of this duty rests on the Ministry of Education and Sports. The Ministry of Education and Sports should have come even earlier to tell us how they are going to address this rampant problem right from primary schools up to the institutions of higher learning. 

I would like to say that the select committee must address itself to the Ministry Of Education. It is known, for example, that our education system largely centres on the issue of passing and failing examinations. I believe that it is the Ministry Of Education that can address this problem. How have we informed our issue of learning; is passing or failing the way to go? 

In some other countries, the issue of passing is not left to the students but rather the burden is on the lecturers. In many countries, for a teacher or lecturer to show the output of what he or she is doing, it is determined by the number of students who pass the examination. However, here in Uganda, the burden of passing the examination is left to the students. I feel this is the genesis of the problem. The students at the universities will always do everything possible to make sure that they get the required marks by hook or crook. Therefore, the Ministry of Education and Sports has a greater say and should help this country to address this problem. 

On the issue of marks, those teachers at universities or tertiary institutions look at marks as a way of income generation. This is a very bad practice, which is happening in our universities and higher institutions of learning. You find that when a lecturer is broke, he or she will try to trade marks for money. If the student does not have the money, she will pay in kind and this is very unfortunate. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should come up with a way of addressing this. How do we monitor these teachers? There is need for stringent punishments for these culprits –(Member timed out.)

6.44
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion. Sexual violence is common in our communities and in our schools. In some schools, for example, teachers send learners to their houses to take textbooks and that is where these children are abused. For that reason, I call upon the Ministry of Education and Sports to plan for staffrooms in all the schools so that the teachers do not have the excuse of sending learners to their homes. All the work – marking and planning of their lessons – will be done in the staffrooms.

There is also need to impart life skills in our girls and the boys because when they have these life skills, they become assertive and have self-esteem. When they are assertive, they are able to say “no” to a teacher who asks them for sex in exchange for marks. If they do not have those skills, they fall prey to those bad teachers. There is need to help these girls. When they report cases of those bad teachers, something should be done. Action should be taken on those reported if we are to deal with this vice.

Madam Speaker, girls also fall victim to sexual violence due to lack of senior women teachers, especially in the rural primary and secondary schools. I was teaching in one of the secondary schools before I came to this Parliament and we were only two female teachers. The other teacher was a nun who was a non-resident. I was the only one residing at the school and I was both the senior woman teacher and the hostel mistress, without even motivation. I tried my best but I do not think everybody can do that. Therefore, there is need to have senior women teachers in the schools so that they guide the girls and help them in their day-to-day lives in schools and when they are out of school –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you for being my good neighbour. The information I would like to give my neighbour is that this abuse does not occur only in institutions such as schools. We are leaving out local governments and ministries. 

If I am to specify, human resource managers take advantage of people who are seeking employment. Secondly, procurement officers – people who are seen to be the final decision makers in terms of awarding contracts – take advantage of other people. I think if this House is serious on the issue of sexual exploitation, we must also open our lenses to look at that. Thank you.

6.50
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

I believe what people are striving to define still relates to sexual abuse; sexual exploitation and violence are embedded within sexual abuse. Sexual abuse in our schools or institutions of learning has been taking place for quite some time. Many times we read it in newspapers, hear about it on radio and see stories on TV, but all those stories stop there and people continue to abuse our children. That is why we have seen a lot of societal breakdown. 

Madam Speaker, what are the effects of what we are talking about? We have seen girls who have been damaged psychologically and emotionally and this has caused them depression, guilt, self-blame and low self-esteem. There was a gruesome case that we saw when I was still in primary school as I was going to school. I used to cross through Makerere University to come to Wandegeya Muslim Primary School. A young girl jumped off from Mary Stuart Hall and died. It was a shocking sight because we found the dead body of this girl in the morning; she had committed suicide. It was discovered that this girl had been taken advantage of by an HIV positive lecturer. She discovered that she was HIV positive and decided to commit suicide. 

This is happening in many institutions. We have heard of this story in Kyambogo University. We have heard of such stories in Uganda Christian University, Mukono. We have also heard of such stories in Nkumba University. This is to tell you that when somebody of the calibre of a lecturer or teacher abuses a girl child, he is actually sentencing this person to death.

We have seen victims of sexual abuse suffer physical injuries. Just yesterday, when we were marking the Maternal Health Day, we had a young girl who was sexually abused at the age of 17 but because of her – (Member timed out.)

6.54
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Madam Speaker, I failed to catch your eye yesterday to thank you for how you represented us. Let me use this opportunity to thank you for that. Allow me also to thank hon. Anna Adeke who is a youth MP and who is really concerned about these matters. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I do not want us at this stage to get ourselves involved in discussing whether it is sexual violence, exploitation, harassment or abuse. They are all evil. If we are here and we say let us focus on either of these, I think we will not have done justice to the people who are going through this. Let us leave that to the committee, which I fully support, to come and report back to us what we think these kinds of acts tantamount to. The committee should be able to give us the definition of what goes on if they get the findings.

Hon. Ann Ebaju tried to say that the power relations gap between those who take advantage of the young ones and the young ones themselves is very huge. These matters are happening behind curtains and there is a big challenge. If nothing is done to have an investigative team to uncover this sexual violence, as Parliament we might find it hard to take any serious decisions. I think that is the reason it has been going on.  

For quite a long time, I have been reflecting on this issue. We have had headmasters and teachers implicated in matters of this nature for quite a long time. Therefore, I think we need a team that will uncover and inform us that this is the way this sexual violence against women manifests itself and this is what can be done. 

Madam Speaker, we are proposing a select committee because when all this is happening, our Government is perhaps not concerned –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I will request hon. Alyek to give us some information she had yesterday on the issue of homosexuality. I am told she had some information, which might benefit us later. 

6.57
COL FLAVIA BYEKWASO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this motion and I would like to thank the mover. 

The mover is calling for an investigation but we already know from her submission and from print media about most of these cases for a long time. The investigation could be conducted because at the end of the day, we need to come up with a correct judgment that is not biased. However, I think we should be looking at why - and I know because there are policies. We should be looking at why the codes of conduct are not enforced.

The mover talked about institutions of learning. We are aware that all institutions of learning are guided by codes of conduct. Where I work, we have a code of conduct - (Interjections) – Protect me, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Do not heckle. 

COL BYEKWASO: We have a code of conduct and I am sure institutions of learning have them. Why is it that these codes of conduct are not functional?

Hon. Okupa talked about what happens in war. However, I would like to tell you that for those of us in the military, especially when we go for missions, you cannot –(Interjections)– You may, but once you are caught, the first thing the next morning will be putting you on the plane to come back home. The moment you touch a girl or your fellow officer, it is not allowed. This is working. I would like to request that we focus on dialogue. Why are the institutions not working?

I would also like to propose that the punishment should not only be for those who have committed the crime but for the supervisors as well. I am a colonel but if I was supervising a major or a captain and they did something wrong, they would first call me to account. At the end of it, if the supervisor knows that that person is under their supervision, they would set better measures to make sure that it does not happen under their watch.

On the issue of power relations, like it has been said, this is not something we are going to solve today. It is here with us and it is bound to happen. There are always those who are weak. However, as Parliament – (Member timed out.)

7.00
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have noticed that it is a very complicated topic we have to address ourselves to. Hon. Ann Ebaju knows it very well, like I do, that when you are the guild president of a university, one of the greatest challenges you face as far as retakes for ladies are concerned is related to lecturers having an issue with the ladies. It could be that he had an intention and the lady did not agree to something somewhere.

In the same scenario, when we were in Makerere University, there were areas where it became normal for some ladies. There were some ladies who would willingly go for these lecturers. There were also situations where boys tried to befriend lecturers by connecting these fellow ladies to them.

There is a lot that has to be explored. Everyone here that went to school knows very well that there is a lot of exploitation as far as lecturers taking advantage of ladies in universities is concerned. It is either because of marks, money or other challenges these ladies face. There is a lot we need to put on table and we must equally go down to secondary schools because it is the same story. Someone the other day stopped us from discussing what happened in St Lawrence Academy Schools and Colleges. What happened in St Lawrence Academy Schools and Colleges was a very disappointing scenario. If someone who had a title of a “doctor” and was the proprietor of the school and also the head teacher could go to that level -

I would like to seek clarification from the mover of the motion whether another committee will be set up or another team that will come in after us. The other day, we watched on TV how refugee ladies cried. These ladies that go to get passports at immigration offices said officials from immigration office take advantage of them.    

Madam Speaker, these refugees come here because they have nowhere to sleep and most times they are taken advantage of. I wonder how we are going to help those ladies who were crying. It took time and they had to show it on TV. It was a sad story. I do not know whether we shall have another committee that will address sexual exploitation in areas outside institutions –(Interruption)

MS NAKATE: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. The information I would like to give to this House is that this same matter came up last year, when we tabled a motion on sexual violence against women and girls. When the issue of the late administrator of the St Lawrence Academy Schools and Colleges came up, we thought it was a wakeup call for the Ministry of Education and Sports to do something yet we are here again still debating the same issues. 

The statistics that were given in the House at that time were so alarming and yet we are still discussing the same matter. At that time, we required the Ministry of Education and Sports to maybe revoke the licences of the perpetrators, especially the teachers and lecturers, but to date we have not got any response.

In addition, we said the ministry should come up with some kind of awareness week at every beginning of the academic year for also the lower classes so that they can be taken through by the same perpetrators who do sexual violence against our children. However, to date, it has not been done.

Finally, we even told the ministry to come up with a data bank where we can easily search for those perpetrators to make the business so risky for these people who are destroying our children. Thank you for giving me time.

THE SPEAKER: I think the time has gone now. (Laughter)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, she is my chairperson, so –(Member timed out.)

7.06
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me join the rest of my colleagues in congratulating you for what you did for us in the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). Congratulations and we are proud of you.

The issue of sexual violence or sexual harassment usually is most common in poor families. You realise that children who come from poor families are the most affected. When they report, at times they are harassed and they are not given the attention which is required.

Even those who attempt to report can be influenced by money to withdraw the cases. Others can be threatened by the outcome in future when they get married because people can keep on referring to what happened during their past. These evils make our girls confused and it affects their self-esteem, ability to perform but also their confidence. I suggest that the Ministry of Education and Sports puts in place strong measures to punish whoever is involved. 

I recall in my previous assignment with the Uganda Police Force, I used to move around the different schools. I remember I found girls who had been defiled but the teachers were still doing normal work; their contracts had not been terminated. Even if a head teacher tries to punish a teacher who has defiled a girl, that teacher will simply move from one school to another. We do not have ways to follow up those teachers and also make sure that they are blacklisted and are not recruited in those respective schools.

We also get information that in some of these institutions, even female teachers, female secretaries and administrators are harassed. They may even fail to pay them or give them a promotion because they are not adhering to their sexual advances. How can we expect a teacher who has also been harassed to be in a position to nurture these young girls and give them the confidence to stand firm and also fight sexual harassment in the schools?

Lastly, I also pray that the Sexual Offences Bill is fast-tracked and maybe our laws relating to sexual harassment and sexual offences be strengthened to make sure that the culprits are arrested and also given strong punishments. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.09
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Anna Adeke for bringing this very important motion.

Sexual violence or sexual harassment or abuse, whatever the case, is very rampant. It is everywhere. However, hon. Adeke is very specific; she would like to have a scope and wants to deal with learning institutions because this is the area where we have entrusted our children. Our children spend most of their time in these institutions and we believe the teachers, the professors and the lecturers act like father figures or mother figures but they are abusing this trust we have in them. That is why we would like to investigate, so that we see the magnitude of this sexual abuse in these institutions. 

People have forgotten that the children in primary schools are not supposed to be introduced to sex early. They use them and ruin their future. Do you think that a girl who has become pregnant at the age of 15 will go back to school and become a lecturer? There are very few who may go back but the rest remain at home. A girl who is defiled and has become disabled may not even give birth. Some may even not like to see a man anymore because of that first bad encounter. Therefore, we would really like to work on the institutions so that those who are found guilty can be identified.

In our committee meeting, we asked why the inspectors or leaders are not deregistering these teachers. They said they do not know and no case has been brought to them. That is why they are there. This investigation will show clearly how far the problem has gone. For the rest of the other abuses at home, market place and in workplaces, we have introduced the Sexual Offences Bill. We would like this Bill to come here as quickly as possible so that once it is passed, we shall be able to sensitise people to know their rights and know what to do. For this particular one, we support it so that we deal with these institutions and those who are spoiling our young girls and ladies with this sexual violence. I support the motion. Thank you very much.

7.12
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that we are completely trapped in this particular issue we are talking about. This issue started like some small fire that completely spread out at the end of the day. However, if we put ourselves in the shoes of parents and not only in leadership, I hope we will be able to manage. 

This issue has come to stay with us. Therefore, I feel we should look for more permanent solutions than selecting a committee that will be on temporary basis. We tend to care for our assets and funds more than our children, who would be our replacements in the future. If we have Auditor-General’s office there to look into how assets and funds are used, what is impossible for us to put such a similar body in place, so that they keep looking into how our children and the other people are faring? They will keep reporting to us in a period we think is appropriate - quarterly, half yearly, annually or on whatever basis we think will be fit for us – so that we get enough information to take the right decisions.

These issues started by substituting some of our elements of culture. You can recall that sex education is started right from primary school when children do not know exactly what to do. This used to be exclusively the work of our sengas at an appropriate time. That has been completely substituted, followed by careless distribution of condoms. Children are curious to know how the condoms will be used. They want to know how it is used. Some of these things which we think do not matter are the things causing these bigger things we are talking about today. 

It is very unfortunate. Possibly, we should be able to adopt some of these western cultures after considering them thoroughly and after digesting them. If you swallow food without chewing, it may contain pieces of bones, which may get stuck in our throats. This is the situation we are in currently. 

Madam Speaker, I pray that at the end of the day, we come up with a permanent body, not an ad hoc one. I thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Woboya and hon. Odria, and then I will ask hon. Alyek to speak. We would like some information from you about a conference, which is being organised stealthily in this country.

7.16
MR VICENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank our sister, hon. Anna Adeke, for bringing such a wonderful motion for our debate.

Higher institutions of learning are actually homes away from home for our children. Therefore, when we send our children to these schools and they become victims of rape and sexual harassment, it is a cause for worry for the whole country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to focus my mind on the issue of the morality of the teachers we recruit in these schools. I would like to know if the Ministry of Education and Sports cares about recruiting people whose moral integrity they have checked. It should be the criteria when you are recruiting the teachers and head teachers, more especially. If this is not happening, it is something you need to review. 

Some of these teachers have already been reported in the schools they have been and we keep recycling them around. Whenever they are reported, they go and make deals with some of the staff at the head office and they get transferred. Therefore, this is something we should seriously investigate. 

In addition, we need to have reporters in these schools. I believe the Ministry of Education and Sports and even the Ministry of Internal Affairs can have informants in these institutions of learning. Why do you wait for a crime to happen and then you come to investigate? Why don’t we put mechanisms in place so that we have scouts who can give us information? This would help detect some of these criminals before they commit these bad acts against our children.

I think it is up to the ministry to think about a strategy of dealing with this. Have some reporters posted around. We have crime preventers; why don’t you tap into that resource and have them around in the schools? They do not need to work in the schools but they can be within the neighbourhood and they can investigate and find out the teachers who are trying to do something.

Madam Speaker, the other issue that is quite important is that we have various laws, for instance the Sexual Offences Act, 2009.  However, the challenge we always have in this country is enforcement of these laws. How are we enforcing them? Why don’t we arrest and prosecute the perpetrators who are involved in these vices? 

That is where I would like to rest my case. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.19
MS ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I personally congratulated you yesterday from your office so for now, I would like to thank you for the opportunity. I rise to support the motion to investigate sexual violence in institutions of learning. 

I would like to say that personally, I evidenced an incident in Lugazi concerning an 11-year-old girl in primary school. Up to now, the family is going through very terrible times.

Madam Speaker, in institutions of learning, especially universities, the main cause of sexual violence is female students who normally go to their lecturers with the interest of getting better marks to pass exams. However, we also have the element of poverty where people are lured because of the desire for money.

As we go into this investigation, let us bear in mind that statistically, the number of students in candidate classes is much lower than that in other classes. If you look at senior 4 and senior 6 candidate classes, their examinations are marked centrally, so there is no way a lecturer or a teacher is going to invite a student by saying, “You are the next to be marked; come and witness”. Therefore, as we go into this investigation, as a way forward, I would like to request the ministry to come up with a policy that all examinations are set and marked centrally. If two weeks are set as the period for doing exams, a period for marking these exams should also be set. For example, halls can be identified for marking purposes instead of marking taking place in the residences of the lecturers or teachers. That is my humble submission. 

I also pray that at the end of the day, culprits of such harassment should be subjected to very serious punishment. I would even propose something like 50 years imprisonment so that a permanent solution is got. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. 

7.23
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to share what we discussed yesterday. 

First of all, I would like to thank you for standing firm as a mother and as a person who can really protect our cultural and societal values. (Applause) You really made us proud by protecting our values.

Madam Speaker, I would like to share this information with the august House. There is something, which is brewing as far as homosexuality in this country is concerned. Much as we are fighting very hard to respond to HIV/AIDS in this country and also finding strategies that can help us reduce new infections in our society, there are people who are purporting to bring preventive measures and yet they are bringing queer groups in our society to promote what is wrong. 

There is already an arrangement to have a big conference in Uganda - the first of its kind - involving “the most at risk” populations in Uganda. They have gone to the extent of baptising “the most at risk” populations as far as HIV/AIDS is concerned to being the key and priority populations.

I have been invited to attend a meeting today by Uganda AIDS Commission to organise for the conference that will take place from 9th to 10th May this year. As far as I know, and I had been in the struggle regarding HIV/AIDS prevention in this country since I got employed in the local government and also worked with non-governmental organisations. We used to have key populations and most at risk populations to include fisher folk - those who fish and sell a lot of fish. We also used to have commercial sex workers, who were mostly ladies, as well as truck drivers as emerging key populations.

However, as I talk, I would like to take this opportunity to bring to your attention that the funders are smuggling men having sex with men and pushing them into the category of “key populations” and they are trying to promote homosexuality in this country. I went to France for an HIV/AIDS conference; I went to Cote D’Ivoire for another conference for East Africa about HIV/AIDS and prevention of Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STDs). Let me tell this august House that these people are coming up in full swing.

I noted that in any conference I attended abroad, these people were given priority. They were given opportunity to march and to stand at the back of the audience. When they stand there, they have their placards. Should you make any speech without recognising them in less than 10 minutes, they will raise their flags. This is the extent to which we have gone. 

I would like to tell my fellow honourable members here that this conference will take place. If you have never seen how homosexuals behave, come and witness. It is going –(Interjections)– Yes, it will be the -

THE SPEAKER: Allow the honourable member to speak.

MS ALYEK: I need to read the objectives of the conference.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let her read the objectives.

MS ALYEK: The National HIV/AIDS Strategic Plan, which has been made by Uganda AIDS Commission, recognises key populations in the country and has categorised them as follows: Existing key populations in Uganda include sex workers, truckers, uniform service men, then MSM (men having sex with men) - and they have been invited to attend the conference - fisher folk and IDUs -

THE SPEAKER: Order, allow the Member to - 

MS ALYEK: Madam Speaker, these are the facts that I would like to bring to the attention of this House because I do not support homosexuality. The emerging key populations that they are talking about include prisoners, minors, plantation workers, boda boda riders, brick layers and salt extractors.

The vulnerable populations that we are looking at include migrants and mobile populations, young women, adolescents, HIV/AIDS discordant couples, pregnant women and persons with disability.

The funders are taking advantage to promote homosexuality in the name of supporting the HIV/AIDs response in this country. Human rights’ organisations should also help us here because these are the people who are bringing on board men having sex with men, women having sex with women openly and it is affecting our society. I need help from this Parliament because I am directly concerned with the HIV/AIDs response and we do not want to promote such acts. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members -

MS ALYEK: Excuse me. Madam Speaker, the venue has not yet been set. I think the outcome of today’s meeting will come up with the venue.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. This is just information, honourable members. However, I do not see our Minister of Health and the Minister for the Presidency who is in charge of the Uganda AIDS Commission. They are not here. 

7.31
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Judith Alyek for bringing this issue up. It is not only the HIV sector that is being targeted. Actually, the donors are using big human rights conferences as well. 

I remember a time that I attended a conference at Hotel Africana. I was shocked to my bones. When I went to the toilet, I was actually warned that when you go and enter the toilet, make sure you lock it as these people are very aggressive –(Interjections)- Yes, that is how I was warned. Therefore, they are not only targeting HIV conferences but even human rights conferences. We really need to investigate this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We would like to hear from the minister in charge of the Uganda AIDS Commission?

7.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable sister. This is very serious and grave information and something must be done. Actually, you cannot divorce it from the motion before the House because we are talking about sexual violence and so on; this is being imported.

Therefore, I would like to assure you, Madam Speaker, that I am going to inform the concerned ministers. I do not know about police but something must be done and has to be done. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, one of our Members of the Pan African Parliament (PAP) is contesting to be a vice president of the bureau. However, I do not think you should read the statement; just inform us that you are going to be a candidate. I would like to ask the Members of Parliament that if you meet any member of the Pan African Parliament, ask them to support hon. Jacqueline Amongin for the vice presidency of the bureau. Do not read the statement; just tell us.

7.33
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like you have directed, I will not read this statement because I know we are caught up with time. 

Under rule 53 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I would like to move to this honourable House that the Pan African Parliament, which is one of the organs of the African Union formed under the Constitutive Act of the African Union, has a Parliament constituting of 54 member states. I happen to be one of the representatives in the Pan African Parliament together with four other Members. 

Madam Speaker, the Pan African Parliament is formed by an objective of ensuring the full participation of African people in the development and economic integration of the continent. Article 12 of the Protocol to the Constitutive Act of the African Union relating to the Pan African Parliament is to the effect that, “There shall be bureau of the Pan African Parliament which shall be elected on a rotational basis among the five regions of the African Union.” That includes eastern, western, southern, north and central region. 

The Pan African Parliament, within the Constitutive Act, will be electing the President or the Vice President, in brief the Speaker and the Deputy Speakers, representing the different regions. Madam Speaker, aware that I have been in the Pan African Parliament from the previous Parliament as the President of the Youth Caucus - Immediately you elected me at the age of 27 years, I was able to champion the youth caucus. Hon. Okupa, can bear me witness that we have made transformations in the African Union where we now have a full-fledged Department of Youth at the African Union and a full-fledged Youth Caucus at the Pan-African Parliament, courtesy of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform Members that having served as the Youth President for a year, the Pan African Parliament Members were able to elevate and elect me to champion one of the ten permanent committees at the Pan African Parliament and that is the Committee on Rural Economy, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment. We feel we have done a commendable job, including liaising with Uganda to particular aspects of engagements in the different international arena, support and funding as the chairperson of that permanent committee.

I would like to bring to the attention of this august House that on 7 May 2018, the Pan African Parliament will be championing and electing leadership in all its portfolios. Key among them will be electing the five bureau Presidents and the Vice Presidents.

I would like to thank members of my delegation for having bestowed confidence in me to be their leader of delegation and also to be a candidate for the Vice President of the Pan African Parliament representing the 15 countries of the eastern region.

I know that home blessings matter a lot. The Speaker of our Parliament, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, is more known internationally than in Uganda and that is what surprises me. With the blessing of this Parliament, which is chaired by a very prominent woman, hon. Rebecca Kadaga, endorsing my candidature for the presidency of the Pan African Parliament, I would only believe that victory shall await us.

Madam Speaker, having mentioned the areas of the PAP and the 10 permanent committees, which I am not going to talk about right now, I am also informing the House that hon. Anifa Kawooya will also be contesting for the President of the Women Caucus and that is what we have endorsed as Pan African Parliament members.

My candidature is premised on the following: realising the full legislative powers of the Pan African Parliament. As of now, we are only doing advisory work for both the national assemblies and the African Union Commission. When it becomes a fully legislative body, it will be very important to address the common challenges that bring us together as the people of Africa and that will be one of my mandates when I am elected on 7 May 2018.

Infrastructural development and trade is key. We believe that when we have this in the continent, trade will be easier. We talk about food security. People in Southern Sudan, for example, have nothing to eat and yet Europe can afford to get food from Uganda or from any of the African states. This is because of the challenges of infrastructural development. I promise to champion that when I am mandated on 7 May 2018.

Issues of gender cannot be a doubt. Having served in the youth leadership right from the students’ level to date, I believe that I will not leave the young people behind, especially at the continental level.

Madam Speaker, with your expertise, prowess and good guidance that I have got from this House from the time I entered here at the age of 27 years, and with all the commitment and confidence that the Ugandan Parliament has bestowed upon me to represent the Ugandan Parliament at the continental Parliament for two terms, it is a blessing enough for us to bring victory home on 7 May 2018. I shall be grateful for any form of support rendered to us as I pledge to uphold the values of this august House and Uganda –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Amongin. I am sure I speak for the House when I say we believe that you are a good candidate; you have the experience and expertise. Maybe what remains is for us to mobilise networks that can go and energise the campaigns. Otherwise, you have our blessing.

I do not know whether the minister would like to say something about the motion raised by hon. Ebaju.

7.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a mother, teacher and political leader in the Ministry of Education and Sports, I would like to thank hon. Anna Ebaju and our colleagues who have moved and supported this motion. You have added efforts to supplement Government efforts in fighting these acts. You will agree with me that protecting our children is a shared responsibility among all of us. That is why I appreciate this gesture. 

I have taken note of all the concerns and views that you have raised in this motion. However, based on what our colleague has presented and the example given of the Head teacher of Kibuli Secondary School, allow me to give information to this House briefly. 

As Ministry of Education and Sports, there are two aspects that we are looking at here; there is the criminal allegation and the professional misconduct. I would like to assure you that police, through the Criminal Investigations Department (CID), are investigating this case. In addition, the Ministry of Education and Sports also took steps. We interdicted the head teacher and set up a committee to investigate him. The committee has already spoken to the accuser and the victims and is already compiling a report, which will soon be presented to the leadership of the ministry, so that we can come up with a comprehensive mechanism of addressing this issue of sexual violence across the board.

My dear colleagues, you are all aware that we have a decentralised system as far as primary education is concerned. According to this, recruitment and disciplining is the responsibility of the local government and that is where we sometimes have problems. As a ministry, we have not sat back. We have, from time to time, sent circulars to local governments because they are our colleagues in development. We ensure that we send these circulars; probably, we are let down by those implementers. Otherwise, because of decentralisation, this responsibility is theirs but we shall not sit back.

As far as the criminal side is concerned, police is still investigating so I may not go into the details of this particular case. 

I would like to remind this House that based on what Members have raised, time has come for us to scale up mobilisation and sensitisation of our communities so that when parents get to learn about these cases, they do not simply hide them or opt to sort them out of court. We must remind them of the importance of protecting and promoting the rights of our children. We all need to work together to ensure that we help this situation.

I appreciate what the Members have raised, that we need to come up with a committee. However, I propose that instead of coming up with a select committee, which will comprise of Members of Parliament, special terms of reference and a timeframe can be given to the Committee on Education and Sports because we are working together as a Government. 

In addition, if we say that the committee will move from school to school, the work will never end. Therefore, I would like to propose that if they are to do this work, they can do it by sampling selected learning institutions on a regional basis, level by level, and then report back to Parliament. We can join efforts with them as a ministry because we are also doing the same. That way, we shall come up with something that will help the children of Uganda. 

Furthermore, I would like to inform you that as a ministry, we have gone ahead to encourage our students not to shy away but report the matter to us for action. It is important that we encourage these children because they are the future leaders of our country. If they do not help us to help them, I think it will be a problem. 

I would like to thank hon. Anna Adeke, the seconders of the motion and all of you who have debated this motion. This is a neutral motion, which concerns all of us. I support you and I would like to call upon all of you to fight this together. It is not the sole responsibility of the Ministry of Education and Sports but of all of us. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, listening to the debate, I also had in mind that we could map out the country and sample some primary and secondary schools, tertiary institutions and universities in the different regions. If you do not mind, we could do that because we cannot do the whole country; it will take several years. However, if we have a sample from each sector, it would help us more. 

We also have to refine the terms of reference. The question we have now is whether to draw a select committee or ask the Committee on Education and Sports.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I made my submission, I knew the challenges of our committees and possibly the challenge of covering the whole country. I think that is why hon. Anna Adeke had limited it to institutions of learning. 

In my opinion, there are other areas of sexual exploitation and violence, which we should leave to the Committee on Education and Sports to handle. However, this specific issue of the institutions would need a select committee that would sample schools in regions. We have been reading in the papers about certain schools in different regions where this vice has been rampant. Those could be examples of sample areas where we can be able to draw more information.

At the moment, committees are busy handling ministerial policy statements hence the need for a select committee. We can give them a timeframe and sample schools and regions. The other areas can be handled by the respective committees, if you guide and direct them to do that and also give them time to do that after the budget session. However, this committee can start its work next week with terms of reference as set by you, Madam Speaker.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House adopts the motion. 
	
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the other part on the Sexual Offenses Bill is with the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. Members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, how can that – The Bill has not been brought to the House. We want that Bill before the close of this session. That is what I said when we were opening the session.

Honourable members, I informed you yesterday that we are hosting the 4th Commonwealth Youth Parliament of the African region. They are going to be here for a week. It is not the African Union but the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and they are going to have their debates in this Chamber. We did not want to take them to the Conference Hall; it is not Parliament. We wanted them to have a feel of the Parliament in Uganda and so they are going to use this Chamber next week for their debates. 

Therefore, I am going to adjourn plenary to the week after. This will give us time to concentrate on the ministerial policy statements. However, you could also come in to give support. Honourable members, please come to the gallery and watch the young people of Africa debating. Each country has brought two girls and two boys. The debates can be quite good. A member of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association branch can give more information.

MR OKUPA: I would like to give additional information to colleagues. As the Speaker has said, next week we are going to have about 11 countries that have confirmed to send their young people to Uganda. The youth are between the age of 11 and 21 years. That is the age bracket for the youth according to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. Two youths from each country are coming. However, we gave Uganda the opportunity to have a bigger number and we have engaged the Youth Members of Parliament to identify five youths from their regions. 

We shall have youths from all over the country representing us here in that age bracket. That is why it is very important for Members to be here because you never know the youth could have been picked from your constituency. We have picked a male and female from the regions in Uganda.

We expect them to start reporting on Saturday for the official opening ceremony on Sunday. The meetings will take place in this House on Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday. We shall also take them to see the countryside and they will then fly back to their countries. Those going back to Arua or Kisoro will take their flights back to their homes as well. (Laughter)

Honourable members, this would be a good time for you to interact with the young people as they will be voters in the next election. Thank you. 

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I am worried because I see that you are about to adjourn the House but there was an issue that was left hanging in our minds. We picked interest when our own, hon. Jacquiline Amongin, told us that she was going to contest. 

Madam Speaker, some of us were not clear about the voters and the date of voting. We remember a time when Her Excellency the former Vice-President was contesting for a position. Some colleagues from Uganda including you, Madam Speaker, were sent to go and canvass for votes to make sure that she went through. I am wondering whether you will step in and equally have some people go to ensure that our own comes back with victory. That is why I had to raise it. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already started. Actually, when I was in Geneva, I met a number of delegations and I told them that I need their support to give our candidate the position. Fortunately, she has been there for some time and they know her. However, the other networking I talked about is the additional support that we may have to organise to send people there to do some networking with the other countries.  The voters are there; it is the other members of the Pan African Parliament.
 
MR BENARD ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you started the sitting this afternoon, you recognised some guests in the gallery. I just wanted to make a few corrections. One is that the guests that were in the gallery were members of civil society organisations looking after children withdrawn from our streets. 

Today was a day for commemorating the International Day of Street Connected Children. This morning, five Members of Parliament gathered at Clock Tower and they included hon. Fredrick Angura, hon. David Abala, hon. Anna Adeke, hon. Silas Aogan and myself. We spent most of the morning marching with thousands of street children and we heard harrowing stories. I had sought for some space on the Order Paper to present a motion that would help the august House add a voice to the plight of the street connected children. Unfortunately, we have all understood that the House has been busy with pertinent issues to discuss.

Therefore, the procedural matter I am seeking your guidance on is about when we can schedule this particular motion on the Order Paper so that we can discuss it. We could probably then give a way forward on how the issue of street children can be addressed by Government in this country. This is because our statistics indicate that the number keeps growing every day and if we do not do something as a country, we are sitting on a time bomb. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. One, I would like to ask the Clerk to look at the international calendar and identify the international days because yesterday I came here and I was told it was Maternal Health Day and I did not know that. As I was sitting here, I was told that today is the International Day for Street Children. 

If we had known and we had got notice, certainly we would have made provision. However, the issue of street children is really important and when we come back after hosting the 4th Commonwealth Youth Parliament, we can debate it because it is important that we do so. Those children are growing and they are going to become very dangerous, so it is important that we discuss how to manage them. 

Honourable member, we have now noticed your intention, so we shall find space on the Order Paper for you to bring that motion. However, Clerk, please give us a list of the international days, and circulate them so that we know and plan for them. 

Honourable members, the House is adjourned to the other week, after hosting the 4th Commonwealth Youth Parliament. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 7.58 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 April 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

