


Thursday, 27 April 2017

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I would like to appeal to us to work expeditiously and complete the Taxation Bills. I am aware that some committees have not completed deliberations on the policy statements so perhaps we can go back and do that work. 

The second matter, and I am glad the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is walking in, is that I was in Zombo on Saturday for hon. Lawrence Biyika’s function, which was held at Zeu District Farm Institute. The district farm institute is completely built; the classrooms and the staff accommodation are there but it has not been used for the last seven years. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Government to ensure that the facilities are utilised so that our children can go and train there because it is a very good facility, which needs to be utilised. 

Last evening, after I left the House, I received a petition from gun owners who are complaining that they have been paying Shs 160,000 for a gun license and that the Government is proposing to raise this to Shs 5 million. They were saying that it was disproportionate and that they appreciate the needs of the security but jumping from Shs 160,000 to Shs 5 million is a bit hard. They did not tell me which Bill it is in and because I have been busy, I have not had time to check. However, I would like the Committee on Finance to take note so that it can be addressed when we come to that issue.

2.41
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for making it personally to Zombo. I would like to inform Members that I was also personally there to support our colleague. 

I think one of the things that this Parliament should be proud of is that we are walking the talk in that the vision of Parliament now is to be a people-centred Parliament. You might have observed that both the Speaker and Deputy Speaker have always been willing to come and celebrate with the people every time we get an opportunity. This time round, we have decided that when both the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are out there, they are able to see what is on the ground so that when we bring any petition or issue in this Parliament, the Speaker is in a position to appreciate it. 

Not only did we observe that the farm institute in Zombo was abandoned but we also observed that the road between Zombo and Nebbi is very bad, much as we were told that the main roads, which link with neighbouring counties are normally tarmacked. The road was so bad that after coming back, for two days, I could not stand straight. Of course I know age has also had an impact on my not standing straight. (Laughter) However, the Zombo road made it worse.

I would like to plead with members of the Committee on Infrastructure to lobby the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that we fix the road between Nebbi and Zombo. That area is very fertile and I discovered this for the first time. In fact, much as we are talking about famine, Zombo has Matooke, Irish potatoes and vegetables. 

Therefore, I think it is important for us to explore what we have and see how we can utilise what we have before we start outsourcing. One of the hindrances would have been the road so even if we have food in Zombo, if we do not have the roads fixed, we cannot transport the food to other parts of the country, which are actually suffering from starvation. 

Madam Speaker, I just want to add on to what you have said that for the purpose of Zombo District, we should deal with the farm institute and also not forget about the urgency of fixing that road between Zombo and Nebbi. 

In Dokolo District, Olweny Rice Scheme, which falls under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has been talked about over and over again but nothing has been done about it. 

When you went for the women’s day celebrations, you all celebrated and we were not allowed to tell you our story but we should have told you that we needed Olweny Rice Scheme to be rehabilitated. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.45
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good that you have talked about the issue of the guns because it originated from somewhere. 

However, Madam Speaker, the police cannot provide all of us with security. We are aware that there are some people who have illegal guns and they use them but again, that should not affect those of us who are holding our guns legally. 

Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Are you now addressing the subject? I thought we should talk about –

MR KATOTO: Madam Speaker, what I am about to tell you is that the ministry wants to smuggle it through the statutory act instrument. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should therefore be aware that when they do that, we are going to question them because they want to smuggle it through the statutory instrument. 

THE SPEAKER: It is not part of these Bills? 

MR KATOTO: No, it is not part of these Bills but they want to smuggle it through the statutory instrument. Therefore, Madam Speaker, we should caution them not to do that because it is too much and the police cannot provide security to all of us. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Katoto. Hon. Lubogo, use two minutes please.  

2.47
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and this pertains to payments to civil servants. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Public Service is now effecting deduction of salaries of some public servants on the grounds that they did not work on some days. What is happening in Kaliro today is that 127 public servants have been affected and they have received half salary. The explanation is that they did not work for some days. 

Madam Speaker, the Public Service standing orders have a disciplinary procedure of how you deal with such issues. While the motive might be right, I think procedure needs to be followed. Is it really right that somebody’s salary must be deducted even when he has never been called, cautioned or subjected to any path of disciplinary caution? 

I think the Ministry of Public Service needs to come and explain how this is being effected and under which law, so that we get to know. Otherwise, I think that a salary is something, which should be the last thing to be affected if somebody is being subjected to any disciplinary measure. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister for Public Service to give us clarification on how that money was deducted.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is, under the standing orders – because I was a civil servant – there is what we call an attendance book. The attendance book does two things; when you attend, you get a mark. There are those who work over time and they are paid for it. If Kaliro has started to implement the attendance book or register, we must congratulate and thank them for the good work they have done. (Applause) 

Therefore, is it procedurally right for an honourable member of Parliament who has been talking about service delivery to come and complain about salary deductions from people who do not work?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, at this material time, I do not know if they did not work. That is why I would like the Minister of Public Service to explain to us how it happened. If they did not work, we shall simply commend the fact that their money was deducted.

2.50
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga County East, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good you have mentioned the issue of guns. I am here to raise something very important. 

Early this morning at around 3.30 a.m., thugs armed with guns and dressed in UPDF uniforms staged a roadblock along Kagadi-Kibaale road and robbed an entire taxi. They stripped naked all the passengers and they took whatever belonged to them.

There was a heavy exchange of gun fire because these thugs had two guns and two pistols, hammers and also toy guns. Over 80 passengers were affected by this and the people of Kagadi are living in fear. 

Madam Speaker, we have a very big problem because Kagadi, Kibaale and Kakumiro districts neighbour Congo and there is a very big problem because of the porous borders. There are a number of illegal guns and now the users have UPDF uniforms. 

We have another problem related to illegal guns. Last year, we lost a health worker who was gunned down in the middle of Kagadi town. Up to now, we have not heard any report about what happened – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister for Internal Affairs to pay attention to the security situation on the Kagadi-Kibaale Road and the surrounding areas so that our people can travel safely? This is not to forget the other roads in Uganda.

2.52
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance on a similar matter related to security and it is linked to my operations as a Member of Parliament in my constituency. 

Madam Speaker, it has become increasingly difficult for me, as a Member of Parliament, to organise and hold meetings in order to consult my people and to inform them about what goes on here in Parliament. This is due to interference and threats from security agencies including the police, the UPDF, the GISOs and the RDCs that have taken up the role of protecting the Balaalo land grabbers that are in Obongi, Yumbe and other parts of West Nile.

Every meeting that we organise is portrayed as a meeting against the Balaalo. The District Council of Moyo sat and passed a council resolution on 28 February, giving the Balaalo time to leave. Even during the district council meeting, the council hall was surrounded by police until the councillors protested against the presence of the Balaalo there. The DISO came out and ordered the police to go away from where they were. Imagine the DISO ordering the police; the DPC also was present. This means that the police are now under the control of the DISO.

In Obongi, apart from that area of the council meeting, on 4 March 2017, I had a meeting at Icua subcounty headquarters. It was a physical planning meeting for the urban development of Itula because we have people coming up and there are many refugees there. Therefore, we would like to have people build in an organised manner. The police were deployed there and the people in the meeting were scattered. The elders also organised meetings but they were also scattered.

As I was hurrying from Obongi to Kampala on 30 March 2017, I picked a flight from Arua Airfield using Eagle Air but because I had something to brief the press about, I called them for a press briefing at the airfield but I was stopped. I was told that I was supposed to get permission from Civil Aviation Authority and that I had to leave the airfield. I left the airfield as I still had time because the plane landed in Arua and went to Juba. We therefore went out of the airfield to organise a press conference –(Interruption) 

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, I would like to know who the Balaalo are in the Republic of Uganda.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, on 4 September 2007, sat and discussed here on this Floor of the House this matter of these Balaalo – I will explain to you later the people called the Balaalo. 

Also on 15 March 2012, Parliament talked about them and constituted a select committee to probe the activities of the Balaalo.
 
My question now is, apart from the work that I do as a Member of Parliament being interfered with, where do we go next if at the district level, a district council resolution was passed in Yumbe in 2011 and up to date the problem is not resolved? In Moyo and Arua, the subcounty councils of Rhino Camp and Rigo did the same. In Nebbi, in 2014, the same happened. Where do we get the force? Where do we get the power, which can resolve this problem of the Balaalo in Uganda?

The Balaalo are cattle keepers who move from place to place. They look like Banyarwanda, they are from Western Uganda. They are not Karimojong. I am defining for you -

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, the Constitution is very clear. On page 212, all the indigenous tribes are listed. In these indigenous tribes listed in the Constitution, there is no tribe called Balaalo. Is the honourable member in order to confuse this Parliament by bringing in a tribe that does not exist within the Ugandan Constitution?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe for your information, during different Parliaments, complaints have been brought here about armed cattle keepers that are moving from place to place. I think the word he should use is armed cattle keepers because they walk with guns. Please go ahead and conclude.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My controversy is not about the definition or identity but the activities and the tendency of using violence; they are armed and move with guns. There is this kind of impunity against the district local government. Where do we get the power to overcome these people? The army, police, and the RDC protect them. The Obongi people are armless and powerless and the Member of Parliament is in danger. Where do we go next?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are on a microphone (Laughter). Can I again request the Minister for Internal Affairs to check what is happening in Obongi in relation to the armed cattle keepers and report to this House?

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Madam Speaker, with your guidance to the minister responsible for security, I also heard hon. Fungaroo saying they are actually grabbing land. I come from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development so I just want to request hon. Fungaroo to give us details of how they are grabbing land because we have a comprehensive approach of handling land grabbers. 

Therefore, if he can interact with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development then we can see how to assist because if they are illegally grabbing people’s land then we can help and see how we can address it.

3.00
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise an important matter of public concern in Teso. In 1980s, there was cattle rustling in Teso. We lost cattle, goats and property. The Ateso took Government to court and the case was won by the people of Teso after discussing it out of court.

However, since that time, the Ateso have not been paid. They are now asking when they are going to be paid. My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that either the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs or that of finance - I do not know which ministry - comes and makes a statement so that we get to know what to do. As we talk, there is nothing clear. The matter was taken to court; that is what I wanted to say.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I went to Serere for the Women’s Day celebrations and during that function we were told that the case has not been concluded.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, there are six cases. One was won and the Government agreed and was very clear. The other cases are still ongoing and the Government knows, which cases are still on. At least I am sure the cases that are still running are actually here.

THE SPEAKER: But now you are saying this one. I do not know how the Government will know which one it is. 

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, allow me lay this document on the Table so that - (Interjections) - I am going to read it. I was saying that in 1980s -

THE SPEAKER: Just describe the document.
MR ABALA: This document is titled, “The ruling on the primary points of law.” The plaintiffs here were Ochen Julius and others Vs the Attorney-General. This is the case, which is still ongoing, but the one, which was won, I will give the details by Monday. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think to assist the honourable member, we shall ask the Attorney-General to give us an update on the overall compensation for Teso so that we can know which of the cases was completed and which one is not. Is that okay, honourable members?

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the same vein, in Acholi and Lango there are some groups that finished their case with the Attorney-General and are equally waiting for their compensation. But there are other groups still struggling in courts. We, therefore, request the Attorney-General - when coming to clarify on these matters of compensation in Teso – to do the same on the Lango and Acholi compensations. We are very desperate and have been pleading for compensation for a long time and we do not know what is really taking place. That is the humble submission from Acholi, Lango and Teso.

I don’t know whether the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here because one time when I raised this matter on the Floor, the minister told us they were trying to put some money aside. I do not know how much has been put aside to address this compensation issues in Teso, Lango and Acholi. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I wish you could also be using the question system. If you had maybe given out a question perhaps now the minister would be coming to answer. I wish you could also use those channels of question for oral answer.

3.05
MR JOHN NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I have is really to condemn in the strongest terms possible and denounce the procurement of sexual lubricants that were procured at a whopping Shs 3 billion for homosexuals. 
I would like to use this opportunity to applaud the Minister of State for Health, the hon. Sarah Opendi who equally condemned this procurement in the strongest terms it deserved. 

Madam Speaker, at the time sanitary pads for our girls is a contentious issue that has even resulted into the incarceration of Dr Stella Nyanzi; at a time when hunger is biting; at a time that crop failure and food shortage is an issue, should Uganda have spent Shs 3 billion to procure sexual lubricants purportedly to cure the wounds that are caused by friction?

The prayer I am making is that since the minister has also realised that this was an evil thing - because homosexuality is an illegality in Uganda, according to the Penal Code Act and the Ant-homosexuality Act - I would pray that the minister furnishes this House with a statement detailing what transpired and the rationale for procuring these lubricants at a whooping Shs 3 billion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The minister is here. I hope she will be able to come and update the country on that issue. Do you want to say something, hon. Sarah Opendi?

3.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This matter came to my attention a week ago and I was very surprised. However, we are following it up to get the details of how this came up because it did not go through the National Medical Stores although it was procured.

Therefore, we would like to know the person who received it and who the recipients are. So, we are still investigating it and at an appropriate time we shall come here with a statement because even for the next round there was about Shs 28 billion earmarked for the same. Madam Speaker, allow us to return with a detailed statement on this matter. Thank you. 

3.09
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to our soldiers operating in Somalia. I have been contacted by some of our brothers and sisters in Somalia saying they have gone for ten months without being paid. One of them has sent me a message saying they are badly off. 

Ugabag 17 worked for a full year and was only paid four months on withdrawing in December. Ugabag 18 is withdrawing with only five months. Ugabag 19 has worked for 10 months and has been only paid for two months. Soldiers sell their food to their Burundian counterparts in Somalia so as to get airtime to call their relatives back home. 

The message further says that the soldiers are supplied with two juice packets and 10 apple fruits for two weeks but that they end up selling them to their Burundi counterparts in exchange for soap and airtime to call their relatives at home. The message further describes the situation as extremely bad. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the ministry responsible comes here to make a statement on this matter. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our troops have really done a great job is pacifying this region. I think they should be supported. So, I would like the Minister of Defence to come and update us on the issues raised by hon. Thomas Tayebwa. 

3.11
MS JULIE MUKODA (Independent, Woman Representative, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a very crucial problem in my district and at this rate by the year 2021, I do not think I will have any voters on the island.

The army on the lake arrest and kill people. I do not know whether that is the order they receive because when we ask them where they get their orders from, they tell us that they receive them from the President. We do not know whether they receive orders to kill my people or to arrest them and take them to court. As I speak, there is a case of Richard Kozaala who was badly beaten last night and is in a very critical condition - he can die anytime.

Madam Speaker, at least I have a witness, the hon. Vincent Ssempijja, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. This month we buried one of my people on the island around the lake shores. It is terrible because every month we bury at least someone who dies after being beaten up by the soldiers on the lake. 

Madam Speaker, I need answers because we need to solve this problem. Thank you so much.
 
THE SPEAKER: I do not know which minister will be responsible for that because while the fish belongs to the hon. Vincent Ssempijja, the army belongs to the hon. Adolf Mwesige. Maybe, let us first finish with hon. Johnson Muyanja and then the minister can respond on the agriculture issues.

3.12
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a serious concern. Yesterday, the minister for disaster preparedness was here delivering a statement in which he said that he was looking for only 45 days to start harvesting.

However, Madam Speaker, what are we going to harvest when the armyworm pesticides, which the minister promised us three weeks ago have not been distributed in our areas. Our voters are putting us on pressure.

Madam Speaker, if you watch NBS television today, you will get to know that hundreds of acres have been affected. We have tried our level best to look for the pesticides that can help us kill the armyworm but in vain because these pesticides are sold at high costs. 

Madam speaker, since the minister is here - 

THE SPEAKER: You raise the issue; it will be answered by the minister. 

MR MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, the suppliers identified have always told the farmers that the pesticides are out of stock. So, what are we going to do in such a situation? Thank you.

3.14
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning our seats as women representatives in this Parliament. 

There are rumours in the newspapers across the country that our seats, including yours, Madam Speaker, are threatened. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like you to remember that in the Ninth Parliament, interest groups like the youth, PWDs and workers MPs suffered the same trend. They were only informed when court had already delivered the judgement. The matter I am talking about has caused anxiety around the country.

Therefore, I would like to ask the Attorney-General to inform us in time. Sometimes he consents to a judgement on our behalf without our knowledge. (Laughter) Remember the number of judgements he has consented to without our input.

Madam Speaker, I know that the Attorney-General can easily consent to it and we lose people like you and me. (Laughter) I request that the Attorney-General comes here and briefs us on the steps, if any, so that we get to be aware of what is taking place. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nabbanja. I will ask the Attorney-General to come and inform the House whether there is a case and what it is about in relation to the election of the women representatives. 

3.17
MR GUTOMOI ABACANON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a very important matter of national importance regarding Apac district hospital. 

I went to Apac district hospital five days ago only to realise that for a year now there has been no power and when one sees how expectant mothers suffer using torches, one can really shed tears. 

I inquired about what was going on in the theatre, and I got to know that Umeme had only allowed the theatre to operate using their power and I think this situation has been going on for about a year now. The hospital cannot realise the amount of money which Umeme is demanding and it is a district referral hospital. I really wonder if the people of Apac are not considered to be citizens of this country. 

I remember one time a university in Kabale had a similar matter, but Government went in and helped with funds. Can Government do something for the people of Apac? At night you cannot imagine the situation in the hospital. Thieves are also sleeping there now. Some thugs also go and line up for food because you cannot tell who is who. Actually, sometimes you do not even know who is a staff member and who is not. 

I asked one lady who was nursing her wounds there and she told me, “I think we are supposed to die here. We are not human beings. Our leaders have communicated to Government several times, but no action has been taken.” 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you should be urging the Government to quickly pay the bills so that they get power. 

Honourable members, we have been proceeding under Rule 25(4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament where the first one hour is for the private Members’ business. Let me now invite the minister to respond. However, the Minister of Health should take into account hon. Gutomoi’s issue of Apac Hospital, which has spent one year without power.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja):  Madam Speaker, allow me to thank you very much for visiting Zombo District and also noting that the District Farm Institute (DFI) there is not yet in use. We are going to look into this matter and coordinate with the local government of Zombo to see that Zeu DFI goes into operation. That zone, including Zombo, is a very fertile area and we need to improve on agriculture there. I have not yet reached Zombo, but I was in Koboko, Arua and Maracha. The next time I go back, I will reach Zombo, Adjumani and others in the area. We are implementing – (Interruption)

MS ADONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister. I would like to get clarification on the DFI of Gulu. You remember the land was given away to Gulu University and there was another land given for the construction of the DFI. Is it in the offing?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, in regard to West Nile, we are trying to introduce coffee and tea in Zombo. We have also worked with some farmers and found out that even bananas do well in this area and our model farms have proved this right. Therefore, the DFI is very pertinent. However, we shall take your remarks very seriously to see that Zeu DFI becomes operational.

District farm institutes are supposed to be run by the districts, but what we do these days, as many of you know, is to attach them to the National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO) because sometimes the district alone cannot run them. 

On the issue of the armyworms, Madam Speaker, Government accepted to release Shs 4.2 billion to buy pesticides to handle these pests. Unfortunately, we bought 2,500 litres and the stores of the agents ran dry yet the money is there. 

Therefore, the Government has decided to order straight from the manufacturers in India and China and in two weeks we shall have enough volume of pesticides. We have ordered for 60,000 litres. In between – because of the mobilisation that has taken place – all the pesticides with the dealers were bought by the farmers –(Interruption)

MS AKELLO: Thank you, honourable minister. I hope I heard you well when you said you went to the shop and bought all the stocks. Did you really follow the procedures of PPDA or you went to the shop and just shopped and the shop ran dry?

MR SSEMPIJJA: No, this was an emergency – (Interruption)

MR OSHABE: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I am aware you know that it takes the armyworms about two days to clear a 10-acre field of maize. I come from Kassanda and we are some of the major maize farmers in this country. These days, I even fear to go there. Whenever farmers see me they say, “Government promised us pesticides; where is it?” They think whenever I arrive there I have taken the pesticides. However, honourable minister, you are saying we will have the pesticides within two or three weeks. I am just wondering whether by the time the pesticides come they will serve the purpose.

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of the armyworm is an emergency. In other countries, when they have such outbreaks, the governments would have even got helicopters to spray. However, the minister is telling us that they are going to wait for two weeks. I am a commercial farmer. If you can visit the farmers, especially the maize farmers in this country, you will find the whole acreage affected. Even if you start this hand-spraying, you may not be able to get rid of all the armyworms. When the minister tells us that we are going to wait for two weeks - let us be serious! 

When we had the foot-and-mouth disease outbreak, we handled it as an emergency and we even passed a supplementary budget here. What is difficult with the minister and the Government even chartering a plane to go and buy and bring the acaricides here so that we can spray?

Madam Speaker, we really need to be serious. The eastern and northern regions are still suffering. We had expected these areas which have got rains to produce and boost and be able to handle the current hunger situation. The honourable minister is telling us two weeks but if we are to wait for two weeks, we would rather not purchase and leave it to God.  We shall depend on whatever comes out.  

Madam Speaker, I am very surprised that we are handling this issue as if it is just an ordinary issue.

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also seeking clarification from the minister. I would like the minister to tell the House the distribution plan and whether this pesticide is going to be given to farmers directly?  At the moment, the pesticides distributed by the Operation Wealth Creation Kiryandongo District received 90 litres. So, is the 90 litres for demonstration purposes or is it meant for all the farmers in the district? What is it meant for?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, use five minutes. We have to do some other work. Please, answer and do not take any more clarifications for now.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the 90 litres for Kiryandongo District were for demonstration purposes. The reason was that we had to educate the farmers on how to use the pesticide.

Madam Speaker, the problem of resistance of some of these pests to drugs is as a result of mismanagement of the drugs. So, we had to first of all send chemicals to all the districts that were affected to demonstrate and educate them on how to use the chemicals.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, if I listened very carefully to the response from the minister, you can clearly see that the minister has almost no problem because the minister was asking for money. He has told us here that he received Shs 4 billion, two weeks ago. Now, if the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries received Shs 4 billion, in such a short period of time, how then could the minister within that period be able to acquire this?

Madam Speaker, I think the problem that we must face as Parliament is the failure to accord the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries the due attention that it requires, such that the minister can respond according to time. That is where the problem is.

Again, in the situation we are in, we would be finding - I imagine that the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA), could be tying up the hands of the minister over procurement of these acaricides. We should find out how best the minister can manoeuvre through this, knowing very well the faults that we are facing are arising from the failure of Government to appropriate enough resources in the production sector. That is where we would have put much attention –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we shall do that debate when we are doing the policy statement. Leave that one there; you can raise it later. Honourable minister, please, close.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform Members that after this mobilisation and sensitisation that has been done, the farmers bought all the pesticides. We found out from the dealers and we added the totals; farmers have bought 300,000 litres and the agencies have nothing. What we did was to contact the manufacturers and 60,000 litres, ordered by Government will be coming in two weeks. This is a type of chemical that cannot be shipped on plane. It is not allowed internationally. It must come by ship. So, there is nothing we can do at this time.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much for giving me the way. Honourable minister, you have communicated that farmers were sensitised and they bought all the pesticides. However, the information I would like to give is that it is not farmers that actually bought all the pesticides. After traders noticed that parliament is in the process of approving some money for Government to purchase these drugs, speculators bought all these pesticides and they have them ready to sell back to the Government, once it is ready to buy. So, the drugs are there but with speculators.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, I am aware of this problem. The last time we contacted one of the agents here, we knew from Malaba the amount of chemicals he had brought in because they must be cleared at the border. He had brought 2,500 litres but he said he had 5,000 litres. So, we said, we are going to look into these problems of fake drugs. That is why we have decided to contact the manufacturers so that we bring the right drugs.

Fight against the army worm is not likely to end with this season. We are going to continue fighting it through the next season but we are also going to use research. Research is almost giving us a different answer to this problem. Except that they are finding out how they can fight the pest biologically. 

Madam Speaker, I hope one time we shall stand here to declare success in this. Otherwise, we are waiting for the drugs that are coming in.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please answer on the issue of fish and the army worm. We need to go to the next item.

MR SSEMPIJJA: On the fish issue, I have to investigate the cause of death for Richard Kozaala. However, for that other person who died in Mayuge, I went there and I attended the burial with the Woman Member of Parliament for Mayuge. Even then, the cause of death of this young man was not as a result of the enforcement team under Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MIAAF) or these soldiers that we are using to enforce. We have a UPDF unit which is assisting us to enforce the fisheries laws. The problem was not caused by them. It was a police operation which we are still investigating. But it was the police doing the operation not soldiers. 

The Kozaala case is new to me. I am going to contact the Inspector General of Police (IGP) and the UPDF unit to find out what caused the death of Kozaala. Otherwise, we emphasise discipline among the people who are operating on the lakes, especially the enforcers so that they do not go against the laws of Uganda.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, we shall now go to item three. Yesterday, a report was presented to this House but Members felt they wanted to reflect on it before they discuss it. So, we shall use 45 minutes, on that matter. 

However, before we start, I would like to inform you that the Corporate League will hold its outing on Sunday, April 30th at Kyambogo University sports grounds at 9 a.m. The Parliament of Uganda’s team will compete in football and pool. This is good for your physical fitness. Therefore, I invite the Members to go to the National Corporate League.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, I raised a matter of national importance here. Do we just leave it like that?

THE SPEAKER: I asked the government to come and give a report on the problem of the cattle keepers.

MR FUNGAROO: Now, I cannot operate even if I go to hold a meeting there today. How do you help me as the Member of Parliament because the army and the police will be deployed against me? They are misusing the Public Order Management Act. Even when you have a meeting in your house with your people, they will say you are talking about the balaalo. They will send the police and the army. What do we do? Should we just leave Obongi for them and go somewhere else? 

THE SPEAKER: Let the Minister of Internal Affairs come with the statement concerning the cattle keepers with guns in Obongi and other areas on Tuesday. 

Do we have contributions on the tourism report? We are going to spend exactly 45 minutes. Just use two minutes.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE INCREASING NUMBER OF FOREIGN RETAIL AND WHOLESALERS IN UGANDA

(Debate continues.)

3.39
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Tourism for the report they have given us. The committee researched well and reported on issues that are affecting not only traders but Ugandans as a whole. 

Madam Speaker, the economy is doing badly because of the policies Government is taking that are edging out Ugandans from all businesses. If at all there are still some Ugandans in business, then they are very few.

For the last 12 years, Uganda Investment Authority has been issuing licences to investors. However, with all the complaints coming along every year, we haven’t had any licence revoked and yet the foreigners who come here shift from one business to another. Can we have a comprehensive report also on Uganda Investment Authority on how they are carrying out their work?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when you look at the “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” (BUBU) policy; we are giving many youths skills but there is no market for these skills. We are sinking a lot of money through the Ministry of Education and Sports to train youths in furniture making and garment cutting. However, are we there to buy those items even as Government? Look at government offices; through procurement, we are buying from outside things that could be manufactured locally. There is no policy stopping importation of such things. We have to ring-fence certain businesses for Ugandans so that we save jobs. The jobs that are being created are not even being got by Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, you rightly said yesterday that in some countries, when investors are brought into the country, one of the conditions is to give them the number of workers that need to be recruited from among the nationals. We need this report from Uganda Investment Authority. The economy is doing badly because Ugandans cannot do trade. We have been lamenting here again and again - (Member timed out.)

3.42
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to appreciate the committee for the good report. Foreigners who come here masquerading as investors in manufacturing, construction and real estate and end up diverting into wholesale and retail trade are responsible for the mass unemployment that the citizens of Uganda are going through.

Again, dollarization of rent is a serious issue, Madam Speaker. If landlords charge tenants in dollars, it will have a very adverse effect on our currency. The depreciation of the shilling is because of this. 

Also, another disastrous effect is that Ugandan tenants fail to pay rent because paying in dollars requires more money in Uganda Shillings. That is why in most shops, there are 20 or more people instead of one person because of the unaffordability of dollars. Ugandans have run out of business and that is why we find Ugandans on streets while the foreigners are running even barber shops. Is the Uganda Investment Authority in charge? If they are the ones who give these licences; why can’t they revoke some of these licences now that –(Member timed out.)

3.44
MS ANNE MARIA NANKIBIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. One time when the Natural Resources Committee was examining witnesses, we asked the Uganda Investment Authority the following questions: What happens to the investors and companies that are licenced for certain businesses and they end up taking a different one? Do they do the monitoring? 

Uganda Investment Authority said they had no capacity to monitor the people they had issued investment licences because sometimes, the country has entered into bilateral agreements with the countries these investors come from. In so doing, they benefit from tax incentives and exemptions and land. At the end of the day, they change and the country loses.

We need to monitor so that at every particular period as assigned by Parliament, we get reports on how many investment licences have been given out and the modes of operation. Madam Speaker, last week –(Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, we are debating a very pertinent issue that was deferred yesterday and the country is awaiting the response from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Is it procedurally right for us to continue when the minister is not around? 

THE SPEAKER: It seems we are talking to ourselves. Now, Mr Prime Minister, we have wanted to discuss this matter since August. There is a restive mood in the population over this issue. It is really important that we address it to the satisfaction of the population. 

Mr Prime Minister, where are your ministers? Today is a sitting day and there is no Cabinet meeting.

3.47
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I have always said it would be expecting a miracle from me to know where my ministers are. (Laughter) I do not think I have a report. I do not have a register for movement of the ministers. Therefore, Madam Speaker, what I – (Interruption)

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I presume and know that the First Deputy Prime Minister is aware of his role as a Leader of Government Business. I do not think there is any other person in this House that should have been responsible to tell us where the ministers are. Is it in order for the Prime Minister to tell us it will be a miracle for you to expect him to know? 
Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is supposed to be in charge and he is the Leader of Government Business in this House. Therefore, he is expected to know where the ministers are or at least to manage their coming here.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Madam Speaker, I do not know what I could tell you but what I also know is the committee is fully-fledged. If you go around the committee rooms, you will find ministers there and even Members in the Opposition, you can see they are very few. Do we know where they are?

Therefore, I suggest we can ask - Madam Speaker, as usual, you can direct us for a statement that we will be able to bring. However, I will not be able to know where the ministers are and asking them to come will also be difficult. However, if I do not know where the ministers are, it does not mean I am not in charge. I am in charge even in the whole House because even the Opposition -(Laughter)- yes, including the Leader of Opposition because they are shadow leaders anyway.

Madam Speaker, therefore, I pray that you let us ask our side to bring a statement on this matter and then, after that we shall be able to debate. I pray.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what statements they can give. Yesterday, the minister was here; she said that they have got a Cabinet subcommittee but we said let us debate the report because it is already here. This is the statement. Therefore, we have to defer it. 

3.51
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you have rightly said, this report was presented in the presence of the minister. And from her behaviour here yesterday, it was clear that she needed to respond to the issues that have been raised in this report. For us to continue debating in her absence is not right. Therefore, I would pray, Madam Speaker, that you direct that the minister comes to this House - (Interruption)

MS NAGGAYI: Madam Speaker, when the minister came here yesterday, she was not ready to respond. Actually, she wanted to water down. She was not intending to be part of the discussion. She wanted to refer us to some other activity they were carrying out as a ministry and Cabinet. She was dodging.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, procedurally your office should clamp down on the minister for disrespecting the plight of Ugandans even when there is a report on the Floor of the House; there is urgency, there are strikes in Kampala, people are agitated. Therefore, I do not know why she does not want to take this matter seriously. 

I would like to be clarified whether it is procedurally right to set a precedent in this House for ministers to disregard important issues and reports of committees. And as a member of the committee, I am distressed that that is a pattern she has had with us in the committee over that matter. We have so many issues.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish Government would take the concerns of the people seriously. It is the interest of the Government to have this matter resolved. Otherwise, it can run out of hand. Therefore, I am directing the Minister for Trade and Industry to come to this House. Let us adjourn for now and she comes.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE LOTTERIES AND GAMING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we had partially handled this matter yesterday. Okay, let us defer it. Can I invite hon. Rwamirama, the Minister of State for Defence to respond to the issues of Somalia. 

3.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (VETERAN AFFAIRS) (Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that our troops in Somalia have not got their allowances from October to March. This is because European Union, which is the one contributing the money has not passed it on. However, their local salaries are going to their accounts -(Interjections)- yes and their families are getting the money. 

When this money comes, we shall pass it over to the soldiers. That is why we are very much aware and we are engaging EU and AU to make sure that the allowances are paid -(Interruption)

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is; I am told soldiers from other countries who are in Somalia are getting their allowances and yet - (Interjections)- by the same people who are there. Hon. Kuteesa, you are enjoying here, your sons and daughters are suffering in Somalia. Therefore, we need to be serious on this matter.

Madam Speaker, the soldiers of Burundi are receiving their allowances. Our soldiers are telling us they are selling their soap and juice to the soldiers of Burundi to get something to eat, to get some airtime to call their people. How come for them, they are paid and ours are not paid?

We shall even need a full statement over this matter.

COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I do not know that the other troops are being paid and ours are not. However, the truth of the matter is that they have not transferred the money. And this has been on-going and we are engaging EU. It is a fact. However, Members should also know that Uganda is contributing the largest contingency and what I am telling you is the truth.

Whether these people have received their allowances, I do not know. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I must express my disappointment with the Government. I called this House yesterday so that we could facilitate the budget process by handling a tax Bill. However, the owners of the Bill are not here. Therefore, I would like to adjourn the House sine die.

(The House rose at 3.58 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)




