Wednesday, 16 April 2014

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)


The House was called to order.


COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. You will recall that yesterday concern was raised in this House about the attendance of members in meetings of Parliament and committees. I wish to remind you to attend these meetings as expected of dignified, honourable and responsible members of this august House. Related to attendance is the matter of time management. Please, let us always try to keep time and to heed to the call, which is not only mine as the presiding officer but also that of the citizens of this country. They have chosen us and sent us here to do exactly that.

Let me also announce that five corporate companies involved in the tobacco industry have requested for a consultative meeting with Members of Parliament whose districts grow tobacco. These spread across the sub regions of West Nile, Bunyoro, Mubende, North Kigezi and the middle North. The companies would like to discuss a number of operational issues touching tobacco activities in the respective constituencies. Other stakeholders to attend this meeting will include leaders of tobacco farmers and distributors. 

The meeting is scheduled to take place tomorrow, Thursday 17th April at Sheraton Hotel beginning at 8.00 a.m. until 1.00 p.m. I wish to remind the concerned Members to attend and participate as you are already notified by the Office of the Clerk to Parliament. However, I also wish to remind those Members who were given notice by the Clerk to attend the consultative meeting that thereafter, they should come back in time to attend plenary that will start at 2 O’clock.

Honourable members, today the Speaker of Parliament, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, addressed a press conference together with the youth on the theme “Youth Go Green Campaign: 10 million youth, 10 million trees challenge.” In the press release that was issued, there are challenges that have been raised, and Members, you are invited to participate. I will be reading a list of places that you also can be part of in terms of choosing which road you would want to manage and plant trees along. I will be reading that list later.

To this effect, on 22nd April H.E the President will be planting trees along the Northern Bypass. The venue for that function will be Naalya roundabout. All Members are hereby invited to participate in this activity to mark this year’s campaign for tree planting. I am advised that as Members of Parliament, we still have the chance of participating in this exercise in a big way. One can choose the roads they want to manage and those roads include: Kampala-Gayaza-Ziroobwe, which is 44 kilometres. If you want to plant trees, you can choose that. There is also Soroti-Dokolo-Lira, which is 123 kilometres; Kawempe-Luweero-Kafu, which is 166 kilometres; Kafu-Masindi, 43kms; Masaka-Mbarara, 154kms; Kaguta Road; Nyakahita-Kazo-Kamwenge; Kabale-Kisoro; Bunagana-Kyanika, 94kms; Busega-Mityana, 57kms; Busunju-Kiboga-Hoima, 154kms; Jinja-Bugiri, 72kms; Karuma-Pakwach-Arua, 108kms; and Gayaza-Kalagi Road, 20kms. You are expected to choose which road you want to participate in by planting and maintaining trees around those areas.

Honourable members, let me also, on another note, announce to that the honourable Dr Chris Baryomunsi, MP Kinkizi East, has been elected the President of the African Parliamentarians Forum on Population and Development. (Applause) He was elected a few days ago at the forum’s annual general meeting that took place in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, from 17 to 19 March 2014. The forum is a platform that brings together Members of Parliament from all over Africa and was established to champion population, health and development issues. So, congratulations, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, for making this Parliament proud again. It is becoming your habit, which we always like to congratulate you for. If you want to give us a very short statement on that, like in one minute, I would allow it at this time.

2.20
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and honourable members. As you have communicated, we have a parliamentarians’ forum in Africa that brings together Members of Parliament to champion issues of population, health and development. We did have a general assembly from 17th to 19th March. Hon. Fred Badda and I attended that meeting on behalf of this Parliament and we had general elections where I was elected president of this forum. I will be serving for three years up to 2017. My voters were worried because they thought I would resign from this Parliament. However, this is just a voluntary organisation; so, I will remain serving as a Member of Parliament for Kinkizi East in this Parliament.

Briefly, let me say that population and development issues have been issues of key concern. In 1994, there was an international conference on population and development, which was held in Cairo and it agreed on a road map in terms of a programme of action for 20 years. Countries committed themselves to addressing issues of population, reproductive health, maternal health, gender issues and other related issues associated with development and population concerns. One of the key fundamental agreements was that Members of Parliament should actively participate in these processes. That is why we are united as Members of Parliament, through this platform, so that we can champion this cause working with governments, civil society and other actors. 

In 2014, there has been a review of the programme of action, which had been on for 20 years. In September, the African governments met in Addis Ababa to review the progress - how far we have gone in terms of achieving the various indicators like maternal mortality, child mortality, population growth, fertility levels and so forth. What has been observed is that some reasonable progress has been realised in Africa but we still have challenges. Looking at the issues which were to be followed up, for example, up to 87 per cent of those issues are behind schedule in terms of implementation in Africa while the other continents have made considerable progress. So, there is concern that as Members of Parliament working with government, we must put in more effort. 

Just last week, there was a UN Commission on Population and Development session and the delegation from Uganda was led by hon. Matia Kasaija. At an appropriate time he will be coming to give a statement in this House. I did attend, on behalf of this Parliament, the negotiations for a whole week and we managed to get a consensus at the end of the week. I must say it was a very tough period because the western powers were trying to drive the agenda to a different direction by way of forcing us to include what they call the new emerging issues like sexual orientation, legalisation of sex trade, issues of sexual right, gender identity and so forth. However, we managed to get consensus and our position as Africans and Arabs was also accommodated - our sovereignty, our national laws, our policies must be respected as we implement these programmes which are of a global agenda. 

Next week, there is also an international parliamentarians’ conference that will take place in Stockholm, Sweden. Hon. Sylvia Namabidde and I will attend this meeting. Here, again, we are trying to get a global consensus on these issues to do with population and development. So, I pledge that we shall continue working with all of you and ensure that population, health and development issues remain top of the agenda of this Parliament. 

Allow me, Mr Speaker, to lay on the Table a declaration which the various Members of Parliament from the African continent agreed on. This is a declaration of African Parliamentarians participating in a general assembly of the Forum of African Parliamentarians on Population and Development. The meeting took place in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, from 17 to 19 March 2014 and basically, the declaration gives the consensus position of the Members of Parliament in Africa on issues of population, health and development. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that declaration. Thank you and congratulations again. Member for Kyaka, on what point do you rise?

2.26
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise under rule 48 of our Rules of Procedure seeking leave of the Speaker to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament seeking to address inequities in admission criteria at Makerere University. Specifically, I seek a motion addressing the district quota system, the 1.5 points for female students and the recently introduced pre-entry exams. The matter is urgent and of national concern. 

We are all aware that A’ level results were recently released and admission into the university may only be –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you seeking leave of the Speaker to present a motion? 

MR KWEMARA: Yes, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But it sounds like you want to present a motion right away. Okay, I grant you leave to present that motion but not today. Today, the Order Paper is full. Can you arrange to present it tomorrow? 

MR KWEMARA: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leave is granted to you.

2.27
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I presume that the two members of the Front Bench are clearly acting on behalf of Government and that I can proceed to raise a matter of national importance for purposes of action. So, I seek your guidance on whether I can proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you feel comfortable to proceed, do so.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to a case of sexual harassment of female athletes who are training in Kapchorwa. This sexual harassment is being meted on them by the coach, a one Peter Wemali, who is also a police officer and is training these people. 

Confirmed reports from the district officials from Kapchorwa, from the victims who have undergone sexual harassment, are that because he has been a police officer, the unconfirmed report is that he is temporarily suspended but nothing has been done to conduct investigations into the case or to bring the culprit to book. The captain, who was the whistle-blower, Mr Moses Kipsiro, was suspended from the national team after confronting the coach with this allegation. Up to now, we do not know his status in the national team, and all of you know that Moses Kipsiro has been one of our promising athletes. 

The female athletes who have been abused by this coach have not been helped or protected. We want a clear statement and commitment from the Minister of Internal Affairs on how far investigations have gone and what administrative measures have been put in place, especially since this person is allegedly a police officer and also a Kenyan whose recruitment to the Police Force is being contested. So, the local people are also contesting whether or not he has a working permit, and the issue of immigrants without working permits being recruited into the Police Force has been raised by many. 

Can the Minister of Internal Affairs or Government clearly state and give a timeframe within which a statement can be given in this House on what measures they are going to take to ensure that the victims’ issues are clearly addressed because this is a crime punishable under the penal code? Mr Speaker, the woman MP of Kapchorwa is here; she can also add more information on this matter. Thank you.

2.32
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to second what the honourable Member of Parliament for Oyam District has said about what is happening to the female athletes who are training in Kapchorwa District. 

It is true these stories have just come out, but when some of the girls were interrogated they said that this issue has been going on for a long but they were only quiet because they were afraid of reporting this man – the big boss, Peter the coach. This man has been in Kapchorwa District for a long time. I do not remember the year he came to Kapchorwa but he has stayed there for some years and he has built a house there. Before he became a coach, most people knew him as a native doctor and many people would go and consult him. I do not know how he became a coach. 

Yesterday, I managed to talk with one of the girls who was sexually harassed. This girl said that it is true this man has been harassing them. She added that he would harass any girl who would join the camp to practice and if you refused to sleep with him, you would become an enemy. He would harass them and call them fools and many other names including “idiot” and “stupid”. Sometimes he would display their names along the road. He would write their names on Manila paper and display them to anybody passing by the road with messages such as, “Look at this fool, she thinks she can run, she thinks she can do it but I am the final person. Where can this one reach?”

These girls have been very discouraged in their running because of this man. Sometimes those who are stubborn are denied food whenever they go to run whether in Kampala or wherever he takes them. Some of these girls have been running without eating because this man would refuse to give them food if they refused to sleep with him. 

He has even made some of these girls his wives. He controls them in any way he wants to, but people know that he is a witchdoctor so they fear to report him. What surprises me is that one of the camps is very near a police station and yet the Police have not been informed of such things. So, that is what is happening in Kapchorwa. My prayer is that maybe in future, our girls need a female coach to train them and this man should be arrested.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The information is clear and the issue has been raised. Can we hear from the government on what is going to happen on this issue?

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Okello Oryem): Mr Speaker and colleagues, on behalf of Government, I unequivocally and in no uncertain terms condemn all forms of sexual harassment and personal harassment against our female athletes or even other females in other disciplines. Let me take this opportunity to thank those girl athletes and let me thank Kipsiro and congratulate him for having the strength and courage to expose this individual who is involved in this evil act, which we all condemn. 

Let me thank the girls who had the courage to come out and give evidence and expose this coach that is alleged to have been involved in this act. As a former Minister of Sports, I regret that our girls are going through this situation. I have taken note of all that has been said. I will communicate it to the Minister of Internal Affairs and my other colleagues so that a statement can be made at the earliest opportunity to explain what investigations or actions are being taken against this coach and others, if any, that are involved in this heinous act. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, this matter is urgent and the camp is still open. We would like a commitment that on Tuesday next week at 2 O’clock we will have this statement before the House.

2.39
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

In my constituency, I have three sub counties and the sub counties of Bukakata and Mukungwe have been affected by a decision that was taken by the National Forestry Authority to cut down indigenous trees, which they sold at Shs 43 million only. There is a forest around Lake Nabugabo, which is one of the international Ramsar sites where the communities have been enjoying eco-tourism and its benefits.

Mr Speaker, when this first happened, the community came up in arms and tried to stop the exercise from going on. However, the people who were destroying and cutting down the trees were being guarded by armed personnel, and indeed the forest is being cut down. From what you have just communicated, the President is campaigning for tree planting but these people are destroying the forest without any plan to replace the trees. The situation is as bad as you can expect because the environment is being degraded. People fear that this forest has got a lot of snakes and other harmful creatures which they think are going to take refuge in their homes.

Mr Speaker, I call upon Government and the minister in charge of the environment to stop this exercise immediately so that an explanation and thorough investigation can be made. For an international Ramsar site to be destroyed by the ministry and by the NFA for just Shs 43 million I think is a very bad act. So, I beg that the ministry comes immediately to explain and also stops this exercise. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Anybody from the government? Yes, hon. minister.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (WATER) (Ms Betty Bigombe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank the honourable member for bringing this to the attention of the House because it is in our interest that we protect this forest. It is also in our interest that we plant more trees. So, such illegal activities must be addressed immediately. 

I would kindly like to ask the honourable member to come to the office with representatives from the community so that we can have a meeting with NFA to see how we can first of all punish the culprits, recover the money and make sure that we address the problem. Thank you very much. 
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And when will this meeting be? 

MS BIGOMBE: On Tuesday at 11.00 a.m., if that is acceptable to the honourable member.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the honourable member says that the NFA authorised the cutting at a cost of Shs 43 million. Having heard from the honourable member, are you saying that as a ministry you are not aware of this illegal activity? Could you please clarify? The next step is that they should be arrested immediately and brought to book and there should be an immediate stop to that action.  

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Minister, in her explanation the honourable Member for Bukoto East did observe that indeed the cutting down of trees is on-going and you are indicating that you can only propose a meeting for Tuesday. In your submission, you indicate that it is very important that these trees are protected. Today is Wednesday and you are proposing for a meeting on Tuesday to explain and agree on a forest that will be cleared. Can you give us your roadmap on why you want a meeting after everything is destroyed? What are you trying to achieve? Are you going to engage in a meeting as a ritual? What are you trying to achieve?

MS BIGOMBE: Thank you, honourable members. First and foremost, the first step is to stop it immediately. Unfortunately, I did not say that when I stood up but I am going to take action immediately.

The second step, Sir, is to also verify so that by the time we have this meeting, verification will have taken place. We will have some facts and information that is relevant. Thank you. 

MS NAMAYANJA: Mr Speaker, I can volunteer some information to the minister –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. Let us handle it the way it should be handled. 

2.46
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance regarding the Mbale Central Market. 

Mr Speaker, a few years ago, government took on markets in the municipalities and Mbale is one of them. First of all, it was difficult to convince the occupants to leave that market but after some time, they agreed on assurance that when the market is complete, they would regain their stalls and lockups. Unfortunately, the market is complete but I have received very many calls from the previous occupants, many of whom had stayed there for over 30 years, saying that during the allocation of space, they were left out. They were the first people to occupy that market but now they see different people occupying the market yet they applied and these people already have records.

Mr Speaker, according to the stalls allocation, it is very surprising that the current occupants are going to be three times more than the original occupants because the market has been expanded greatly, but even then the previous people still have not been considered. They are bitter because some officials came from the Ministry of Local Government to help in the allocation but they did not listen to the first occupants; they were only telling them to follow what they were doing. On a sad note, many of the people who have been allocated stalls are the rich men in town. 

There are also the street vendors who wrote to the Minister for Local Government and they were assured that if they left the streets they would be allocated space. Unfortunately, even though they wrote to the minister, and I will table the letter which was received on 8th November last year, nothing has been done for these people and there is an outcry in Mbale. 

The President is supposed to open that market on the 28th of this month and these people are organising to demonstrate. If they do, it will show a bad picture about the people of Mbale, especially the people who are in charge of allocation. The executive of the market and the local councillors are victims because they have conflict of interest issues. Therefore, Mr Speaker, I am appealing to the relevant authorities to come and rescue the people of Mbale before the President comes. Let there be a way forward that will not embarrass Mbale or the President because of greedy people trying to take over the stalls of the poor people who had previously occupied the market. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Government, you built and expanded a market and are now giving it to people who were never even there and yet you had an undertaking that you would consider those who were in the market first.

2.50
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I request that you to allow the minister in charge of local government to come here with a statement on Tuesday and tell us about the status not only in Mbale but concerning all the markets that were constructed in that sense. It would benefit the stakeholders in those areas. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is so directed and I mandate you to make this communication to the minister. 

2.51
MR SAM OWOR OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise in regard to the notification that you gave the government side yesterday about issues of national importance in my constituency. 

A storm hit my constituency about 10 days ago and last week on Sunday 13th, another storm hit scores of villages in Kibanda County, Kiryandongo District. The following villages were affected adversely: Bweyale Central, Siriba, Nyakadot Cell, Kitaleba, Kalangala, Nyakagando and Kyembera. The latter villages were hit 10 days ago and the ones I read before were hit on Sunday. As a matter of fact, a one Merab Kabandize died and scores of others were admitted and hospitalised in Kiryandongo Hospital and other clinics around that same place. 

Our prayers are as follows: that there should be an early warning mechanism, surely, to alert Ugandans. Again, Mr Speaker, this is not a problem that only hit my constituency; I remember my brother from Butaleja and many others also suffered this. So, this looks like a national problem and therefore an early warning mechanism ought to be in place to notify Ugandans about these calamities, which I am sure can be predicted because they have a nexus with weather. 

Our prayer is that immediate and urgent emergency relief be sent to Kibanda County to help these Ugandans who are sleeping outside and are desperate. There should also be some sort of reparation or compensation to help these victims who are basically looking at us, the local leaders, to help them out. Again, as you can imagine, the magnitude of this problem is far and wide beyond us.

The other issue is the matter that you, Mr Speaker, participated in on the other side – from Kamdini to Gulu - where you launched the rehabilitation of the road. From our side, Kiryandongo to Kamdini Road was also launched for rehabilitation but there are issues which have risen since then. I am happy my brother, hon. Byabagambi, is here. The Uganda National Roads Authority has commenced on an activity of displacing people who are about 20 metres away on one side of the road because on the opposite side of the road we have a game reserve. When we launched the Karuma-Kamdini City Plan because of the hydroelectricity power, we were made aware that there is a comprehensive plan to have a city status for these two towns and that development by international standards will take place on either side of the road. However, we are seeing a situation where the park side is left intact and the encroachment is being done on where the majority of the people are. 

People are being registered, and I do not know whether this is with a view of having them compensated. I wish to find out the strategy you have since the Karuma-Kamdini Plan was launched to have development spread out on both sides of the road so that we can have minimum displacement of the population. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, too. Hon. Minister, please respond to the second issue of displacement by the road.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, my brother. Before I come to that, Mr Speaker, I will supplement on what he said first because I come from his constituency. It is true that his people have mobilised and have started seeing the importance of the environment. I think that is a good thing. At the same time, I urge the local leaders, including the MP himself, to embark on sensitising those people so that they stop burning even the few trees that we are planting there. This is becoming a very big problem. Some of us have tried planting trees there but they have burnt all of them, thereby curtailing our efforts.

On the second issue, it is true that that road is under rehabilitation. The traffic has exponentially increased, therefore we cannot leave the road as small as it is; we have to expand it. Initially, that road had no pedestrian walkways; people were fighting with vehicles for the same carriageway. The time has now come for us to improvise by putting walkways so that pedestrians and cyclists can have their own space in order to avoid accidents. However, the only option we have is to expand the other side, which is not a national park. 

It is very clear that since it is government policy – actually it is constitutional – that we must compensate these people, we must pay for the land that we are going to acquire. Therefore, the exercise that is going on now is a verification exercise so that we know who is affected and how much land is affected. 

We have not started displacing people and we are not actually encroaching since we are going to take the land legally. So, that will not be an encroachment issue but rather an acquisition issue. We shall pay them and compensate them. I take it upon myself to involve you in the exercise so that you can help us sensitise the people so that we do the road smoothly and quickly. Thank you.

2.59
MR VINCENT MUJUNI (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there was a second issue on the storm. I am sorry.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Tress Bucyanayandi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is where I come in. First, I wish to convey my sympathies to hon. Otada about what happened. 

The Ministry of Agriculture can come in and assist with planting materials – grain, maize, beans and cassava. I would be happy to share with you some information again regarding the number of people affected and the likely quantities required in terms of seed. Of course, I will also send a team to assess the magnitude of the problem. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, member for Rwampara can now continue.

MR MUJUNI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last month, an official from NEMA invaded my constituency. Rwampara has five sub counties, 31 parishes and 301 villages. About 200 villages depend on subsistence agriculture and mostly in the low lying areas. 

Mr Speaker, the said NEMA official, a one Musingwire, has, with a lot of impunity, gone to the parishes of Nyakikara, Nyarubungo, Kamomo and many other villages and destroyed people’s gardens. Plants like sugarcane, eggplants, and vegetables have been destroyed and he says he is being funded by an NGO to protect the environment. 

In the National Environment Act, from which NEMA is framed, the principle environmental conservation is based on the principle of population vis-à-vis the capacity and productivity of individuals. For an individual from NEMA to go to a constituency and destroy people’s gardens with impunity is uncalled for. Worse still, they have employed prisoners from Kyamugolani – you know how desperate they can be; even when they destroy the plants, they eat all of them. (Laughter) Now, my people are actually starving.

These are our prayers:
1. The minister in charge of water and environment immediately halts this exercise until an environmental audit is done in respect of the National Environment Act. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is whether this area is a wetland or a forest reserve. Could it be that the NEMA official has encroached on private land?

MR MUJUNI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. At an appropriate time and with your permission, Mr Speaker, I will lay on the Table the pictures indicating the damage that has been meted on our people by the NEMA officer. I am trying to show you, even these pictures will indicate, that on the very sides of the hills some individuals came and cut down all the banana plantations and cabbages. 

By the way, what is a wetland? For your information, 80 per cent of my people live in low lying areas; would that constitute a wetland? So, there is need to define what constitutes a wetland. If you have to apply the law, it must be done uniformly. You should not come for the people of Rwampara because their voice is limited and leave people who have constructed petrol stations and other buildings in wetlands. Why go for the cabbages and sugarcanes? Are they more environmentally dangerous than the petrol stations?

As I wind up, Mr Speaker, the core values of NEMA –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the matter has been raised that crops like cabbages and others like that have been destroyed by NEMA officials. What is Government going to do about that? I think that is the issue.

3.04
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker and honourable members, I think the Minister of Water and Environment who has just gone out will verify on this issue raised by my colleague. 

What I want to state is that we have a challenge as a country, which we should address as leaders. We have to conserve the environment. These areas are known but we have members of our communities who even go to the extent of moving at night to destroy wetlands and forest reserves.

My colleague, hon. Beatrice Atim Anywar, asked the member who raised this matter whether this was private land or not but he did not answer. So, the Minister will come and give a statement here but still, we should also watch out as leaders in our communities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, it is a short while after 3 O’clock and the Prime Minister is here. We also have an urgent motion by one of us who is seeking leave of the House to introduce a private Members’ Bill, the Judiciary Administration Bill. It is supposed to be moved by hon. Felix Okot Ogong. However, rule 34 now kicks in for the next 45 minutes. So, please call the next item.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, before we get there, let me introduce a delegation of teaching staff from Kiryandongo District Teachers’ Association. They are led by Ms Irene Adokorach. They are represented by hon. Owor Sam Amooti Otada and hon. Helen Kahunde. They have come to observe the proceedings; please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome. (Applause)

This is time for the questions to the Prime Minister. Please keep the questions short so that we can use the 45 minutes properly. 

3.07
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Will the Prime Minister clarify to the country allegations to the effect that Government is considering a reduction on the subvention to UPE pupils from Shs 7,000 to something below yet we thought Government is about to increase that subvention? Will the Prime Minister clarify that allegation? If it is true, can he explain to the country what the objective is? Thank you.

3.08
THE PRIME MINISTER (Mr Amama Mbabazi): That is not an issue that has been discussed by Government in Cabinet or any other organ. If it is a proposal, it has not reached the necessary authorities and no such decision has been taken therefore. Thank you.

3.08
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Bulisa County, Bulisa): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, a few months ago, we were happy to hear that Government is returning kingdom properties to the respective kingdoms and some cheques worth billions of money also followed and some land titles were also handed over yesterday. I would like to know if this is an across-the-board intervention by the state for all the cultural institutions in all the regions. 

I am also mindful that some of these properties are hosting local government offices, courts and many other government institutions and, therefore, it comes with a toll of rent. Also, there are some areas that may have not agitated yet, but we are a republic and we would expect that such a good gesture by the President of correcting an injustice is handled in a more institutionalized way, even including the Constitution. We seem to agree that we gave a limited mandate to the cultural institutions in the Constitution and possibly some constitutional amendments will follow  –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, please keep the question short. We need to use the time properly.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you. Hon. Prime Minister, would you help this Parliament and the country understand the cost implications and what other regions should expect – Buganda, Busoga, Tooro. We also have regions that are expecting the regional tier. I thought the regional tier would be one way to address some of these problems and we move on. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I have noted the statement by my honourable friend, Stephen Mukitale. I would like to make a clear statement that it has been Government policy to return the properties that belonged to these cultural institutions. What we have done for the Buganda Kingdom obviously must be done for other areas where similar circumstances exist. 

We made it very clear, right from the beginning, that those properties that belonged to the state remain in the hands of the state and those properties, which had been meant for public administration, remain in the hands of public administration. Now, all those properties that belonged to the cultural institutions would be returned after due verification. I do believe that what we have witnessed the President hand over were the properties that now had been verified to belong to the cultural institutions. Thank you.

3.12
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I seek to know from the Prime minister under which law the current national ID registration is being undertaken and when these registration centres will be gazetted. I ask this because I understand they have not yet been gazetted yet the exercise is on-going. My question is: under which law is the current national ID registration taking place and when are these registration centres going to be gazetted?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, hon. Mwiru knows very well, or ought to know, that we act on the imposition of the Constitution of a duty on Government to register the citizens. We are operating under those general powers of the Constitution. We will gazette. I am not ashamed to act constitutionally; those who think acting constitutionally is shameful belong to a different era. We are in the new era of the rule of law and constitutionalism, having put everything right that had gone wrong, and that is precisely what we are doing. Thank you.

3.15
MR BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Government promised to pay hard-to-reach allowances to government workers in the country but as I speak, in most of the hard-to-reach areas like Kome Islands in my constituency, some parts of Buvuma and other parts of the country, this allowance has not been forthcoming or it has not been paid at all. We would like to know Government’s position; did government abandon its promise or it is still ready to fulfil it? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am informed now by hon. Bakaluba Mukasa that Kome Island, which is a sub county in his constituency, is a hard-to-reach and hard-to-live area, which is entitled to hard-to-reach allowances and has not received them. I have taken note of it and we will follow it up and make sure that if it is a hard-to-reach area, it receives equal treatment like other areas. Thank you.

3.16 
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to know when the Government will compensate the people affected by the rural electrification project in Oyam District. I have seen the Ministry of Works compensate people but the rural electrification project has been on-going and people now even have the power but people have not been compensated in Oyam District. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Santa Alum, the people of Oyam District that have been affected by our successful rural electrification programme have now been verified and preparations for compensation are underway. Thank you.

3.17
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, there are some intricacies that are likely to make the implementation of the provision of the local content as presently provided for in the recent passed oil laws problematic. What is the Ministry of Energy doing to sort out this problem? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I would like to inform hon. Michael Mawanda that Government is very much aware of that issue and we have indeed discussed it. Last week, we held a presidential investors roundtable talk and one of the thematic areas that we handled was petroleum, oil and gas and actually this question was raised and we did talk about it. We informed those present, and I would like to pass on the same information to this Parliament, that preparations are underway to prepare the country for that local content aspect of our gas and oil industry. This is because it is one thing to provide in the law for the local content and it is another for us to build the capacity to actually exploit that opportunity. So, we are very aware of this and it is possible to raise the capacity locally to apply this in the oil and gas sector. Thank you.

3.19
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like the Prime Minster to clarify to the House and to the people of Mbale - In 2011 when President Museveni was looking for votes, he promised the people of Budadiri, Nalugugu, Mutufu, up to Namagumba, people of Bududa, Magale, Rwakhakha that he was going to tarmac those roads. To date, nothing has been done. Can you tell us what Government is doing about those roads which the President promised? Are they waiting until 2016 to come with the same promise again?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I would like to assure my brother, hon. Jack Wamai, that the NRM, as he knows very well, keeps its promises. (Laughter) - I really like that appreciation. I am pleased that the Opposition today is happy with our performance as a government and, therefore, the pledges that we made in the 2011 election are pledges we will meet. We have met many and we still have a few more years to fulfil all of them. I want to assure you that the plan to do all those roads, to do tarmacking for instance of Mbale to Rwakhakha and all those areas is on course. I thought hon. Wamanga-Wamai would be very happy to hear the news that the NRM is going to do what it promised to do. 

3.22
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you very much. Hon. Prime Minister, last week I asked you a question and you have not answered it, but I have another question for you. During our visits to different countries as members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, we found out that there are very many people of Ugandan descent living abroad. We have actually met in the diaspora first generation, second generation, third generation and fourth generation Ugandans. Can you tell us, Mr Prime Minister, the government estimates of Ugandans or people of Ugandan origin living abroad and what Uganda Government’s plan is to involve these people in our development as a country and in particular in elections? Thank you. I will wait for the other question.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, it is true that hon. Okuonzi raised a question about poverty levels and I did promise that I would respond to it. There was another question relating to defence but I am not ready to respond to it. I will be happy to do so next week.

On the poverty trends, my response is as follows: Uganda’s fast economic expansion in the last two decades has translated into lower poverty levels as we all know, and as he said himself. According to the recent household survey, 2012/2013, the proportion of people living below the poverty line has decreased to 19.7 per cent which is less than the 56.4 per cent as of 1992/1993 financial year. 

This is a new figure and I thought Parliament would welcome it. So, since they did not hear it, can I repeat it? The poverty line has decreased to 19.7 per cent. (Applause) This indicates that Uganda has already met and surpassed the MDG 1 target of reducing the proportion of the population living in extreme poverty by 2015. We have surpassed this and I was happy to report, when I was in New York at the World Leaders’ Summit last September, that Uganda had attained this target.

The country is also on track in achieving the Vision 2040 poverty target of five per cent by 2040 if the current trend is maintained. The proportion of people living below the poverty line according to regions is - I can give the figures: the number in the whole of Uganda in 2009/2010 was 24.5 per cent. I can give you the numbers according to regions: in central region in 2009/2010 it was 10.7 per cent and it has come down to 5.2 per cent. The western region was 21.8 per cent and the 2012/2013 figure is 8.5 per cent. In the eastern, the figure was 24.3 –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was following the submission by the Leader of Government Business with a lot of effort. According to our rules, once we have such figures and statements to read, it is normal that copies are circulated so that we are able to follow and maybe raise points of clarification. Are we procedurally right under the circumstances that a statement with such important figures is read to the House and we have no reference points, not even copies for us to be able to follow the presentation?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is Prime Minister’s question time and this question was asked. Those figures were raised by the honourable Dr Okuonzi last week and the Prime Minister is responding to them under that rule of Prime Minister’s Question Time. Please proceed.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Those who were absent should update themselves. In 2012/2013, it was 25.5 per cent which marks a slight rise for eastern. Yes, it has gone up. For the northern region it was 46.2 per cent and it has come down to 41.8 per cent. 

As I have consistently stated in meetings under the Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme, there has been a significant drop for the North but it is still unacceptably high. It is still dropping; it has not gone up. It dropped from 46.2 per cent in 2009 to 41.8 per cent. So the only region which has registered a slight increase in poverty levels is the eastern region. Incidentally, I will be able to give you a written copy and if honourable someone was able to - It will be on the iPad. Table No. 1 shows both the provisional and – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, with a lot of restraint, in the Commonwealth, as indeed we are adopting this procedure, questions are shot and the Prime Minister is on top of the situation and he stands up and fields questions. That is unlike what I see here where ministers rise and whisper to the Prime Minister or he reads from text. The practice is that the Prime Minister responds off cuff. He fields questions off cuff but not the way we are doing. 

However, is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to refer to a fully elected member, without any dispute whatsoever other than that created by some other individuals, in order to put on the Hansard of this House “honourable someone” without specifically going into the details, well aware of his own shortcomings and failure to field questions? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have said this and let me say it again: the practice that we so ably quote in other jurisdictions is that in these areas of coverage, the Prime Minister gets to know early. It is not about testing the Prime Minister’s knowledge; it is about getting information from the government through the Prime Minister. It is not about testing. 

If you have been in the House of Commons, where I have been a few times, during Prime Minister’s Question Time sometimes the Prime Minister reads from a text, meaning he had advance information. So, that is it. I do not know which other Commonwealth you are referring to other than the one I know.  Otherwise, that is the practice because it is supposed to shorten the time people would have otherwise used for oral questions, which take long. This helps to process some of the urgent matters with the Prime Minister so that they get to know and they consult and then they come and fire questions and exchange like that. 

On the point of order, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, all the members that sit in this House are known by their names and by constituencies. So, if you are referring to any member of this House, you refer to that member either by the constituency or the name. I have not known of anybody in this House who we call honourable someone. So, you are not in order. (Laughter) 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: From this table, Mr Speaker, these provisions – I should have said these are provisional results of the household survey of 2012/13 - show an increase in the proportion of poor people. After validation, it has been confirmed that all regions except the eastern region registered a decrease in that period. The biggest reduction was registered in western Uganda followed by central and then the northern region. 

The eastern region registered a slight increase in poverty from 23.3 to 25.5 per cent. This increase is however not statistically significant. I would like honourable members to know that this increase is not statistically significant. This indicates that the development programmes like the PRDP, NUSAF and special programmes for Karamoja are having the desired effect. The slight increase in the eastern region is mainly attributed to the slight increase in rural poverty. Most rural households in this region rely heavily on agriculture but are also frequently affected by floods and drought, which result in severe crop losses with implications for household incomes and food security. Loss of property due to floods further compounds poverty. 

However, even though there was a decrease in the proportion of poor people below the poverty line in Northern Uganda, in absolute terms the number of poor persons increased in the North by 0.2 per cent. This may be attributed to a number of reasons, some of which are, and we shall confirm this because the analysis is still going on:

a) 	The increase in absolute numbers in northern region is mainly explained by an increase in urban poverty. Rural poverty decrease in the North has occurred thanks to the peace prevailing in the region and increased production of major crops like cassava, sorghum and maize. 

b) 	Increase in the cost of living particularly as a result of high food prices due to the increase in demand for domestic produce from neighbouring countries especially Congo and the Republic of South Sudan, which negatively affects the net food buyer. 

I am going to give you the details of this, which I will give out in the course of tomorrow, having made some few corrections here.

On the question of Ugandans in the diaspora, we have a department dealing with the diaspora in the Ministry Of Foreign Affairs. I do not have the figures now; I can only say yes, we are keeping very close watch over the people abroad and we have the figures, which I cannot give you at the moment but which we should be able to produce anytime. Thank you. 

3.39
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime minister, the social protection fund is being piloted in 14 districts of Uganda. When does Government plan to roll it out in the remaining districts? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it the social protection programme for the elderly?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I answered this question last week and I would refer my honourable colleague to my answer of last week. 

3.40
MR KENNETH LUBOGO: (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, clause 1 of the Public Order Management Act says that this Act shall come into force on a date appointed by the minister by statutory instrument. My question is: when do we expect this statutory instrument, and can you make it clear to the nation that this Act is not yet in force? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, the Act is in full force because the statutory instrument was gazetted. Thank you. 

3.41
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I want to ask the Prime Minister whether he is aware that all the LCIs from Dokolo have not received their bicycles that were promised by Government. I want to ask the Prime Minister when they will distribute bicycles to the LCIs in Dokolo District and in other districts. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the distribution of bicycles has been done in a structured way. I do believe that the district of Dokolo will arise in due course and I would like to assure my brother to deliver the message to his good people in Dokolo. People from Dokolo are good, even the one I am looking at is good. (Laughter) I am talking about Dokolo and I said that the people of Dokolo are good. (Laughter) There won’t be any doubt that their bicycles will reach them in due course.

3.43
MR PETER LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to know from the Prime Minister why the people of Kotido District are not being given the authority to recruit civil servants. The district has written to the Ministry of Public Service more than 10 letters and yet there are many civil servants that are retiring. The people of Kotido and the people of this country should know why.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The people of Kotido are given the same treatment as the rest of the people of Uganda. This government certainly cannot act in discrimination against anyone, let alone the people of Kotido, in light of the resolve of the people of Kotido to be one with Uganda in all the programmes we have had in the country and particularly in Karamoja. 

The issues of recruitment of public servants do not concern only Kotido District but the whole country; we have put a freeze, as Government, on recruitment of staff for many reasons which I do not have to go into but which you all know. The only exception is where there is exceptional need to recruit, which is actually done after consideration by the President himself. So, I would like to invite my brother, hon. Lokii; if he has a reason which is different from the reason of not recruiting staff in the whole country, we will be able to receive and handle it accordingly. Thank you.

3.46	
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That microphone is outside Parliament. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, I asked the Prime Minister about somebody degrading land in Kyambogo and I thank him that that person was stopped. But where the person had dug, the wires are just hanging in the air and that is dangerous for other people and I believe that when you stop somebody from doing something, you have to tell him to reinstate it to the original state. So, Rt hon. Prime Minister, when are you telling this fellow to restore the place so that these wires do not fall and kill people who are on the main road or those residents of Kyambogo?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, the instruction was whole – it was not partial and therefore we expect implementation to be whole and we will follow it up to make sure that it is whole. Thank you.

3.48
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the railway line to Kasese has been mentioned in several State-of-the-Nation addresses and it is now long overdue –(Interjections) - the railway line to Kasese. What is the explanation for the delay and when exactly can the people of Kasese expect to transport their items using the railway line? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House that we have made several public statements concerning this in this House and elsewhere. The Government of Uganda entered into an arrangement with Kenya and others on how to rehabilitate our railway transportation system. And the Rift Valley Railways has been busy rehabilitating the railway line and we would like to have it rehabilitated all the way from Mombasa to Kasese and actually improving it because we are making it standard gauge.
And the people of Kasese will be happy to know that progress is being made. For the people of West Nile, the line up to Pakwach will be rehabilitated and as we have already announced, it will be extended beyond Pakwach to Juba in the Republic of South Sudan and from Kasese up to Kigali. I was hoping that it would pass through Kanungu – (Laughter) – but the route is different and I am happy to have it in the neighbourhood. And this programme will start soon. Thank you.

3.51
DR JEREMIAH TWA-TWA (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Mr Speaker, we are aware that most births and deaths take place at night. But we also know that today the majority of our health facilities are suffering from chronic absence of lighting; many of them are plagued by utility bills, meaning they have no light. If we want to attain Millennium Development Goal No.4 and No.5, we therefore need to provide light. Can the Prime Minister explain to this House and the nation at large the measures that Government is taking to ensure that we provide adequate lighting to the health facilities?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, I didn’t know that births and deaths happen at night. (Laughter) So, to be safer, please go to hospital during the day.
Mr Speaker, Government is indeed concerned about the question of cutting off power and water from health centre facilities. It is shameful and it just must not happen again. We have told the ministries and the utility organisations concerned that this must not happen again. We are of course aware that these utility companies that provide these services need to be paid. Therefore, we are going to create a special budget to provide for especially hospitals to make sure that they have both water and electricity constantly supplied without break. Thank you.

3.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you Rt hon. Prime Minister for answering the questions. However, I have one particular one I am not satisfied with and it is the issue of poverty. Very often, we talk about poverty levels but if you asked anybody the poverty levels in Uganda and where you start from; what are the social or economic indicators for poverty? If you consider Ugandans, at least those in my constituency, what they are eating today, the health facilities they have access to, the education they have access to and if it were not present whether they would afford it and how they dress, I would be hesitant to say their poverty levels have gone down. However, it is also possible because in our country, in the last 30 years, we have had poverty horizontally caused by war and certain government policies to the extent that we now have people in the North and east being much poorer than people from some areas. Then there is vertical poverty which has been caused by policies of Government which has led to a widening gap between the rich and poor.

So, it is important that we should be looking at this when we discuss poverty. There are some areas like Busoga where I come from, which have never had affirmative action and the poverty levels – like the Prime Minister said that it has increased in the east could be in Busoga where the increase has occurred.  Whereas other parts of the country enjoyed affirmative action, Busoga has never had affirmative action and the people of Busoga have been asking when they will have affirmative action like the rest of the country.

Finally, hon. Prime Minister, when we talk about poverty as leaders, what does it mean to be above the poverty line? What do you have access to? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I will respond to that but let me use this opportunity to – I received the answer about hon. Dr Sam Okuonzi’s question about the estimated number of Ugandans in the Diaspora. The World Bank Migration and Remittances Fact Book of 2011 estimates that there were 757,500 Ugandans living outside our borders. These include permanent residents, temporary workers, students and I didn’t know we have Ugandan refugees – I don’t know what they would be running away from. 

The Government of Uganda is cognisant of the important role that Ugandans abroad play in the socio-economic and political development of our country. In recognition of this, Government created in 2007, as I said earlier, a diaspora services department at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Its mandate includes, driving the development, management and implementation of the National Diaspora Policy, promoting, nurturing and sustaining a mutually beneficial relationship between the Government of Uganda and its people overseas, establishing and maintaining a database on the identity, location and skills of Ugandans abroad and structuring of information and channels of communication with them.

I am pleased to note that the Draft National Diaspora Policy for Uganda has been finalised and will be considered soon by Cabinet. This policy seeks to create an environment that will provide all possible opportunities for each Ugandan in the Diaspora to participate and contribute to national development; to promote and enhance measures that improve economic and legitimate rights including the protection of their business and other properties; to support dialogue and cooperation among the Diaspora and their country Uganda; promote a spirit of love for patriotism for Uganda among Ugandans in the Diaspora; to promote resource mobilisation for national development; foster externalisation of labour including support to validate academic qualifications while in Uganda or abroad for youth in seeking employment and enhancing coordination and administrative mechanisms in support of Diaspora programmes in Uganda and Ugandan consulates as a one stop centre.

We are also busy looking at a possibility of establishing a mechanism to enable them exercise their right to vote; to have a hand in choosing who is to lead their country. Cabinet will be considering the proposed Diaspora policy and will decide on whether and how to extend voting rights to Ugandans living abroad. This process is very much open for public consultation and I invite you to engage with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs which is coordinating this policy so that you can give your contribution. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are concluding and the time is up.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Okay. On the question of poverty, our definition of poverty as a country is the definition by the United Nations. As you know, even in the MDGs, the definition was given and for what they call extreme poverty, it is those living on less than a dollar a day. That is the definition of extreme poverty we are talking about. As to what they eat or what they wear, as to their shelter and things like that in terms of quality, of course these are important but they are not part of the definition of poverty as internationally defined and our definition is international. 

The eastern region has registered a slight increase, as I said, statistically insignificant of poverty levels and the reason I gave was the drought that hit this area and so on and so forth. I don’t think it is because Busoga region has not had affirmative action. It is not true to say that the whole of Uganda except Busoga has had affirmative action. I come from a sub-region that has had no affirmative action. I come from Kigezi - (Interjections) - I am not campaigning; I am telling you. Campaigning for what?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, they are not on record and you are putting yourself on record. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am not campaigning; when the time for campaigning comes, you will see me. (Laughter) The areas that have had affirmative action mainly because they were affected by war like the northern region and Luwero and so on are known. But places like Kigezi, Ankole and most of the Buganda region have not had – (Interruption)

MR WAFULA: Thank you very much, for giving way. Mr Speaker, Busoga had war and Lakwena was defeated in Busoga at Magamaga. So, if you are saying that parts of Uganda got affirmative action because of war, definitely Busoga had war and never got affirmative action. That is what I want you to know.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The areas that have had war are many; I can tell you that Mbarara was destroyed by war; Masaka - Kigezi suffered five years of war that was going on in Rwanda in case you didn’t know. So, that is not my point. I am simply responding to your point that Busoga is an area that has been discriminated in terms of affirmative action; that is not the case. Affirmative action has been on some basis which you all know. So it is a fact that in the North, we have registered rapid decline of poverty levels simply because we came from IDPs.

Back to our villages, production has increased. People are able to grow food for themselves, there is peace and economic activity is picking up. So, we have had almost a dramatic decline from 60 percent to 41 percent. It is a big drop and it is still dropping because last year when I addressed the PRDP conference, my figure was 46 percent but now it is 41.8 percent. So, we are registering overall decline in poverty levels to 19.7 percent which is a great improvement and for which I invite the Opposition to applaud Government for that success. At least you see the good things that Government is doing. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Prime Minister. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have two groups of people; people living with HIV/AIDS and members of the Civil Society Coalition on HIV/AIDS Prevention and Management. They have come to observe the proceedings of Parliament. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Members, I think you are going to force me to start strict implementation of the rules because there is nothing like guidance in our rules. We only have procedure, motions and those things. It is becoming too much guidance, even after you have just guided, guidance comes in. (Laughter)

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that is what happens when people have a lot of confidence in the Chair. But anyway, I rise to seek guidance because when I raised the issue of the disaster in my constituency, the honourable minister was not in the House and right now, I see him in the House and I believe that the people of my constituency deserve at least an answer from Government about the issue that I presented. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was hoping that the minister has already received information because the way we processed it, somebody undertook to inform the minister. So, we are waiting for that process to be complete then the minister will show interest in responding and the Chair will allow the minister to respond.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL - THE JUDICIARY (ADMINISTRATION) BILL, 2014

4.11
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Mr Speaker and my colleagues members of Parliament, I rise to move a motion to introduce a Private Member’s Bill and this motion is moved under rule 11 of our Rules of Procedure.

”WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution and rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognise the rights of a Member to move a Private Member’s Bill;

AND WHEREAS the role of Parliament under Article 79 is to make laws for peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 150 of the Constitution mandates the Parliament of Uganda to make laws relating to the Judiciary and providing for structures, procedures and functions of the Judiciary;

NOTING THAT there is need to improve the administration of justice, efficiency and effectiveness of courts of judicature, strengthen the independence and streamline the administration of the courts of judicature in Uganda;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that this House grants leave to the mover of this motion to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled “The Judiciary Administration Act, 2014” and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.”

Mr Speaker, the draft Bill as required by our Rules of Procedure is hereby attached. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, that is the motion. It is seconded by hon. Magyezi from Igara West, hon. Lilly Adong from Nwoya District and did I see the Member for Katakwi seconding the motion? No. Hon. Tom Alero also seconds the motion. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR OKOT OGONG: Yes. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Constitution of Uganda guarantees protection of law for everyone. The Constitution also prescribes clear principles that the Judiciary must adhere to in exercising judicial authority. These are all clear. The Judiciary must do justice to all irrespective of their status. The Judiciary must also not delay justice. The Judiciary must provide justice expeditiously. The Judiciary must promote alternative forms of dispute resolution. The Judiciary must also administer justice without undue regard to procedural technicalities and the Judiciary must protect and promote the purpose and principles of the Constitution.

Mr Speaker, the Judiciary in Uganda can adequately perform the above mandate when:
    a) There are constitutional and operational guarantees of judicial independence and this is clear to hon. Members of Parliament. 
    b) Sufficient financial resources are predictably and transparently provided to the Judiciary.
    c) Competent judges are transparently appointed, assured security of tenure and provided a living wage.
    d) Judgements can be rendered, enforced and reviewed without danger to the person, family or property of the judges and when discipline within the Bench itself is subject to the rules of the due process.

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, the Judiciary, unlike the Executive and Parliament, has been bogged down by several challenges and the problems of inability of the current Judiciary to dispense justice were summed up in a paper that was presented by Principal Judge, Justice Bamwine. I can sum it up to say as I quote him, “Sufficient financial resources are of particular importance. The capacity of the Judiciary to deliver justice is directly proportional to the resources it has and spends on maintenance, operating expenses and a capital outlay. The Judiciary share in the total national budget, an item for which it is expended, reveals the level of commitment of Government to justice in their country.” 

Whereas our Parliament receives 1.8 percent of the national budget, I want to inform you that the Judiciary gets 0.04 percent and this affects the performance of the Judiciary. 

Aware of this, the Judiciary has continued to suffer from structural challenges, which include the inability of the Judiciary to manage and discipline non-judicial staff and public perception that justice is only for the rich. Hon. Members, you know our people complain about this. There is also heavy backlog build up at all levels of courts and these are not explained. There are also endless judgements of cases and this affects the dispensation of justice to our people. There is also high level of endemic corruption in the Judiciary and acute shortage of staff at all levels of courts. These are the challenges that I have enumerated but there are several. 

It is submitted that the greatest problem in our view has been the absence of the law to operationalise Chapter Eight of the Constitution. This is actually in our Constitution but Parliament has not had time to operationalise Chapter Eight of our Constitution that is the administration of justice and this Bill is intended to cure the defect by proposing the Administration of Justice Bill, 2014.

Hon. Members, the object of this Bill is to operationalise provisions of the Constitution of Uganda relating to the Judiciary, improve administration of justice, improve efficiency and effectiveness of the courts of judicature and also strengthen the independence and streamline the administration of courts of judicature in the country.

Hon. Members, you are aware that as a country, we need a strong structure in the Judiciary. We need effectiveness and efficiency in the Judiciary and therefore this brings me to the importance and urgency of this Bill.

Independence of the Judiciary can be effectively realised if the Judiciary is autonomous especially in respect of finances and personnel. The proper functioning of the Judiciary cannot be undertaken with the current structure of funding and employment. Most Commonwealth jurisdictions have similar legislation. For example, Kenya our neighbour has this law and it has led to a stronger and independent Judiciary in Kenya. Therefore, if Members would buy this argument, I think it is also urgent that we institute our own law so that we can strengthen administration of justice in our country.

It should be noted that independence of Parliament is largely attributed to the passage of the Administration of Parliament Act, which was introduced as a Private Member’s Bill in 1996 and it was passed by Parliament. It is hoped by many that this Bill will lead to the strengthening of the Judiciary. This will ultimately lead to a stronger Government as all the three arms of Government will be able to discharge their mandate without any problem.

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this Parliament grants me leave for the introduction of the Judiciary Administration Bill, 2014 as a Private Member’s Bill. Mr Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The seconder has five minutes.

4.22
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion that this House grants leave to the mover of the motion to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act of Parliament entitled the Judiciary Administration Bill, 2014.

Mr Speaker, I support the motion because it is fully in line with the powers of Parliament to make laws providing for administration, structure procedures and functions of the Judiciary as provided for under Article 150 of our Constitution. 

The principle of checks and balances and separation of powers assumes that the three arms of Government, that is, the Executive, Legislature and Judiciary work together in harmony but are autonomous and independent of each other in exercise of their functions. Article 128 (1) of the Constitution is even more clear on the independence of the Judiciary.

Fundamental aspects of building strong autonomous and efficient institutions such as the Judiciary include the Human Resource Management, there is appointment, transfer, disciplining of the personnel, financial management and financial resource provision, that is provision of adequate predictable and accountable resources including control and dispensing of those resources by the institution; professionalisation of organs of the institution in handling public duty, including research, access to ICT, training, equipment and others.

Mr Speaker, the ongoing debate in the press, the legal fraternity and the general public at the moment point to the need to strengthen the judicial system administration so as to build trust, respect and independence of the Judiciary as an important governance institution in this country, which is charged with dispensing justice and protecting the rule of law.

It is important that we go with the mover because recent events not only justify the need of this Bill but actually, they require Parliament to act quickly.

Parliament cannot sit and watch as the Judiciary is virtually relegated to a department of Government. We cannot sit and watch as the Judiciary administration, its staffing and resourcing leave serious glaring gaps to the detriment of our justice and governance.

Article 128 (3) of the Constitution imposes on us as Parliament a very serious responsibility because it states that all organs and agencies of the State shall accord the court such assistance as may be required to ensure the effectiveness of the courts of law. By enacting this law for Judiciary Administration, we as Parliament shall be doing our duty to put in place the necessary legal framework to ensure the independence and efficiency of the Judiciary.

This we shall do through strengthening its autonomy in administration of its personnel and financial resources.

Finally, to me, the ultimate beneficiary of this law will be the ordinary Ugandan whose right to a fair hearing and justice by an independent and impartial judicial system is protected by Article 28 of our Constitution. 

Therefore, I would like to beg you, colleagues, to support this motion so as to improve and strengthen administration of justice in this country. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Members. I propose the question now for your debate. The motion is that this House grants leave to the hon. Member to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Judiciary Administration Act, 2014.” That is the motion for your debate. Later on, I will put the question to a vote.

4.26
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the import of this motion. The concerns are very legitimate and I also appreciate the activism of my brother, hon. Okot Ogong on the matter. This matter, the Administration of the Judiciary Bill has a bit of background. Just recently, a Bill went to Cabinet for discussion. It was debated but deferred, pending the resolution of some issues, which came up which were of a constitutional nature and we needed to harmonise our understanding of the Bill vis-à-vis the Constitution.

When we went back in the guidelines, we thought that we should engage stakeholders in this matter. We engaged the Judiciary, and in any case, even before going to Cabinet, they had been engaged; so, much of the draft came from them.  We engaged Parliament and we formed a task force involving the Judiciary, some Members of Parliament and ourselves in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. That team is headed by the Justice of the Supreme Court, Justice Jotham Tumwesigye.

Even yesterday, we had a meeting on this same Bill, together with some members of Parliament. Tomorrow, we are interacting with the Prime Minister and thereafter, I do not think we shall exceed a month before we come with a harmonised Bill on all issues to this Parliament.

I would encourage the mover of the motion and the seconder, even tomorrow, to join us in that team so that we strengthen the government position on this matter because after all, my brother knows that he could also easily face some challenges because, for instance, he is talking about a percentage of GDP that the Judiciary gets if he has got to bring it. That could also touch on some constitutional limitations in the Constitution, Article 93 and so on.

So, the best would be to work together since we have all come together as a team, to come here as soon as possible, with a Bill that has everyone’s support.

Thank you very much.

4.30
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the learned Attorney-General and apparently, what is at stake from his perception is there is already a process being chaired by Justice Tumwesigye, which could easily address the concerns of the movers of the motion.

But whereas I buy into his guidance, particularly, on Article 93, in respect to whether the Bill has financial implications, that should not stop and hold the hands of Parliament and a Member from proceeding with the Bill. 

That consultation can go on and in any case, even if there is a parallel arrangement, it can be merged at an appropriate stage but I think the movers of the motion are clear that the matter is more urgent now than ever before. In any case, what would be the harm? The learned Attorney-General has not told us what the harm is with the motion to have a Private Member’s Bill on the administration of the Judiciary.

He has not told us what harm there is. So, I would encourage the Attorney-General in this respect to allow a member proceed with the motion; let it be carried, after all, he shall be given assistance and at that stage, maybe, if there are lacunas, if there are issues to be harmonised, it can be done at that stage rather than Parliament killing a motion that is good and well-intended.

Secondly, if there are those issues that were not addressed by the Member, the ministry can still take over, it can still take up the Bill. It is not fatal at that stage.

But we, as members of Parliament, are agreeable that we need to have a strong Judiciary; we need to have the separation of powers and we either do it now or relegate it to history. Once an opportunity has arisen by hon. Okot Ogong, we should not lose it. If there are issues to be added, they can be added. But let us not appear to be throwing out the baby with the bath water. 

It is important now that we allow a Member proceed with the motion. Those nitty gritties can be added on in the process and after all, this motion is overdue. It is a command of the Constitution and I think it is to everybody’s wish and interest that we have a strong Judiciary, a strong Legislature and a strong Executive.

That is how you can have the balance. Short of that, Mr Speaker, we shall be condemned that once an opportunity arose, we did not respond to it. If there are those concerns, they can be addressed along the way but let us have this Bill and let us stand with the honourable member. I support the motion.

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.33
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. At the moment, as Parliament, we are required to pronounce ourselves on grant of leave. Why am I saying this? One time, we had an issue to do with the operationalisation of the Road Fund Act and you directed the Ministry of Finance to produce the draft Bill because they said they were trying to amend Section 14 in two weeks. Hon. Aston Kajara was in this House and he confirmed that within two weeks, it would be done. Actually, I saw him looking at me when I started speaking – but nothing has been produced to-date.

One time, we again moved a motion for the introduction of a Private Member’s Bill on the law on the minimum wage and we got leave. They said the same thing – that they were also doing the same thing and what was required was just collaboration. But it is very difficult even to get in touch with them. I have been talking to the Minister but he has been telling me most of the time that he is on duty. I realised that for us at the moment – I will seek the indulgence of the House to support the granting of leave so that it is up to the Member because he needs a certificate of financial implications to cooperate with the Minister so that we know that we are on the way instead of us killing this. 

If it was not for this motion, the Attorney-General would not have briefed us on what they are doing. As a result of this, he has been prompted to tell us how they have been having meetings and so on.

Having said that, I wish to support the grant of leave. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.34
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think there is no doubt in anybody’s mind that this particular piece of legislation is long overdue. Government and backbenchers do agree that this law is long overdue. I am privileged that I entered this Parliament the same day with the Attorney-General; at that time, he was not the Attorney-General but a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

But from 2001, this committee where the Attorney-General sat then, has been demanding for this law, year after year. Whenever the Judiciary appears before this committee, they are asking about this law. Why? This is because there are very big challenges within the Judiciary due to the absence of this law.

Therefore, my view is that this is not about competition or taking credit but rather doing what we are supposed to do; it is about doing what the Constitution commands. Why should a government that has failed and/or neglected to bring this law since 1995 object at this moment? It is extremely ridiculous. If Government has an input, this is the time; this Bill will eventually be referred to the legal and parliamentary affairs committee, where Government with these beautiful ideas they have but have sat on for the last many years, can bring and we incorporate them in the law. What is wrong with that?

The constitution framers envisaged that at one point, if Government is unable or unwilling to bring a particular legislation, a private Member is empowered under the Constitution to do it. And that is what hon. Okot Ogong is doing. To suffocate hon. Okot Ogong today is to render this particular constitutional provision redundant – that whenever a Member comes up with a Private Member’s Bill, Government claims that they are considering bringing it up and so he or she should wait. There is nothing to wait for.

Mr Speaker, I have been a victim of this sort of thing. It took me a full year to draft the Access to Information Bill. I did research all-over the world but when I tabled the motion for leave, the minister stood up and said, “I am taking over this law.” And hon. Nsaba Buturo had the audacity to remove my name and sign that he is the mover of that Bill. You can imagine; word-for-word – a research that took me a whole year – and the minister removed my name, put his and said he was tabling the Bill for first reading. I think this is the kind of thing we must discourage. If Government has been doing research, let them come and enrich this particular piece of legislation. 

I support the motion. (Applause)

4.39
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Okot Ogong for coming up with the motion. I also thank the seconders of the motion. This Bill is very important and all of us agree that it should have come yesterday. 

Therefore, I will not spend time going into its merits. I will only address myself to the concerns raised by the Attorney-General. While he is right to inform us that some work is being done by the Executive – but Mr Speaker you know that our rules prohibit us from legislating in anticipation. So, what is before us is the motion moved by hon. Okot Ogong. While the Attorney-General has given us useful information, the rules clearly command that once Parliament has granted leave, then the affected department of Government should assist the Member to improve the Bill. So, there is no contradiction. 

I would like to urge Members to support the motion by granting leave and then hon. Okot Ogong will be assisted by the Attorney-General in improving the Bill. Then he will get the certificate and we shall proceed. So, let us not stifle the opportunity the Member has brought to have this Bill handled by this Parliament. And I am sure the Attorney-General will assist the Member after we have granted leave and then the Member will come back with an improved Bill which he has already drafted.

Mr Speaker, I have moved Private Members’ Bills before – both in the Eighth Parliament and the Ninth Parliament when I moved the recent Tobacco Control Bill. I now want your procedural guidance on the issue of issuing a certificate of financial implications. This is because as much as I am aware of Article 93 of the Constitution, the officials in the Ministry of Finance have taken it upon themselves to usurp the power to grant a member permission to move the Bill. 

My understanding is that the law requires the Ministry of Finance to study the Bill, which a Member has brought – whether Private or Government Bill – and assess the financial implications and gives a certificate. In any case, it is Parliament that appropriates and which will assess the suitability or non-suitability of that Bill. But what is happening now is that the technocrats object to Members raising Private Members’ Bills.

Like hon. Katuntu has said, some of us take a lot of time to carry out research but when I moved a motion here, seeking leave of this House, to introduce the Tobacco Control Bill, the Ministry of Finance had basically refused for a period of two years. It had to take me a protracted struggle with the Ministry of Finance officials to eventually give me a certificate but they are still not willing.

 Therefore, I do not know, Mr Speaker, how your office can assist Members of Parliament to get these certificates once they have been given leave. It is a problem even when the Bill is drafted in a manner that does not offend the Constitution or any other law. You will face resistance – not from the political leaders but the technocrats from the Ministry of Finance because they think they have the power to either allow you proceed or not. So, we need the Speaker to guide the Ministry of Finance on how it handles and assists Members to acquire certificates of financial implications.

I thank the Member and urge the House to grant leave so that the Member can proceed and he will be assisted by the Attorney-General as he improves the Bill. Thank you. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Before I let other Members to speak to this motion, on this issue of certificates of financial implications, I would like to say that that is just a creation of the Budget Act. It is not a Constitutional requirement; it is the Budget Act that creates that provision. And the reason is because there were laws that were being passed but they could not be implemented because they had not been anticipated with their implementation not being provided for in the budget. So, the Budget Act made a provision for that, that as you are presenting the Bill, it must be accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. This certificate is simply to say that yes, this Bill will have a financial implication and this implication will be taken care of in this budgetary provision. Or that, yes, this Bill will have financial implications which will not be taken care of this financial year; it can be considered in the next financial year. 

That is the explanation so that as we talk about the commencement clauses and others, you will know that the law will not come into force this financial year; it will only come into force the following financial year. It is not supposed to prohibit the process. (Applause)

So, the explanation from the Ministry of Finance should be yes, this Bill will have financial implications, which can be accommodated in this budget or in the next budget. That is the clarification that Parliament needs, that when you are talking about commencement, then you can say we will make it commence by a statutory instrument. That means the minister or the person responsible for the Bill will have known that there is now money for the Bill, then they can commence it. So, that is what it is supposed to achieve, really. 

So, if the people at the Ministry of Finance are taking this as something else, they are acting in error and to borrow the hon. John Jen-Lukyamuzi’s words, they are masquerading in the law. (Laughter)

MR KATUNTU: Guidance, Mr Speaker, on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just said something about the issue of guidance. I would prefer someone asking for procedure. Okay, let me have Kanungu.

4.45
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion by hon. Felix Okot-Ogong. I know that the objective of this Parliament is to make laws that can bring about peace and good governance of our country. So, I believe that by the time somebody comes with a Private Member’s Bill, they have already discovered there is a loophole somewhere.
 
So, it is paramount that leave is granted to enable the Member present the Bill to address that loophole, so that all that is not going well can be addressed. I support the granting of leave to him so that this law is brought to address weaknesses and where the Attorney-General becomes uncomfortable, we will see how to handle that from here. Otherwise, we have to ensure this Bill comes here to address the problems in the Judiciary.  Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter from Bugweri.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, it has been overtaken by events. So, I withdraw.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the issue is simple. Do we give leave to the Member to present a Private Members’ Bill or not? We are not discussing the Bill now. Attorney-General, we are not discussing the Bill. Can this House grant the honourable member leave to present it or not, in which case, he joins the cluster and cadre of people who will look at that text before it comes to us in this House? Yes, learned Attorney-General, can we grant the Member leave or not? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MR RUHINDI: You can hear – it seems the referendum is yes. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, we have been working tirelessly on this matter. Notice, assuming it is granted – and this is for guidance – would there be anything in law that can stop Government from, for instance, introducing the work, in the form of a Bill, it has been working on say, tomorrow or the next day before the private member brings his?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what is going to happen is that if we grant the Member leave? It means – because they have a text that has been attached to the motion – you now look at that text together since you have said that you also have interests in this Bill. You can agree or disagree on some parts but you can even agree on who introduces it. The private Member may come back to the House that “whereas you granted me leave, but now we have agreed that Government should introduce the Bill.” That will still be procedurally correct. (Applause)

So, go and do your negotiations and adjustments on the text and if the honourable agrees – but the House will be interested in the timeframe within which this matter will be completed. You said something about within a month from the government side. So, we are going to grant leave but that this Bill should be in this House in one month’s time.

So, whether it will be introduced by you after consultations with the Member or by the private Member himself, we know that the House should expect the Judiciary Administration Bill, 2014 in one month’s time.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, when a private Member comes with his initiative, this House should not condone a practice where Government comes up to undermine that effort; no. We should not condone it because by the time a Member comes, as I said before, to this House, that Member must have been doing research and evidence has been adduced. What is Government’s problem with this?

The point of procedure is: the law allows them to take over such Bills if they so wish. But even then, that should be in good faith. If a Member has come up with their Bill and Government thinks they have other relevant ideas, what is wrong with them coming to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, move amendments to enrich that Bill?

So, I really do not know how we are proceeding because I thought we would grant the Member leave and whether Government comes in two weeks or three years, we do not mind because we will already be having business before us. The business will be that motion. The speculation of the learned Attorney-General, with all due respect, should not be entertained.

Whenever the Attorney-General feels they have some useful information or research done, let them present that to the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, what we are discussing now is a motion seeking leave granting the Member permission to present a Private Member’s Bill. It is not yet a Bill; we are not yet debating the Bill. And the same rules say that upon granting the Member this leave, the Member will be entitled to full support from the government in the preparation of the final text of the Bill. That is the procedure. 

The Member has no capacity to go to all those details – that is what the rules at least anticipate, that the Member will need assistance and that assistance must be given from our Department of Legislative Services or from the First Parliamentary Counsel, which is a Department of Government but the Member will have the right granted by this House to have those facilities given to him.  

Therefore, I am now saying that in that process, they can consult but that does not stop the Member from coming back to the House with the Bill for first reading because the leave will have been granted. That is the issue.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Mr Speaker, we should agree with your wise ruling. This, to me, is an opportunity for the mover and Government to come together and sort out all the differences, then go through Cabinet quickly and that is it. This Bill is a catalyst. Should the government be sleeping, then it is now - (Laughter) - we should agree. We must ask the mover and the government to work together. I accept your ruling. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedure I am seeking, building on what hon. Katuntu has raised regarding what the Attorney-General asked from you, I understood that the  Attorney-General says, if Government brings a Bill next week on this matter, what happens - a similar Bill on this specific issue? 

We would like to get information on the procedural way to move because you said we should consult; we do not know whether you actually meant that now that we have considered this matter, Government has no option but to consult with a private Member. If they agree that Government can take it over, it is fine. If Government enriches the work of a private Member, then that is also fine. However, as far as this matter is concerned now, our eyes are looking at hon. Felix Okot Ogong to handle this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Correct. That is the position. There is no other position.

MR AYENA: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity. From what I have heard, it would appear there is no mutual disagreement between the two positions. The only point of contention is the first mover. It is just about motion. I will give you a narrative of the law of motion. 

When a bus or a vehicle starts moving, and you want to jump into that vehicle, the law of motion demands that you should not face the direction from which the vehicle is coming. The law of motion is that you run to the same direction it is moving and then you wait for that split second when you are moving at the same speed with the vehicle and you jump into the vehicle. (Laughter) Otherwise, the motion of the vehicle moving will throw you out of it. What we are telling the Attorney-General is that the command of the Constitution is that when the Constitution provides for the making or operationalisation of some laws, you are supposed to be proactive. 

At the same time, the Constitution also enables Members of this Parliament in case the Attorney-General, for that matter the government, sits on their laurels to move a Private Members’ Bill. So, in this case, what in effect we are saying by way of procedure is that the vehicle is already in motion, the only thing that the Attorney-General can do, if they want to be heard on the matter, is to join the vehicle in motion. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, make sure that in that flip of a second, you are found relevant. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had thought that the honourable member was raising a procedural issue for the Speaker to take a decision or to make a ruling on it. But he has now even ruled on the subject. (Laughter) He raised it and ruled on it. That is exactly what we have been saying all along.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, most of the points have been covered except that I urge Members that the motion should not be shot at using technicalities or whatever it is that we move together and see that the law is passed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We move together at the same speed.
 
MR BYABAGAMBI: We can even jump in or they can get out and we get in. Actually, I was very much amazed by his knowledge of the 3rd Newton Law, or the law of motion. But at the same time, what I want to put out is that when the Attorney-General or the Cabinet was doing its work, consultation and making a draft and the Attorney- General brought it to the Cabinet, he was not aware that hon. Okot Ogong was going to move the Private Member’s Bill. At the same time, when he was doing it, I am very much sure that hon. Okot Ogong was not aware of what the Attorney-General was doing.

Therefore, there should not be any –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister who is a Leader of Government Business has given a formal and final position on Government side. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister to continue speaking as if he is the Leader of Government Business in this House when the Leader of Government Business has finalised everything? Is he in order?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I truly would not like to assume anything because in politics anything is possible. He may be the new Prime Minister. He could be the Leader of Government Business. So, I do not know. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling but what I wanted to say is that hon. Kantuntu gave a very valid point.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I think you are taking us back. We have agreed on the principles. what happens after the Motion? We have agreed on that. Let the Attorney-General make the final statement and we take a decision.

5.00
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, in agreement with the summation of the Deputy Leader of Government Business and in conjunction to your ruling, I am happy my brother, hon. Ayena has brought to our attention the law of motion. 

But I thought I would also give you the law of common sense by giving you an example of a two-headed snake. I do not know how many of us have seen a two-headed snake. This two-headed snake moves to the well to have water and extremely thirsty, and it is intercepted by a twig; one head this way and one head that way, but because they believe they have the same capacity to think and move at the same time, each one wants to take its direction. Meanwhile, they cannot agree on the direction and they remain on the twig; mind you, they have one body, two heads. At the end of the day, the snake collapses of thirst. The idea is this; the common saying that two heads are always better than one sometimes depends on how those two heads are utilised. 

What I am moving towards is that this idea of interaction and agreeing on things which can be done and moving together is the best way forward. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will put the question to the motion that this House grants leave to the honourable member to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Judiciary Administration Bill, 2014”. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leave granted. Congratulations. (Applause)

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO BORROW UP TO $120 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE THE UPGRADING OF TIRINYI-PALLISA-KUMI AND PALLISA-KAMONKOLI ROAD

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, we would like you to take a short time on this, please. Fifteen minutes.

5.03
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to register my appreciation to your office, the Clerk’s office, honourable colleagues and the technical staff of Parliament for the support they have rendered the Committee on National Economy for the last two terms of five years that I have been a chairperson of this committee. I pray that the same support will be given to our incoming leaders. I sincerely appreciate you all.

On behalf of the Committee on National Economy, I would like to present the report on the proposal by Government to borrow $ 120 million from the Islamic Development Bank for financing the upgrading of the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it $120 million?

MR MUKITALE: Yes, it is $120 million.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the Order Paper is saying $12 million.

MR MUKITALE: No, it is $120 million for Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Kamonkoli road projects. This project serves the people of Uganda in the regions of Bukedi, Bugisu, Teso and even the neighbours in Busoga are beneficiaries. It is also a short-cut when you are going to Karamoja and beyond.

The committee studied and made reference to the following documents: the Ministry of Finance brief on loan requests, Ministry of Works and Transport brief, Financing Agreement between the Republic of Uganda and IDB and the Project Implementation Plan. I will read the lower part of the background to the project.

The 111.25 kilometre Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Kamonkoli road is located in Eastern Uganda and is part of the 21,000 kilometres of national road network. It connects Tirinyi, Pallisa and Mbale towns to Kumi and Soroti and Pallisa towns to Kamonkoli.

The Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi road is 67.18 kilometres long while the Pallisa-Kamonkoli road is 44.07 kilometres long. Tirinyi is a growing town on the busy Iganga-Mbale highway to Kumi. The current poor conditions and limited stability of existing Eastern gravel road link has resulted into considerable high vehicle operating costs and economic losses. Therefore, upgrading of this road to a better standard would result in economic development in the project area and surrounding areas.

On the next page, is the project linkage to country strategy. 

Project objective

In 5.1, I will just summarise the components. Of the four components, the biggest component of the project is the civil works, which you will find later in a table. Component (b) is consultancy services, component (c) is land acquisition and resettlement and component (d) is operations and project management support.

In 6, project cost and financing arrangement - The total project cost is estimated at $ 162.45 million equivalent to Shs 419.121 billion and will be financed by IDB and Uganda Government counterpart funding. Financing from IDB will amount to the $ 120 million equivalent to Shs 309.6 billion and is to cover 73.9 per cent of the total project cost.

Government of Uganda will finance 26.1 per cent of the project cost amounting to $ 42.45 million equivalent to the Shs 109.521 billion and will cover, among others, land acquisition, design review and part of the contingency as the Government of Uganda counterpart funding.

The financing details

The table below summarises what we have just given above. In table 1 and table 2, you can clearly see that civil works takes the biggest component of the budget and that is one of the concerns of the committee. Also, on page six, we have the loan terms and conditions right from (b). Forty percent of the required land has been acquired for the first year of the project implementation. Two, 55 percent of the required land has been acquired for the second year project and three, five percent of required land has been acquired for the third year. So, the three-year phased land acquisition is provided for as a condition and the committee reports to that effect.

You may continue with all procurement to be conducted in IDB procedures and then, we can go to number 8 of page seven: project institutional implementation arrangement and that takes us to the observations and recommendations, which I think I can do in a few minutes.

Prioritisation of the project

The committee noted Government’s increased commitment to developing and maintaining a national road network that will facilitate people’s day to day activities, drive economic growth through improving connectivity between producing areas and markets in the country and further boost agricultural exports and also meet the needs of road users now and in the future.

However, the committee was not satisfied with the criteria used by UNRA when selecting the priority national roads to be intervened on. The committee observed that there are a number of other key pending national roads in the Eastern region with huge potential to support Uganda’s economic growth that require urgent upgrading from gravel to bituminous standards. These include Musiita-Lumino, Busia-Majanji, Mbale-Bubulo-Lwakhakha, Namagumba-Budadiri-Nalugugu, Kamuli-Bukungu, Muyembe-Nakapiripirit and Moroto-Kotido roads.

The committee recommends that UNRA should clearly state the criteria used when selecting priority road projects to be intervened. UNRA should also develop a framework under which equitable distribution of interventions in non-priority areas should be considered.

The committee strongly recommends that other pending road projects in the Eastern region that are part of the trading corridor should be considered by UNRA for rehabilitation and maintenance.

Mr Speaker and colleagues, this was further complicated by non-take-off of the contractor financing of the 19 plus roads. The minister should explain later.

Two, delays in completion of road projects. The committee observed that despite the increased funding to the road sector over time, fiscal outputs have remained dismal as projects are not executed in a timely manner thus raising a lot of anxiety among beneficiaries and leaving them frustrated. The sector is still grappling with the problem of delayed completion of road construction projects, which is attributed to several factors ranging from inadequate capacity of local contractors, short falls and delayed release of funds, fluctuation of fuel prices leading to high construction costs, delayed completion of design reviews, among others.

The committee, therefore, recommends that initiatives towards reducing problems of delayed completion of road construction projects be fast-tracked by Government. Capacity building of the procurement unit with the view of reducing procurement delays should be urgently considered in order to curb road construction delays and lack of absorption for projects. 

Government should strictly ensure that counterpart funding for projects is also provided on time.

Observation three, on maintenance backlog: The committee observed that there has been a maintenance backlog on the national road network over a period of time. This has necessitated a need for additional funding from medium to long term for maintenance of the national road network especially upgrading of the 10,000kms roads taken over from the districts in 2010 to national roads standards.

The committee recommends that government expedites the envisaged legal reforms to allow the collection of direct remittances of road user charges especially fuel levied to Uganda Road Fund account as this will contribute to availability of additional funds for maintenance of the national road network.

In the interlude, the committee recommends that Government should increase the fund for maintenance of the national road network, especially in tackling the very bad spots on the roads to make motorable.

Mr Speaker, we hope this will be taken care of in the next budget, not specifically for this road, but the national outlook of the road sector.

Observation four, land and property compensation: The committee observed the continued non-availability of some parts of weigh leaves for road projects due to land compensation issues. This has been partly attributed to late release of Government of Uganda counterpart funding meant for land compensation for right of way acquisition of project affected persons.

Although identification and verification of projects affected persons is always done, cases of residents claiming to have been left out are still cropping up in a number of road construction projects. There are cases of residents who get cleared but refuse to move off the compensated properties claiming that they were undervalued.

Such cases force the contractors to skip work on some sections, thereby interrupting the work schedule since it requires movement of equipment and workers to the sections that are free of encumbrances.

The committee recommends that Government ensures that valuation and actual compensations for land is made in time so that land acquisition does not delay the implementation of activities of projects.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that UNRA should explore the idea of putting road reserve markers immediately after compensation has been done prior to even construction. In addition, all properties that are within the road reserve should be immediately removed and road reserves freed of such structures. UNRA should also process land titles for areas along road projects that have been acquired in case where there is refusal to leave premises that have been compensated.

This is a case of what UTCL is doing, with the weigh-leaves for transmission lines.

UNRA should also ensure that its road reserves enforcement team is monitored and evaluated to ensure that it performs its role.

For many times, we have been raising the concern of this constitutional encumbrance of adequate prior and prompt compensation which we found an encumbrance in all projects, not only in roads but also in energy and other areas.

Observation five, inter-ministerial agency coordination: The committee observed that continued lack of coordination between ministries, departments and agencies as evidenced by the many electricity power lines along the project roads that are likely to be affected and may call for the re-allocation for the electricity power lines in the future, an expense that would have been avoided.

The committee recommends that Government strengthens coordination capacities between ministries, departments and agencies in the implementation of the projects in order to minimise wastage; an inter-ministerial approach, not only roads but also water and energy so that we have a joint plan and stop discontinued cutting of the ICT people and tomorrow NWSC and another day, another ministry.

Observation six, community involvement: the committee was concerned that the community was not adequately informed about the project. In this regard, the committee noted that the involvement of the community in implementation of this road project will make them understand and appreciate the likely impact of the road construction over their livelihood.

The committee recommends that in the context of re-settlement, activities along the project road UNRA should ensure re-distribution of opportunities to project affected persons where applicable.

Observation seven, impact of the project on vulnerable groups: The committee further noted that likely impacts of this project on potentially vulnerable groups according to the project feasibility study out of the households to be affected by the project, 10 per cent were headed by females, 15.9 per cent were elderly headed households, 5.6 per cent were child-headed households and four per cent were headed by people with disabilities. 

On the overall, vulnerable persons living along the project roads consists 36 per cent, about 1,367 of total number of project affected persons out of the 3,790. 

The committee recommends that UNRA ensures that the identified vulnerable groups are provided with special attention of livelihood support in order to ensure that their status does not get worse than pre-project period.

Observation eight, as I come towards the conclusion, supervision and contract management: The committee further observes the slow improvement in supervision and contract management by UNRA, which has been attributed to understaffing, leading to a high project staff UNRA attachment ratio to project engineer handling more than two projects - these staffing gaps continue to impact on the effective supervision of projects due to staffing gaps.

A number of projects continue to be supervised by hired consultants in some circumstances. There is also laxity among UNRA and consultants who have not taken their supervision responsibility seriously.

Mr Speaker, you are aware UNRA for some time has not had a substantive ED and the board is just being put in place so, that would have been part of the policy and managerial oversight. The committee recommends that UNRA expedites the recruitment of more staff and further ensures that consultants take supervision of road projects very seriously. UNRA staff and consultants that fail to take their responsibility seriously should be made individually culpable to losses arising there from.

The committee noted government’s 2002 transport policy and strategy hinges on the promotion of less costly, efficient and reliable transport services as the means of providing effective support to increase agricultural and industrial production, trade, tourism, social and administrative services. 

The upgrading of the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Kamonkoli road will improve by eliminating the traffic obstacles and also foster new development and employment opportunities for the local population in the entire Eastern region.

Therefore, the committee supports and recommends to this House to approve the request by Government of Uganda to borrow $120 million from IDB for financing Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa- Kamonkoli road. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, on behalf of the committee. Hon. Members, you recall that the Minister of Finance presented a proposal to this House, a proposal by the Government of Uganda to borrow up to $120 million from the IDB to finance the upgrading of the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa- Kamonkoli road.

They presented it to this House and it was forwarded to the committee. Now, I propose the question to you, that the report of the committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow be adopted by this House. That is what I propose for your debate. Any debate or I put the question? (Laughter)

Hon. Members, then, we will take one minute each; is that okay? Okay, two minutes because we have very many people and if we use three minutes, it will come up to two hours. So, let us do two minutes each.

5.23
MR KEZEKIA MBOGO (Independent, Budaka County, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for bringing us this report, which we have been waiting for. I support the motion. We have been waiting for Tirinyi-Pallisa Road for a long time. It has been there but when we heard that the motion was coming, we unanimously decided to support the motion. (Laughter)

So, I wanted to move the motion that let the question be put without any amendment. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion has been seconded. When a motion of this nature is moved, the matter for the Speaker to handle is to process the motion. And the motion has been moved that the question be put. I will now put the question to that motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question to the motion that the Report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal of the Government of Uganda to borrow up to $120 million from the Islamic Development Bank to Finance the Upgrading of the Tirinyi-Pallisa-Kumi and Pallisa-Kamonkoli Road be adopted by this House.

(Question put and agreed to.

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, Mr Chairman. Let us have the next item. (Applause)

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF A SUMMARY OF REPORTS OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON ITS VISIT TO UGANDA’S MISSIONS ABROAD BETWEEN JULY 2010 AND NOVEMBER 2013

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have ten minutes.

5.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Dr Sam Okuonzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the interest of time, I will just focus on observations and recommendations.

The mandate of the Committee on Foreign Affairs covers two broad areas: the first one is missions abroad and the other one is bilateral, multilateral and inter-governmental relations. In order to perform this function, with respect to the missions abroad, the committee paid working visits to Uganda’s missions in London, Cairo, Nairobi, Washington and several other cities that we recorded in the reports. 

These visits were made between July 2010 and November 2013, a period spanning about four years. And each visit has its own report – we actually have about 20 reports, some of which are on thematic issues.

This report is a synthesis of these separate reports and we have a larger version called the amalgamated report, which I would like to lay on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the amalgamated report of the committee. (Laughter)

DR OKUONZI: I will go straight to the findings, which are divided into two groups – there are general findings and specific findings. The general findings cover common issues that we found in all these places. And the first one is on diplomatic protocol and consular relations.

We found that despite the missions being underfunded, they were doing a good job and were liaising very well with the respective governments, establishing good relations with the counterpart institutions abroad. They also provide good consular services to Ugandans and non-Ugandans who go for official visits to these missions.

The committee commends the Uganda’s missions abroad for the good work they are doing and urges them to work even harder to improve Uganda’s image abroad.

The second issue is about the welfare of foreign service officers. The foreign service officers are grossly underfunded and we found a general outcry on the poor service conditions that they were facing.

The committee recommends that foreign service officers be facilitated at least once a year to visit their families. This is one of the issues they raised. And that the foreign service officers that live with their spouses be given permission to find employment for them.

Education allowance given to foreign service officers is small and should be paid in full and promptly – because it is already very small! 

The salaries for these officers should also be reviewed and brought in line with the United Nations schedule of compensation in line with the cost of living in different cities around the world.

Posting of foreign service officers should take cognizance of the school going children, the curriculum and the school term periods. A vote in training for foreign service officers and heads of missions in foreign languages should be provided. A lot of difficulty was expressed with many of our officers abroad who do not know the language of the people where they live.

The Ministry of Finance should provide funds for education allowance and make sure that they receive it timely and promptly to enable the children of Foreign Service officers to acquire quality education.

The second issue is on imbalance in the foreign service. The committee appreciates the posting of heads of missions and other Foreign Service officers to Uganda’s missions abroad. The committee is, however, concerned that the majority of the heads of missions are political appointees. It noted that only two out of 33 heads of missions are career diplomats. In the same vein, 30 per cent of Foreign Service officers in other ranks are political appointees.

The committee recommends that the appointment of career diplomats and political appointees should be revised at a ratio of 40 to 60 per cent. This is just an arbitrary ratio that we thought would be appropriate and it is open to debate.

Relations among Foreign Service officers and their behaviour

Some mission staff face strife infighting, lack of cooperation from colleagues. The cases in point are the Foreign Service officers in Washington and Ankara missions and now in Cairo, Egypt.

The committee recommends that Ministry of Foreign Affairs looks into the staffing and carry out vigorous induction programme for Foreign Service officers before they are posted.

Job descriptions

The committee observed that staff do not have well-spelt out schedules of work, leading to duplication and redundancy of some of the officers.

The committee recommends that job descriptions of all mission staff be uniform across board and should be determined by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

Heads of missions should draw out well-spelt work schedules for the mission staff.

State of Uganda’s Missions properties

Uganda properties abroad in which missions are accommodated are typically located in very prime areas but they have long records of poor maintenance and repairs. In some cases, such as in Brussels, Ottawa and Dar-es-Salaam, buildings are dilapidated and some have been condemned.

Budgets to renovate and repair such properties are typically ignored by the Ministry of Finance. However, the committee notes with appreciation, the welcome attempts that have been made to renovate the Ottawa Chancery at Shs 1.6 billion, which has now been secured and availed to the mission for that reconstruction. We are very grateful to see this development.

The committee recommends that Uganda takes better care of its properties abroad and the situations where buildings are due for repair or condemned should not arise.

The committee further recommends that part of the Non Tax Revenue (NTR) be used specifically to finance the maintenance and acquisition of Uganda’s properties abroad.

The government should provide funds for developing plots that have been allocated to Uganda’s missions abroad and such cases include plots in Dar-es-Salaam, Pretoria, Juba and Addis Ababa.

Utilisation of Non Tax Revenue

NTR is collected mainly from issuance of visas and other travel documents by missions. The funds are banked on NTR accounts and remitted to the Consolidated Fund in the Bank of Uganda. However, missions have consistently requested the Ministry of Finance to allow them utilise NTR at source to enable them to fulfil the mandate.

The committee recommends that the ministry should create a retention account for all NRT collected by Uganda’s missions abroad so that this money can be used for maintenance and acquisition of properties abroad.

Financing of missions

Missions are greatly constrained and under-funded; Moreover, the novation system of accounting presents a big challenge because the moment some money is allocated to an item and it is used up, no more reallocations can be done, however dire the situation may be until permission is sought from the Permanent Secretary to the Treasury, which response does not usually arrive timely.

The committee recommends that $10,000 be allocated to each mission to organise Independence celebrations as we found that this was one of the main items not funded.

Implementation of the Missions Charter

The purpose of Uganda’s missions abroad is to promote and strengthen friendly relations between Government and the people of Uganda and the governments of those countries.

The strategic objective is to promote trade, investment, technology transfer, mobilise resources for development and to promote Uganda’s good image abroad and to promote regional and international peace and security.

Some missions have, despite resource constraints, met stakeholders, organised exhibitions and generally, made an effort to promote Uganda’s image abroad. However, the missions could do much more to implement the charter if they were better funded.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in general and the missions abroad specifically should be funded to enable them perform better than they are doing.

Ugandans in the Diaspora

Ugandans in the Diaspora represent a significant population in North America alone because this is where we met a good number of them. This population is estimated by the Diaspora themselves – and I want you to compare with what the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has said a few hours ago – to be two million including, first, second, third and now, fourth generation.

Around the world, there could be up to 10 million Ugandans estimated by the Diaspora themselves and not by the World Bank. Many Ugandan communities abroad are organised into associations and distinct groups, usually establish relations with one another and to link culturally, economically and politically with mother Uganda.

Most Ugandans in the Diaspora have gone there to look for jobs, better life but a sizeable number comprises of political refugees. Most Ugandans in the Diaspora that the committee met do non-professional jobs. That is why they are unable to remit the money upon which the World Bank made its assessment. A sizeable number of Ugandans that the committee met in form of meetings such as the UNA are professionals and entrepreneurs.

The issues that they raised include: dual-citizenship – where they said that they want to register both as Ugandans and citizens of those countries. But they cited $50 per person per entry to Uganda and $470 to regain Uganda’s citizenship as a major block.

They also decried the lack of incentives such as competitive salary, tax holidays and availability of land to attract them to transfer skills and bring investment into Uganda.

They typically cited low salaries in Uganda and abnormal salary differences – citing the example of the difference between the salary of an Executive Director in a Government agency and that of a Professor in a Government University, which is 15 times more for the Executive Director.

The Diaspora are concerned about the rampant corruption in Uganda, citing the recent case of corruption in the Office of the Prime Minister.

They also raised concerns about State House scholarships and economic imbalance in Uganda, both regional and vertical. They further raised issues of economic development around the country.

The committee recommends that missions should interact more with Ugandans in the Diaspora. We found that there were no serious attempts by missions to interact with people in the Diaspora.

Furthermore, the missions should encourage Ugandans abroad to register with them physically or online. We found that most of the people living in the Diaspora were fearful of coming to the missions. Maybe, most of them are illegal there so, they could be encouraged to register online. 

The mission should also ensure that they take efforts to estimate the number of Ugandans living in those countries and we, of course, had this afternoon a very poor estimate of the number of Diaspora abroad. The Government should put in place incentives to attract Ugandans abroad to invest in Uganda.

The committee recommends further that the Government puts in place incentives and a system to enable Ugandans to participate in elections. The committee recommends that Government should expedite the Diaspora policy, which will go a long way in addressing most of the challenges faced by the Diaspora community abroad.

Management of students’ scholarship

A number of missions have mobilised scholarships for Ugandan students; these include Cuba, Canada, and Russia. The Canada mission has lobbied for undergraduate long term scholarship to study Medicine in Cuba and currently, there are 22 Ugandan students in Cuba on these scholarships. In Russia, Uganda has lost and continued to lose scholarships offered to Ugandans due to lack of interest or poor management and advertisement done here in Uganda.

Initially, the Russian Government offered 10 scholarships per year. These have reduced to seven, then five and now they are only three scholarships given to Ugandans every year because they were not taken up by Ugandans. On the loss of Russian scholarships offered to Uganda, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Education take up the matter urgently and ensure this loss does not happen. 

Further, the management of scholarship schemes should be transparent and should be regionally balanced.

Promoting Uganda’s tourism abroad

Just to say that generally the tourism promotion effort is wanting and the case in point in Ottawa is that some effort that has been made by the mission staff to organise familiarisation trips to Uganda for Canadians has taken place, but this should be made in all the missions around the world. 

In Uganda, there is low investment in tourism compared to other countries in the region. So, it really does not auger very well in attracting tourists back here in Uganda. Annually, for example, Uganda invests only $300,000 on tourism. But our neighbour Rwanda invests $5 million, Tanzania invests $12 Million, Kenya invests $30 Million. 

So, the committee recommends an aggressive promotion campaign to increase Uganda’s tourism portfolio. Innovative packages should be designed and Uganda’s tourism site should be exhibited aggressively. Efforts should be made to advertise Uganda’s tourism on international TV channels like other countries are already doing. Uganda’s tourism agency should provide our missions abroad with brochures to enable them to market Uganda abroad. 

Attracting trade and investment

A number of Ugandan missions abroad including, among others, the missions in Abu Dhabi, Beijing, Rome, New York, Riyadh have lobbied host countries to invest in Uganda, typically in energy, infrastructure and minerals –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, three minutes to conclude.

DR OKUONZI: I just want to mention a few specific issues and I think the recommendations can be read by Members. These are: Uganda-South Sudan relationship; there has been a bit of hostility at the border. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry keeps engaging the Government of South Sudan.

The second issue is that of Nairobi security threat; this matter we have gone there two times to check and the committee recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs provides funds to install CCTV cameras to the mission to tighten security and possibly to relocate the mission to a safer area in Nairobi.

There are a number of observations that we have made on creating consulates, on the hostility on Anti Homosexuality; now, it is an Act. Then on human trafficking; on United Nations Economic Commission; we have made also recommendations on the UN General Assembly that took place in September 2013 and made some observations there. We have made recommendations specifically on Uganda’s position on ICC because Uganda apparently intends to withdraw from ICC. 

On this particular one, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs gives this Parliament an official position of the Government on ICC with the respect to the intention of withdrawing from ICC as a country. 

On donor funds, the committee recommends that Government prepares a comprehensive policy on donor funds stating how to effectively use any donor funds in the future because most of the donor funds are now linked with conditions, which we may not ourselves accept. So, we need to set criteria for accepting and rejecting donor aid. 

Our missions abroad represent our country; they are the image of Uganda and Uganda’s pride abroad. They also face huge challenges. 

The government needs to take a keen interest in developing and maintaining the missions so that they portray a positive image of Uganda and contribute effectively in building our country. 

I beg to move that this report be adopted. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for this very comprehensive report, covering periods of July 2010 that is, the Eighth Parliament to November 2013. 

Hon. Members, I propose the question that the report of the committee on Foreign Affairs on its visit to Uganda’s missions abroad between July 2010 and November 2013 be adopted by this House. That is the question for our debate; debate is open. 

Going by the numbers, we will take two minutes each. I will give the shadow minister three minutes but honourable members will do two minutes.

5.50
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Jack Wamanga-Wamai): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairman for the report and I am glad the two ministers are in the House, that whatever the chairman has presented, they are aware of most of these issues. 

I will address myself to a few points, one of those being the welfare of the Foreign Service officers serving abroad. Secondly, I will talk about the recruitment in the Foreign Service and the posting of Foreign Service officers to missions. Lastly, I will talk about the education allowance that is supposed to be given to Foreign Service officers. 

It is not easy to live in a foreign country especially when you are serving the Government of Uganda. I say this because the conditions abroad are not easy. When winter comes and you find that some of our Foreign Service officers are not even able to heat their homes and apartments, at times water is disconnected and the heating is disconnected from the chanceries - these are facts that our Foreign Service officers are going through! 

When you look at the remunerations that are paid to our Foreign Service officers, you keep wondering and at times, I regard our Foreign Service officers as the people who are doing national services, because when you compare the smallest country in Africa, a country, like some of our neighbours - I will not mention names - and you look at what they get as their foreign service allowance -  by the way, they get even family allowances abroad, their families are kept here but the foreign service allowance paid to a Ugandan Head of Mission in Beijing, cannot be compared to a foreign service allowance paid to a third secretary from a neighbouring country in Beijing. Uganda was paying salary plus Foreign Service allowance and when you compare the Foreign Service allowance plus salary, it cannot even be compared to a third of a secretary from a neighbouring country. So, you can see how difficult it is for our people serving abroad. 

Worse still, our Foreign Service officers are not supposed to take their families. They are living abroad alone, either the wives are here or the men are here but they are serving alone. So, you can see some of the problems. You cannot go to the office and start working when you know your child is sick. We want the House to assist our Foreign Service officers abroad as the conditions they are serving in are really very difficult.

Education allowance

Originally Government –(Member timed out.)

5.54
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sympathise with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because it is categorised as a non-productive sector and I think it is selfishly done so without knowing that Foreign Affairs contributes a lot to this country. 

My challenge to the front bench is that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should be restructured to do a lot more than what they are doing today. If we continue underfunding them, then we are going to have problems. Let us look at other foreign ministries in foreign countries, how are they handled and managed? They are fully funded but ours has always been an embarrassment. 

We went to Moscow some years back and the Ambassador of Uganda decided to take us to attend an African Ambassadors’ function at the Ghanaian Embassy. After the function, the ambassadors of Ghana, Nigeria and Zambia decided to call us as MPs from Uganda. They said, “We would love to have audience with these Members of Parliament” but we did not know what the audience was about. When the function ended, they came and said, “You are Members of Parliament; do not shame Uganda. Uganda has never been like this. Look at where your mission is. Look at where your Ambassador lives, in a flat. You must move away from there; that is not the Uganda we know.”

It was very embarrassing and this is everywhere. The problem lies here that if we continue to treat Ministry of Foreign Affairs as a non-productive sector, that is all we are going to earn. Therefore, I would call for restructuring of that ministry to save us but I would also call on the current leadership in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to emulate the late Rt hon. Wapakhabulo who used to put his foot down and reject people who were being dumped in Foreign Affairs - (Member timed out.)

5.56
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report. I have a few observations. In the report, the chairman mentioned that our missions abroad render consular services to people who are travelling in and out of the missions of Uganda where they are. I think that is a general statement. 

Yesterday, the Pan African Parliament was lamenting on how our mission in South Africa is not giving them any form of assistance. So, it is not true that our missions abroad give good consular services.

I was also a victim when I was in India. I was totally ignored by the Mission in India and the only service I got from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs here was bad propaganda that was being relayed about us. So, hon. Members, a lot needs to be done in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. As hon. Okumu has said, change the image of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and our missions.

Secondly, regarding the state of our missions abroad, I will give an example of the High Commission in India and specifically, the underground level of that mission. The place is leaking and it has not been repaired. When you look at the face of the building, you may think the building is in good shape but when you enter inside and go downstairs, there is a very big problem.

The committee also talked about the job description of workers in these missions not being clearly spelt out. Some staff are more important than others and there is also the issue of promotion and increase of their salaries. In our High Commission in India, there is an Indian secretary who has worked in that mission for more than 20 years but she has remained - (Member timed out.)

5.58
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are no bad workers but there are bad managers and the President should have been a bit more serious in doing away with Foreign Affairs ministers and taking over himself. One time, he went abroad with a bottle of Uganda Waragi and he came a little bit close to doing the work, which Foreign Service would have done in order to boost our economy a little bit more.

We have not had any statement from any Foreign Affairs Minister whatsoever. Even though the senior and junior ministers are there, they have never given any statement to this Parliament in regard to the rottenness of their docket, the state of affairs of our foreign missions and how short they have come all the years in terms of funding. They are just there. So - [Mr Mukitale rose_] - Give me information if you have it.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much for giving way. I only wanted to inform hon. Lulume that the docket of foreign policy is the President’s and that the ministers do it on behalf of the President. Thank you.

DR BAYIGGA: So, all of them have failed. That is the information he was giving me. Mr Speaker, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs should explain to Parliament what Uganda’s interest abroad means. I was on the Committee of Foreign Affairs and I kept on asking this question and none of them could answer. Other countries have got foreign interests abroad defined in terms of economics and building their image. You cannot talk about building Uganda’s image abroad when you cannot fund it – (Member timed out.)

6.01
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I will begin from where hon. Bayigga ended; our foreign policy. I remember two years ago, we were told that Government was in the process of formulating a foreign policy and that they had given that assignment to some consultants.

The ministers are here and they will tell us whether we have our Foreign Affairs policy in place. If we do not have it then, we will continue to suffer as a country because any country without that policy cannot do anything better than what is being done right now.

The Independence celebrations
The chairman has talked about $ 10,000. We were ashamed when we were in Moscow two years ago and our Independence celebrations coincided with our visit there. We were hosted at the residence of the Deputy Ambassador who has since passed away. Those who contributed to our party were members from Kenya and other neighbouring countries and we, the members of the committee. So, it was really very shameful and they told us that whenever they are invited for these big day national celebrations, Uganda always goes but they have never been – (Member timed out.)

6.03
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and the committee for a good report but I have some disappointments to register. I have had the opportunity to go to our London Mission, to Brussels, to the UN and to China. I was seated in the lobby of the London Mission - and it is a good idea that our missions have had the commercial aspects but here I was looking at a film during Amin’s time shooting someone in Mbarara at the 1972 invasion. Hon. Minister, please, select the material you use to advertise our country. 

Secondly, I went to Brussels –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that Eng. Katwiremu was one of those who dealt with AGOA and trade investments; they travelled the whole world going to missions and that they were doing it on behalf of Uganda. The procedural issue I am raising is, did he inform the President at that time that there is a problem at the mission?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a clarification issue. (Laughter) 

MR KATWIREMU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was not a member of the Foreign Service and there is a whole ministry to do that. I was talking about the Brussels Mission. If you go to their embassy and to the ambassador’s office, as you go upstairs the Floor has been eaten by woodworms, it is almost falling apart. The basement is almost collapsing; the pipes, water has slithered in those pipes; you literally do not have an embassy. We had an ambassador’s house with a swimming pool and a tennis court; right now, it is an empty plot with –(Member timed out.)  

6.06
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Before you cut me off, I want to thank Uganda’s High Commissioner to India, who was in Paris, hon. Napeyok - this wonderful Karimojong woman diplomat. She went to Paris but she had no money but I can tell you she is very good; maybe she has been constrained by not having enough money. But I want to pose a question to the Ministers of Foreign Affairs - they are here - do you get some time as ministers to prepare a paper and hand it to somebody who appointed you? Or you have just decided to drive wonderful cars and you have forgotten your diplomats abroad because you are the ministers? What are you leading? And I want to be very careful and I am very serious. How do you run a ministry and you cannot tell the Head of State that there is a problem? Why are you keeping quiet? Why are you cowards? That is a very big question by the way, Mr Speaker, and I am very serious.

Secondly, the chairperson actually talked about the people who have become refugees. There are some economic refugees. There are some Ugandans who claim to have been prosecuted by this government, yet, it has not happened, just because they want to work abroad and on that, I have examples. So, when combining the numbers of people who went abroad for economic reasons, do not call them “political refugees” those are economic refugees. They are looking for money. 

Lastly, there is no country that can fail to celebrate their Independence because Independence Celebrations instil patriotism among Ugandans abroad, and again it portrays a very good image of the country. How can neighbouring countries celebrate their independence and we, Ugandans, do not recognise ours?

I want to move a motion, as I finish, that this Parliament should be very serious and task the Ministers of Foreign Affairs to come here with a comprehensive report about what they are doing because they are mistreating Ugandans and yet, they should be talking on their behalf. I am very serious by the way. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I would like to beg your indulgence. If you have been out of this country, which I know is true, and visited our missions, they are really in dire need of help. This is a sector, which would have created employment to Uganda because it should be one of those marketing our products so that we get money to help our people. So, we cannot debate this sector in two minutes. 

So, Mr Speaker, I want to plead with you that if we do not have time now, we bring this tomorrow. We give them an opportunity to go and prepare because they have understood that we need a report and we debate it so that a member can debate for about five or six minutes on missions. (Applause) Otherwise, this country we are in - in fact, the image of Uganda is the mission. So, the moment they see a blocked toilet in a mission, it means a blocked country. So, I want to beg that with the powers entrusted to you – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is what I wanted to propose when we come to conclude this debate. I have personally seen some of those places, I have even taken pictures and they are not good; the ministers know this. What this House wants is for you to confirm to the House that you are aware of these things and ask for how this House can help that ministry deal with those issues because they are real and we have all brought reports to different people. So, the sentiments are clear and if honourable members want to pause at this moment, I would agree that we adopt the report and task the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to come back here in two weeks with a comprehensive statement on the state of affairs in our foreign missions. 

6.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE) (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Mr Speaker, I will begin by pleading with you to protect me from fellow Members but I think we have to share this. When I was deputy chairperson to my chairman, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, he delegated us to visit several missions but after looking at all our prime locations in different cities, we came up with a proposal, which I think Parliament did not have time to process; that why don’t we think outside the box and look at a new approach of build, operate and transfer? It was discussed in the committee; I do not remember whether the chairman managed to bring it before Parliament. 

However, I would like to propose to my colleagues, the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, that probably, as you come back, let us try to look at that because if we are talking of image building, then we begin by looking at our properties, which are in prime locations in different cities. Thank you.  

6.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Okello Oryem): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for the report that he presented here, and I thank our colleagues for the contributions and concerns about our missions abroad and other aspects of foreign affairs. 

When I saw the Order Paper this afternoon, I tried to get hold of a copy of the report, including looking for it in my iPad but I could not find it - hoping that I will be in a more robust position to respond.

I do hope now that you intend to rule that you will give us another opportunity so that we go back and prepare a more comprehensive response to what was raised in the report, including issues that were raised here by colleagues.

But it is very true that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the state of our foreign missions, the welfare of service officers all need to be re-examined so that they are in a better state of affairs. There is no doubt about that but the bottom line is funding. We hope that at an appropriate time, when we are availed with enough funding, we will be able to do a better job.

We have had interactions and we work very closely with the foreign affairs committee and we have continuously suggested ways and means in which we could – including build, operate and transfer – (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of procedure. You have ably advised this House that the minister will have to go and prepare a detailed statement about their ministry and the bottlenecks they face as far as our missions and property abroad are concerned. This will enable us give them support, as Parliament. But now, it appears as if the minister is trying to give us the status yet, you have given him some time to prepare a detailed report about the same. 

Is he procedurally right to continue?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the matter we are debating is to do with foreign affairs and since we are drawing to the close of this debate, the minister has to show evidence that he was in the House listening. (Laughter) But, please, make it brief and let us conclude this matter so that we can have an opportunity to have a more detailed debate.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you, Mr Speaker, because in your usual manner, you have wisely ruled. Let me thank my colleagues for their concern.

In conclusion, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has, at no time in the history of this country, had better Ministers of Foreign Affairs. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we agree that we adopt this report and then, we give the Ministry of Foreign Affairs two weeks. Is two weeks sufficient for you to come back with a comprehensive response? 

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Yes, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I will now put the question – 

MS AMUGE: Mr Speaker, maybe you should remind them to come back with responses from PAP because yesterday – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, there were also issues raised by the Pan African Parliament yesterday. For that, you will have to look at the Hansard or get somebody to brief you.

I now put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on its visit to Uganda’s missions abroad between July 2010 and November 2013 be adopted by the House.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ministers, you have two weeks within which to come back to this House and brief us of all those matters that relate to Foreign Affairs: its missions, staffing and challenges and advise us on the way forward. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise advice. For purposes of clarity, we would prefer that the minister responds to issues country by country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is comprehensive.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is right – comprehensive. For example, they should say, “In India, we have this amount of land and buildings.” They should also attach the pictures for us. (Laughter) I want to thank my sister hon. Amuge – she was my Vice Chairperson. She was in India and if you see the pictures they came with, you can shed tears. So, we want to compare the pictures of her time and today’s pictures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, hon. Minister, you should be as comprehensive as possible to the anticipated satisfaction of this House.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Mr Speaker, let me thank hon. Mafabi for suggesting a more comprehensive report. In that same spirit, may I then request for more time – an extra one week to enable us – considering that we are going for Easter. (Interjections) Let us be fair if we want a proper report. So, to be fair, Mr Speaker, I ask for three weeks.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three weeks granted.

MR OKELLO ORYEM: Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us deal with item No.3.

LAYING OF PAPERS

UGANDA HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION 16TH ANNUAL REPORT 2013

6.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Ms Jovah Kamateeka): Mr Speaker, I rise under Rule 30 and in accordance with Article 52(2) of the Constitution to lay the Uganda Human Rights Commission 16th Annual Report 2013. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2013

6.21
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial years ended 30 June 2013 for the following:
i)	Ministry of Local Government
ii)	The Judicial Service Commission
iii)	Uganda Human Rights Commission
iv)	Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs
v)	Uganda Road Fund
vi)	Ministry of Works and Transport
vii)	Directorate of Immigration and Citizenship Control
viii)	Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) SWAP Development Fund.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those eight reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the financial year ended 30 June 2013. Those reports stand committed to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious handling.

REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it 2013 or 2012?

6.23
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Paul Mwiru): Mr Speaker, it is 2013, we have already dealt with 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, I think there was an amendment. There was a mistake. 

MR MWIRU: I beg to lay on Table reports and opinions of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 for the following - Mr Speaker, for the record, they are arranged in that order.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. 

MR MWIRU: 
(i)	Government of Uganda Consolidated Financial Statements
(ii)	Ministry of Health
(iii)	Ministry of Local Government
(iv)	Ministry of Education and Sports
(v)	Ministry of Water and Environment
(vi)	Masaka Regional Referral Hospital
(vii)	Jinja Regional Referral Hospital
(viii)	Uganda High Commission, New Delhi
(ix)	The Electoral Commission
(x) 	Uganda Registration Services Bureau - Liquidation Account
(xi) 	Uganda Country Capacity Building Programme (UCCBP)
(xii) 	Territorial Approach to Climatic Change (TACC) in Mbale Region - UNDP-Funded Project No. 00060230-00075753
(xiii) 	Ministry of Health Uganda Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Programmes (UGFATMP - Scaling up Interventions of TB Prevention, Control, Treatment, Care and Support in Uganda – Grant No. UGD-T-MOFPED
(xiv) 	Ministry of Health – Uganda Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Programmes (UGFATMP) – Scaling up Prevention, Care, Treatment and Health Systems Strengthening for HIV/AIDS

(xv) 	Ministry of Water and Environment Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project ID No. P-UG-AAC-001; ADF Loan No. 210015008296ADF Grant No. 2100155003172 and NDF Grant No.441.

I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those 15 reports and opinions of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013. They are accordingly referred to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious handling. Thank you very much, Chairman. 

This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock and I mean 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 17 April 2014 at 2.00 p.m.) 

