Wednesday, 23 April 2014

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. As you are aware, today is Wednesday and rule 34 commands us to engage with the Prime Minister from 3 O’clock. So when the clock strikes 3.00p.m., we will go to Prime Minister’s Question Time even if there is business that is going on. 

I have received notification from the Opposition Chief Whip to the effect that there is a change in the membership of committees – hon. Ssebagala Abdu Latif moves from the Committee on National Economy to the Budget Committee. That has been effected. So, I put the question to that change.

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.15
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to raise a matter of public concern pertaining to my area of Rubaga South. As we speak now, we are experiencing torrential rains and whenever it rains, in Rubaga South it is a different situation altogether. I therefore beg Government to respond to the concerns I am going to raise here.

We have a main trench running from Kibuye to Natete and this trench goes up to Nalukolongo and River Mayanja. It can no longer accommodate water whenever it rains. On Monday this week, at the former Sembule Steel Mills rain water overwhelmed the trench and caused impassable floods for both pedestrians and vehicles for over six hours. The same floods have invaded Nanfuka Zone in Natete ending into a foreseeable disaster. A number of residents have now vacated their places of residence and are now refugees in other areas.

In light of that concern, which has resulted into a public nuisance which can be addressed pursuant to our laws, I beg Government to answer the following: Mr Speaker, what I am talking about is unexplainable because as we speak now, the road from Kabusu to Zzana is provides passage for the many vehicles that go to the airport. I expected a serious government to have been knowledgeable about the need to protect that road so that it is passable to provide relief. Where we have a government that does not care, what do we do? 

I would like to know why Government has paid no attention to the situation by widening that trench which has long been standing. When you see what you see during the rains, you can even assume that no government exists in Uganda and yet I know that we have a government. Is Government aware that the road being blocked is the chief relief road to the airport? If so, when are they going to address that disaster? It is a matter of serious concern and I need an answer without compromise. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Do we have a response? Member for Nakapiripirit, do you want to speak on the same subject? (Interjection) Okay, you have another matter; let us first close this one.

2.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Lumumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Lukyamuzi for raising this issue, but since we are going to have the Prime Minister’s Question Time, that will be his first question to answer because this is a question the Member has asked and he wants a response from Government. The Prime Minister will, therefore, answer it during that time. (Interjection) He is coming.

I also want to add, Mr Speaker, that part of the area which my colleague has talked about is a wetland and it would be our responsibility, as leaders, to help Government by ensuring that our voters do not settle in wetlands.

MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Government Chief Whip. Sincerely, when a Member of Parliament raises a pertinent issue of heavy rains and she postpones it for the Prime Minister’s Question Time, it is becomes difficult. I was expecting the Chief Whip to say, “Let us work with KCCA and see how we can solve these problems”, but sending it to the Prime Minister’s Question Time!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, what the Chief Whip is saying is that she is not able to answer that question; the Prime Minister will deal with it, and it is procedurally right to handle it with the appropriate authority of the government.

MR SSEWUNGU: Let her overload him; it is okay.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, we are humbly here to protect the Rules of Procedure and the Constitution. Knowing very well that there is a provision in our Rules of Procedure for an opportunity for a Member of Parliament at any time, as permitted by the Speaker, to raise a matter of public concern, it would be double jeopardy for hon. Lumumba to refer the question to another scene of the programme. I assume that she is knowledgeable about the procedures of Parliament; otherwise, we would be repeating ourselves and yet this is independent in its own right and can be answered. So is she procedurally right – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, it will be good for the future readers of the Hansard to explain how double jeopardy has come in this matter. (Laughter) Please, explain how double jeopardy has come in.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Yes, because in accordance with the law, – this is in substitution of court because Parliament is a court in its own right – when we report a matter of that kind and then we have to report again before similar people who are equally judges or responsible, it would be double jeopardy to repeat the same.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Government Chief Whip has said that this question will be handled by the Prime Minister when his time comes. Let us give him the benefit of doubt. We hope that being the Leader of Government Business, he will deal with this matter more comprehensively rather than us handling it at this stage. That is the request from the government. So, let us wait and see; if it is not handled, you have recourse through the Speaker. Yes, Member for Nakapiripirit. 

2.20
MS ROSE IRIAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

Over 1,600 people in Nakapiripirit District, in Namalu Sub County, have been displaced by the prisons authorities. Right now, my people are stranded; they have nowhere to settle and they have no shelter. Their shelter has been destroyed and these prisons authorities had promised to build for the natives some shelter and cultivate for them gardens but they have never done anything. The people are now homeless and stranded. They ploughed and destroyed the cassava and sweet potatoes and the people are now suffering. They have nowhere to sleep and they have nothing to eat. So, I plead with Government to rescue us from that situation. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

2.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Ms Barbara Nekesa Oundo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concern raised by my sister. 

On the issue of our people who are stranded as a result of the Uganda Prisons authorities at Namalu ploughing that land specifically for school feeding, we had not realised that there were people who had been resettled there and are now stranded. Since that has now been brought up by our sister, we are going to work with the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness to find temporary shelter for these people as we work with the Ministry of Lands and the community to resettle them in other areas. 

The area that was ploughed by the prisons was prisons land. So the people who were displaced are those who had settled on prisons land. Since we decided to use the land to grow food for schools in Karamoja, it led to that displacement. However, we are going to handle it together with the district community leaders alongside the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness for immediate intervention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, when do you brief Parliament about the process since the matter has come before us now?

MS OUNDO: Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence; give us precisely three weeks and then we shall report back to the House. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, in three weeks, we expect a report that the matters in Nakapiripirit have been handled. 

MS IRIAMA: Mr Speaker, it has been long - more than a month. They had promised to cultivate for them and nothing has been done; can you imagine? Rescue the situation. 

MS OUNDO: Mr Speaker, I am saying that this has been known to the local leaders, especially the Members of Parliament, but it is coming to our knowledge right now as we speak in the House. So, I want to reassure my sister that we are going to handle this immediately; within three weeks, we shall return to the House to report on the progress. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Member for Nakapiripirit, we expect some kind of response from the minister in charge of Karamoja on how this matter has been settled. Can we move to the Order Paper?

PETITION BY THE BAKINGWE AND THE BAGABO ETHNIC MINORITIES IN KASESE DISTRICT, SOUTH WESTERN UGANDA

2.25
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a petition moved under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure. It is a petition of the Bakingwe and the Bagabo ethnic minorities to be included in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as indigenous communities as at 1 February 1926 –(Laughter)

The humble petition of the Bakingwe and the Bagabo ethnic minorities in Kasese District, South Western Uganda, through hon. Boaz Kafuda as their area MP, states that: 

THE Bakingwe and Bagabo are indigenous ethnic minority communities who are Runyakitara speaking and are traditionally fisher communities, which have inhabited areas around Lake Edward, Lake George and the Kazinga Channel in the present-day Queen Elizabeth National Park in Busongora County of Kasese District. The petitioners also occupy areas in Lake Katwe Sub County, Muhokya and Katwe-Kabatoro Town Council in Kasese District and Omukasoga Ndekye in Rubirizi District. 

NOTING that during the Constituent Assembly deliberations, the Bakingwe and the Bagabo ethnic minority communities were omitted from the list of Uganda’s indigenous communities attached to the Constitution in the Third Schedule, yet they have been, since time immemorial, a traditional fisher community in Uganda living around Lake Edward, Lake George and the Kazinga Channel areas in the present-day Queen Elizabeth National Park in Busongora County, Kasese District and Rubirizi District; 

CONSIDERING that there is a serious fear of assimilation by the major tribe in the area, they would like to invoke Article 36 and 37 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda that guarantees the right of all persons to belong to, enjoy, practice, profess, maintain and promote any culture, cultural institution, language, tradition, creed or religion in community with others; and allows minorities to participate in the decision-making processes, and their views and interests shall be taken into account in the making of national plans and programmes.  

THE Bakingwe and Bagabo communities are cognisant of the fact that Uganda is a signatory to various international legal instruments such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Persons Belonging to National or Ethnic, Religious and Linguistic Minorities, which variously impose on state parties obligation to guarantee the rights of ethnic, religious and linguistic minorities in their states to enjoy their own culture, profess their religion and to use their own language.

WHEREFORE, your petitioners pray that: 
1. 	Parliament and Government interest themselves in the affairs of ethnic minorities in Uganda with a view of enhancing their protection and encouraging their existence, identity, languages, traditions and customs; 

2. 	That Government recognises the Bakingwe, the Bagabo and other ethnic minorities in Uganda and includes them in the Third Schedule to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; 

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray. 

Mr Speaker, as I speak, the petitioners - the Bakingwe and the Bagabo - are now present here in the gallery and are here for recognition –(Interjections) These are the representatives of all the other petitioners; of course, the whole tribe could not come here. These are their leaders and are some of the petitioners. 

Mr Speaker, the names and signatures of the petitioners are hereby attached to this petition and I beg to lay it on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the petition and thank you, honourable Member for Busongora.

Honourable members, this petition was brought to my attention and I looked at it and it is one of those petitions that require a specific way of handling under rule 29(6). I am therefore exercising the authority conferred upon me by both the Constitution and the Rules of Procedure to request that this matter be referred to the minister responsible for justice and constitutional affairs and the Attorney-General for expeditious handling and he will advise the House on the best way to proceed. This is because these people are in Uganda but they are not known by the Constitution and that is a matter for urgent handling especially now that registration for national identity cards is going on. The petition is accordingly referred to the Minister of Justice and the Attorney-General for advice on how the House can proceed.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I happen to be one of the Members of Parliament for Kasese; I represent the people of Busongora County North while my honourable colleague represents the people of Busongora County South. 

Mr Speaker, I also had the privilege to work with the district network NGO Forum of Kasese and I also had the privilege to actually interact with the communities he is talking about – the Bakingwe and Bagabo. These communities are actually non-citizens of Kasese. They are just fishmongers like you may have Bakonjo fishing in Kalangala. (Laughter) That is the kind of situation prevailing there. So, people who came to this place as fishmongers – he even specified here that they are actually Banyakitara and the Banyakitara communities are known as coming from Bunyoro.

Mr Speaker, is it therefore procedurally right for you to receive such a petition when the Constitution of Uganda states that as of January 1926, the communities that were in Uganda were duly registered, and that is what we know? Is it, therefore, procedurally right for communities who came to this place as fishmongers, and yet there are even fishmongers in Kasese, to be taken as citizens of Kasese? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a procedural matter upon which I am required to rule. Order, honourable members! The Member has raised a procedural issue asking whether it is procedurally right for the Speaker to receive such a petition and he wants the Speaker to rule on that subject. 

Any citizen of this country, one or many, has a right of access to this House; the Constitution guarantees that and the Rules of Procedure of this House, rule 29, also guarantee that. It does not matter; the issue is that the person feels aggrieved and is seeking recourse from this House and this House must listen to such a person. This House cannot shut its doors to any member of the public seeking recourse from it. It would be an abdication of our role as a Parliament representing people. So, it is procedurally correct for the Speaker to receive a petition and process it. That is precisely the reason why this particular petition has been referred to the minister responsible for justice - the people who manage the Constitution - and the Attorney-General to look at it and get back to the House and advise us on how to proceed with this matter.

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS AND DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I appreciate the content and import of the petition and I agree that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is the principal player or the sector ministry responsible for this matter. However, I beg to be on record that we should be jointly charged this responsibility together with the Ministry of Labour, Gender and Social Development because they normally help a lot with the research on social matters in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If that is the prayer of the learned Attorney-General, this petition is referred to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Office of the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. They should handle it expeditiously and brief the House within the timeframe provided in the Rules of Procedure, so that we can see how to move on with this subject. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

    A) REPORT ON THE SEVENTH AFRICAN EVALUATION ASSOCIATION (AFREA) CONFERENCE, YAOUNDÉ, CAMEROON, 3 – 7 MARCH 2014

2.37
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I move under rule 32 of our Rules of Procedure to lay on the Table a report on the Seventh African Evaluation Association Conference, which I attended from 3rd to 7 March 2014.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

    B) REPORT AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2010

2.38
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table a report on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2010. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For which institution? 

MR MUGUME: For the National Forestry Authority, Fredkorpset Project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. I think, chairperson, just proceed to lay all of them on the Table before I put the question.

    C) REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2011

2.44
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 for the following: 

i) 	Office of the Prime Minister - the DANIDA support to the public sector management reforms.
ii) 	National Forestry Authority, Fredkorpset Exchange Project (FK).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those two reports and opinion of the Auditor-General.

    D) REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012

MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table reports and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 for the following:

i)	Support to District Development Programme (DDP) III, UNDP funded project No. 00043023 – 00050139; 

ii)	Ministry of Health - Support for national prevention, care, treatment, laboratory services, strategic information and policies for HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases and tuberculosis in the Republic of Uganda under the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS relief, grant No. IU2GPS000936-05; 

iii)	Uganda Blood Transmission Services - supporting national blood transfusion service in the implementation and strengthening of blood safety activities in Uganda, cooperative agreement No. 5U2GPS002724-02;

iv) The Privatisation and Utility Sector Reform Project - divesture and redundancy accounts. 

v) Road Sector Support Project 3 ADF Project, ID No. P-UG-DBO-020 and loan No. 2100150020793 Nyakahita-Kazo-Kamwenge Road; 

vi) The East African Public Health Laboratory Networking Project, IDA credit agreement No. 4733-UG.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

    E) REPORTS AND OPINION OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2013

MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to lay on the Table the report and opinion of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2013 for the following:

i) 	Bank of Uganda Agricultural Credit Facility (ACF).

ii) 	Electricity Sector Development Project (ESDP), Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, IDA credit No. 4988-UG.

iii) 	Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme - Project I (CAIIP-I).

iv) 	Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme - Project II (CAIIP II)

v) 	Uganda National Roads Authority - Transport Sector Development Project (TSDP)-IDA credit No. 4679.

vi) 	The second Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 2).

vii) The Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) - Rural Electrification Agency, IDA CR. No. 4554-UG and GEF Trust Fund grant agreement No. TF094484.

viii) The Energy for Rural Transformation Project II (ERT II) - Uganda Communications Commission IDA credit agreement No. 44540-UG. 

ix) 	Improvement of health service delivery in Mulago Hospital and in the city of Kampala project - MKCCAP.

x) 	Makerere University - Economic Policy Research Centre.

xi) 	Forensic investigations into the operations of Lake Victoria Environment Management Project (LVEMP II).

xii) District Livelihoods Support Programme (DLSP) - IFAD loan No. 707-UG, 783-UG and grant No. 895-UG, 1164-UG.

xiii) 	Agricultural Technology and Agribusiness Advisory Services (ATAAS) Project, IDA Cr. 4769-UG.

xiv) 	The Eastern Africa Agricultural Productivity (EAAP) Project - IDA Cr.4672-UG.

xv) 	Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Programme Project III (CAIIP III).

xvi) 	Vegetable Oil Development Project Phase 2 (VODP 2), IFAD loan No.806-UG.

xvii)	 Support to the Health Sector Strategic Plan Project II, ADF loan No.2100150013194.

xviii)The Avian and Human Influenza Preparedness and Response Project.

xix) 	The Financial Management and Accountability Programme (FINMAP). 

xx) The Ministry of Water and Environment - Joint Water and Sanitation Sector Programme Support (JWSSPS).

xxi) The Ministry of Water and Environment - Water and Sanitation Development Facility – South West Branch (WSDF-SW).

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairperson. Let the records capture all those papers that have been laid on the Table. The paper under (a) will be scheduled for debate as soon as the time is available. For papers laid under (b) and (c), they stand referred to the Committee on COSASE. They should handle this expeditiously within the timeframe provided in the rules. Documents laid under (d) and (e) stand committed to the Committee on Public Accounts for expeditious handling. Thank you. 

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, rule 34 says we start at 3.00 p.m.; today we have a bonus of five minutes. Let us start now. We will start earlier today. 

2.53
MR BENJAMIN CADET (Independent, Bunyaruguru County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are two issues that I want to raise.

One, I come from a district with 32 lakes and out of the 32 lakes –(Interjections)– I think you should do your geography well; we have 32 lakes and 15 of those are found in a national park and yet there are people who have been staying there for long. Whereas fishing is a preserve of the Ministry of Fisheries, UWA has come in and prevented the local communities from carrying out fishing for the last six months and this has affected people’s income. The question is: when is UWA removing the embargo or curfew that prevents my people from carrying out fishing as an economic activity.

Two, His Excellency the President said that they are going to construct an electric fence to prevent elephants, buffaloes and other animals from destroying people’s crops and gardens. I want to inquire from Government: when is the construction of the electric fence beginning in Bunyaruguru? I thank you very much.

2.55
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, may I take this opportunity to welcome you back and the honourable members from the Easter holiday. I have not heard any report that there were any undue incidents in any of your constituencies, so we thank God for that.

Secondly, there were questions that I had indicated last week that I would answer today; may I start with them? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, you could.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The first is on land acquisition. Hon. Michael Mawanda asked why Government had not issued regulations to govern compensation to project affected persons as required under Section 20 of the Land Acquisition Act of 1965. He further asked what Government was doing about this. My response, after research, is as follows:

One, the Land Acquisition Act of 1965 is not consistent with Article 26 of the Constitution and Section 77 of the Land Act, 1998. The Land Acquisition Act had no provision on compensation and is, therefore, undergoing review by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to include compensation issues so that it conforms to Article 26 of the Constitution. 

If I may just remind colleagues, Article 26 of the Constitution provides as follows: 
“Protection from deprivation of property 
(1) 	Every person has a right to own property either individually or in association with others.

(2) 	No person shall be compulsorily deprived of property or any interest in or right over property of any description except where the following conditions are satisfied- 
(a) 	the taking of possession or acquisition is necessary for public use or in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or public health; and 
(b) 	the compulsory taking of possession or acquisition of property is made under a law which makes provision for— 
(i) prompt payment of fair and adequate compensation, prior to the taking of possession or acquisition of the property; and (ii) a right of access to a court of law by any person who has an interest or right over the property.”

Section 77 of the Land Act of 1998 reads as follows: “The district land tribunal shall, in accessing compensation referred to in section 76(1) (b), take into account the following- 
(a)	in the case of a customary owner, the value of land shall be the open market value of the unimproved land; 
(b) 	the value of the buildings on the land, which shall be taken at open market value for urban areas and depreciated replacement cost for the rural areas; 
(c) 	the value of standing crops on the land, excluding annual crops which could be harvested during the period of notice given to the tenant.

(2) 	In addition to compensation assessed under this section, there shall be paid as a disturbance allowance 15 per cent or, if less than six months’ notice to give up vacant possession is give, 30 per cent of any sum assessed under subsection (1).

(3) 	The rates set out in the list of rates of compensation referred to in section 59 (1)(e) shall be used in determining the amount of compensation payable.”

The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is currently reviewing all land related laws including the Land Acquisition Act. The ministry will, therefore, issue regulations when the new legislation on land acquisition is enacted. At the moment, therefore, compensation is governed by those two provisions I have read – Article 26 of the Constitution and Section 77 of the Land Act. This regulatory framework will be strengthened with the on-going review of the Land Acquisition Act and the regulations that shall follow.

The second question was by hon. Bakaluba Mukasa and it was about hard-to-reach allowances for public servants in Koome Island, Mukono District. He asked why Koome Island is not receiving hard-to-reach allowances yet it has been designated as a hard-to-reach area by Government. My response is as follows:

1. 	Koome Island was allocated Shs 76,992,413 in the financial year 2013/2014 to cater for payment of hardship allowances for that financial year. As at February 2014, Shs 36,353,750 had been spent, leaving a balance of Shs 40,638,663 which should be adequate to pay hardship allowances up to the end of this financial year.

2. 	It should however be noted that the Ministry of Public Service has not received any formal complaint about non-payment of hardship allowances from Mukono District Local Government this financial year.

3. 	Payment of hardship allowances was decentralised and it is the role of the accounting officers to submit names of staff who are to be paid the allowance to the Ministry of Public Service in order to activate the hard-to-reach code against one’s salary. In the case of Koome Island in Mukono District, it could be that some staff are not receiving the allowance because they are new and have not yet accessed the payroll. In which case, this issue can easily be addressed if a specific list of affected staff is provided to the Ministry of Public Service.

Thirdly, on the question of a re-stocking programme for Sebei sub-region, raised by – (Interjections) – During the last PRDP policy-monitoring committee meeting, Members of Parliament from Sebei sub-region requested that their sub-region be included in the restocking programme since they had suffered gross harm due to cattle rustling for many years. Given that the PRDP policy group recently invited Members of Parliament from West Nile, Teso, Lango and Acholi, without Sebei, to discuss restocking, can Government have a separate restocking programme for Sebei? That was the question and my response is: 

It is true that during the policy committee meeting held on 6 December 2013, a resolution was passed to include Sebei sub-region in the restocking programme. It should be noted, however, that this programme was a presidential pledge for the four sub-regions of West Nile, Acholi, Lango and Teso where each of the sub-regions was allocated Shs 5 billion. 

The concern of the honourable members from Greater North Parliamentary Forum has been noted and will be brought to the attention of the President for consideration during the subsequent phases of the restocking programme. It is important to note that any deviation from the current presidential pledge requires additional resources which, of course, as honourable members know, are not available at the moment because this Parliament only appropriated Shs 20 billion.

The fourth question was about ex-soldiers sent on training, asked by hon. Freedom Grace Kwiyucwiny – (Interjections)– and the question was: Why is it that some ex-soldiers who were sent for re-training – I am able to pronounce the name very well because I have interacted with her very closely now for a long time. (Laughter) The question was, why is it that some ex-soldiers who were sent for re-training were sent back home with army uniform?

The policy is that they should all be actually disarmed, which includes handing over of the army uniforms. Whoever is still holding uniforms did so irregularly and if identified may be in breach of the law. So, my advice to them is that they should return the uniforms.

Today, before I came, the Government Chief Whip promised that I would respond to the two questions raised by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, my old friend – sorry, my young friend. The route that you referred to, I believe is the Kabuusu-Nyanama Road. I would like to respond to his point that this route has been neglected by Government. 

That road is contained in the Greater Kampala Master Plan. It is one of the priority roads to be worked upon as soon as the government completes the designs that are currently on-going. I thought hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, being an honourable member representing a city constituency, would have this information at his disposal.

The next question was about Nalukolongo Channel. As we all know from the public coverage of the issues of Nalukolongo Channel, clearing of this channel has been blocked by members of the public who live in the area and who have resisted Kampala Capital City Authority from performing that work. I would like this Parliament to take public notice of the role of the area MP, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, in encouraging his voters to behave that way and urge him – because I am reliably informed that his home is not far from the channel –(Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I was reluctant to raise a point of order when the Prime Minister was talking but on seeing that he was going astray, I thought I had to intervene. 

Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to allege that John Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man, resides by the channel when it is common knowledge – Mr Speaker, you are also a witness because you once came to my home established in Mutundwe – that I am not very far from Kampala University, which is a clear cut and established home far from the trenches as he was alleging. Is he in order to make such false allegations when he has many expectations ahead of him? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, now that the honourable Member for Rubaga South has brought the knowledge of the Speaker in this matter, I shall inform the House that I got stuck on the road going to his House. (Laughter)  The car I was travelling in could not reach the home, so I had to walk, meaning the area was a bit muddy. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Just to give notice to colleagues in Parliament and the public - Government is in the course of reining in on the violation of our laws and our Constitution relating to the protection of wetlands. So, all those who live or have lived on wetlands, please something is coming to protect all wetlands and of course as we know, that channel was flowing through –(Interjections)– and forests. Now, to the question raised by hon. Cadet –(Interruption) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am rising on a very polite point of procedure pursuant to the response extended to my inquiries by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. On the point of concern I raised, I was very emphatic about the acrimony, disaster and public nuisance caused as a result of the floods that have come as a result of Government reluctance to temporarily widen the channel so that people and vehicles can pass. There is a state of emergency which cannot allow anyone to believe that there is a Government in Uganda when no attention is paid to such situations even temporarily. 

So, is he in order to come and give –(Interjections)– is he procedurally right to attempt to give an answer while ignoring the pertinent issues, when he is a whole Prime Minister who is supposed to know each and every area of what he is talking about? What is he talking about – he is a President to be? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please deal with that leg of the question. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I hoped that my honourable friend would read through the lines and get the answer to that question. What I am saying is that the people living along that channel are living on what was a wetland. In fact, the information I have now is that some people have even settled on top of the channel itself. Therefore, the flooding –(Interruption) 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am standing on a point of order. The area mentioned by the Prime Minister running from Sembule to Nanfuka Zone up to Natete geographically under the statute of 1958, which we are still using, is prescribed as a residential and industrial area. This means industries can take off and people can live there. 

In light of that, is the Prime Minister in order to speak in open ignorance of the area he is supposed to know, namely greater Kampala? That area is prescribed as industrial and also residential. For you to condemn the people who are there as those who are encroaching on the wetland is to distort the geography of the earmarked areas in terms of geographical study. 

Are you in order to miss-prescribe an area which is well known in mapping of Kampala pursuant to the law I have quoted? You must be sincere and open. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is a question of fact that would require the Speaker to first visit the locus of the area in question. I have not visited; as you are aware, I am sitting right here, so I cannot rule on that factual situation whether the Prime Minister is in order or not. It is a factual situation that I cannot handle; I would need to go there and come back. 

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, a point of order has been raised by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi and you have ruled on that point of order. Is the Attorney-General, therefore, in order to suggest that your ruling was insufficient that he must beef it up with a point of information?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Of course, this House thrives on information and correct information but I was still waiting to find out from the learned Attorney-General what he was rising up to say. On what point do you rise, learned Attorney General? 

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, this information is useful. I am informing the House because of the misleading statement made by hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi that Uganda is still based, in terms of physical planning, on the Towns and Country Planning Act of 1958. We just passed the Physical Planning Act, which governs physical planning, in 2010. Isn’t that useful information to this House and correcting the record that has been very misleading?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I am very grateful to the Deputy Attorney-General for updating my friend, hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi, and making him current at least for today. Further, I would like to inform him that he knows very well of a place where there is this bicycle factory called Raodmaster – at that junction – and people are living on top of the channel. I know for sure that the hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi knows that. So, it is alright; when finally the wheels of the authority begin to roll in the protection of the wetlands, I am sure hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi will be present to explain to his people the point he has raised in Parliament today.

I would like to respond to the issue raised by the hon. Benjamin Cadet. He said his constituency has 32 lakes and that the Uganda Wildlife Authority is preventing people from fishing in some of those lakes. My answer to that is that part of that constellation of lakes is actually in the park. Many of these lakes have designated breeding grounds for fish and, therefore, as such are protected from overfishing or are regulated. I will be happy, though, to get the details of the areas affected and when I do, I will give specific answers to the House.

On the question of preventing wild animals from crossing the boundary of the parks and going into habited areas and attacking the neighbours, yes, we have talked about erecting – He is dealing with what I am also dealing with in my constituency and we have been talking about erecting an electric fence. We have been studying similar cases in Zimbabwe and South Africa and in some areas, depending on what kind of animals you have, electrical fencing may be effective while it may not be in others.

We are in the process of concluding that feasibility study in order to provide money for whatever action we will decide to take. In the meantime, trenches have been built along the boundaries but you need to realise that animals are quite clever. You know, his name means big elephant –(Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Whose name?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Hon. Nzoghu. That name means big elephant; a big one. I thought he would stand –(Laughter) I do not know if hon. Benjamin Cadet’s area has had the same experience but in my area, elephants are able to cross these trenches. They were supposed to stop elephants but believe it or not, they can build a bridge across the trench and cross. They have done so and it is obvious that trenches cannot stop elephants because they are clever enough to find their way around. So, we are now looking at all possible ways of trying to protect people from the ravages of wild animals that cross from the parks. When we are ready with this feasibility study, I will come back to Parliament and inform you. Thank you. 

3.26
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The New Vision newspaper of yesterday on page 34 quoted the honourable minister, Simon D’Ujanga, as having told the Committee on Natural Resources he following: “Uganda as a country is endowed with huge reserves of minerals and if the minerals are well extracted and refined, they will spur economic growth at unprecedented levels…”

Mr Speaker, is the Prime Minister aware that the Department of Geology and Surveys, which is mandated to look after our minerals, has had all its senior staff in acting capacity for more than three years? So, virtually there are no substantive senior officers that can fulfil what the honourable minister was talking about and this is against the standing orders of the Ministry of Public Service. So, what is the ministry doing to sort out this problem? Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, I am sure there is a reason why they have been in acting capacity but we will establish exactly why. I have answered the question before about acting capacity in relation to the acting PS of the Ministry of Public Service. I did say that the reason was that the Public Service Commission’s mandate expired last year. The new commission had not been put in place partly because the process of approval is still on-going here in Parliament and so on. 


I was very delighted to be informed, I think last week or the week, before that Parliament had concluded its work and submitted its report to the President. So, I believe that as soon as this commission is in place, all these acting capacities will be handled by that appropriate body. Thank you.

3.29
MR MATHIAS KASAMBA (NRM, Kakuto County, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inquire from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister about the status of the returnees from Tanzania who were expelled and who have been staying in my constituency in Kakuuto for quite a few months. 

As we were approaching Easter, I was approached by a team from the Red Cross and their camp commandant about the supply of food to these people. There are over 5,000 people and they are camped at Sango Bay. They only got 32 bags of maize flour and each of them received about half a kilogram. So, I would like to know the fate and status of these people. 

What are the plans for them to be resettled because they are energetic? The majority of them are Ugandans who had crossed to Tanzania. They were screened and are supposed to be resettled at the earliest time. They are very good energetic Ugandans who are yearning to get land. How is the Prime Minister’s office planning to handle these Ugandans who are confined in an open water-logged place as the rains are thriving? I beg to get that response.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister is very well aware of these people who came from Tanzania and are in my brother Kasamba’s constituency. These people are mixed; some say they are Ugandans, some say they are Rwandese and some say they are Tanzanians. So, it was necessary to carry out a verification exercise to know who is who. That exercise has not been completed and as soon as it is completed, it will guide us on what action to be taken on each one of them. In the meantime, government is in contact, through diplomatic channels, with the Tanzanian authorities so that the question of people being expelled from Tanzania and coming to Uganda is handled maybe a little differently. Thank you.

3.32
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to ask the Prime Minister if he can admit, on behalf of this government, that they have failed to implement and to do their role as Government as is enshrined in Chapter one, Article 4 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. If he does not admit, I want him to state with evidence how many languages our Constitution has been translated into and how accessible they are. 

I am asking this because my people cannot read English but they cannot access the Constitution in Luganda. So, I want the Prime Minister to admit that they have failed over the 19 years to translate the Constitution to our local languages.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, the question was, do I admit? No, I do not.

3.33
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, aware that senior 4 candidates normally fill UNEB registration forms during first term but now schools have closed for holidays and the senior 4 candidates have gone home, I would like to find out from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister whether this year our candidates are going to sit exams. If so, why is it that up to now UNEB has not yet given out the registration forms to our senior 4 candidates? Every year, senior 4 candidates fill forms between February and March but this year, the story is quite different. What a mess with our Uganda National Examinations Board. Thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: For all school leaving candidates, that is, P7, S4, and S6, a circular was sent to all schools and filling of forms began three weeks ago and to the best of my knowledge, this has now been cleared.

3.35
MR FRED EBIL (UPC, Kole County, Kole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. During the 2011 campaigns, while in Alito Sub County grounds, the President, among other pledges, pledged to return a lorry for Aculbanya Secondary School in Aboke which was used and destroyed by the LRA. He pledged to return it when he wins the election, and he won. 

He also promised to put tap water in Ayer Town Council, which is a major town council in Kole District, and also to rehabilitate the old power line from Aboke to Alito sub counties. These were presidential pledges. My question to the Prime Minister is: when will the President fulfil his pledges that he made to the people of Kole?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As my brother, hon. Fred Ebil, knows –(Interjection)- I appreciate hon. Beatrice Anywar’s offer of assistance to answer the question. I always find her in private not here – (Laughter)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand on a point of order. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister has been asked a question from a colleague and as you are aware, I have not caught your eye to stand up to speak and the Prime Minister is alluding that I was offering advice for what he is supposed to answer. However, above all, is the Prime Minister in order to allude, instead of asking questions concerning my constituency Kitgum and any other official communication that I have private time to meet him elsewhere? Can he substantiate? Is he in order, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even those things that shall be done in private will be proclaimed on the roof tops. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: As my honourable brother, Fred Ebil, knows, the pledges of the 2011 campaigns are being fulfilled. We still have two more years, so be patient. Your power line from Aboke to Alito is on course; it is expected to be handled next year. 

The lorry for Aculbanya School - I do not have specific information about that but simply be patient. All the pledges that were made will be fulfilled and those that we are unable to fulfil, we will have to explain what may have happened, and of course since we are still around –(Interjections)– we will fulfil, do not worry. I thank you.

3.43
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Mr Prime Minister, you are aware that Article 18 of the Constitution directs the state to register deaths, marriages and births. This has not been done as required.

Two, the registration that was started last Monday of people aged 16 and above has not taken off well because of lack of personnel and gadgets. Could you please inform the country how we will handle this matter and whether this exercise is going to be extended because you had said that it will be for only four months? I thank you.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Well, to the best of my knowledge, the exercise of registration of deaths and births is continuous. We had had challenges in the past which we have, as Government, tried to overcome. I am happy to inform this House that the department responsible has been doing well. It was reorganized and it has been doing very well indeed. There may be cases where deaths or births have not been registered in some areas and it would be good for the area MP to inform us so that we can attend to them.

On the question of the national ID registration exercise, it is true that it has started and as the minister did promise, the minister will at regular intervals update Parliament on the progress being made. I was in my constituency over the weekend and I actually registered myself and had a struggle to do so because I was asked for a document that I did not have. (Laughter) They asked me for my passport, which I did not have and I did not have my marriage certificate, baptism or birth certificate. Eventually, they asked me for a letter from my LCI and I did not have and so, they refused to register me. 

I was very happy with this team because they were acting strictly in accordance with the guidelines given to them. I was impressed and went onto the radio and made the point that I thought that they were doing a good job except that they were not completely up to date because it is not necessary to have these documents. If you have them, they will facilitate you. Incidentally, in my case, I happened to have my card – you know I was one of the first ones to be registered when this exercise started the other time – (Interjections) - the Mühlbauer one. I have the card from Mühlbauer, so why was it necessary for me to register again? This exercise asks for more details than were asked for the last time and so, I found it necessary to repeat the exercise and because I gave that card, they agreed to register me because it is my identity now. 

So, these documents are not necessary and only helpful in terms of identification but if you do not have them, you can go with a letter. We have established parish verification committees and so all that you need is to have verification from your parish to register.

On the question of equipment, it is true that I did register in the town council of Kihihi and yet I do not live in the town council of Kihihi; I live in my sub-county called Nyakinoni, which does not have a kit. There was not a single kit because the kits that were distributed were those kits that we originally had from the previous arrangement. The new kits that have been bought had not arrived and I am glad to inform this House and country that these kits have now arrived and are being distributed throughout Uganda. My expectation is that by the end of this week, every parish will have its kit so that registration picks up. 

I, therefore, would like to conclude by saying that I am very confident that in the four months that we gave ourselves, we would have successfully completed this exercise. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is time; we shall continue next week.  

3.47
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, for answering questions - some of them very well but we have issues with some of them. 

I would like to ask a little more on the question of restocking. Government has been talking about restocking for over 20 years now but it looks like we do not know the extent of this restocking programme - the expected outputs or achievements, how many people or homes it was supposed to benefit and when it is ending.

Mr Speaker, another issue we have concern over is the question of acting capacity in the civil service. The Prime Minister said it was because of the absence of the Public Service Commission. The Public Service Commission has been absent for only about six months. I sat on the committee that interviewed the Public Service Commission recently - the Appointments Committee - and we used this time to ask those who wanted to be commissioners and those that were continuing about this issue. They said that it is not their problem or duty in making sure that people are being promoted or making sure that they are not in acting capacity. The law says you can act for six months but people have acted for three or four years. The issue is with the ministries; all ministries have got people who have been acting for years, including the Ministry for Public Service. So, the Government will have to do this differently; it is not just a question of absence of the Public Service Commission.

There was a question asked by hon. Nalubega to which the Prime Minister just answered, “We do not admit.” However, it is true that the Government, since 1995, has failed to translate the Constitution to any other language and yet it is a constitutional requirement that the Constitution be translated into languages understood by everybody. So, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we require you to tell us when you plan to translate the Constitution into various languages.

Lastly, on the issue of ID registration, this registration is being done without any enabling law. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you said here last time that it is in the Constitution. I do not think the Constitution is sufficient in implementing an exercise like this; we definitely need an enabling law to have this exercise run smoothly. 

So far, from the way you are handling it, there are a lot of big challenges in his exercise. In many places there is one camera and one computer in one sub-county, which can have five to six parishes. Also, the form that the people are supposed to fill has four pages and is very detailed. Currently, it is the rainy season and to peasants, this time is really valuable but when they go to the registration points, instead of being photographed and registered, they are given these elaborate forms and so many of them do not return them. Unless you do something about this, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this exercise is bound to fail.

Lastly, we have heard reports from South Sudan. We are involved there and in the papers this morning, I saw dead bodies being gathered by bulldozers. It is possible that some of them are Ugandans – either soldiers or civilians. We would like to know what is happening in South Sudan – how many people we have lost there and when we are withdrawing our troops from there. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you making any responses to that?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The restocking exercise is in areas that had been affected by war and extensive disruption of lives in these areas, including the depletion of livestock. What Government is doing is not compensating those who lost because the presumption is that everyone lost something. This exercise is an economic activity. We have decided to deal with these four zones of Acholi, Lango, Teso and West Nile and the idea is like the idea which we have of distribution of tea or coffee seedlings to increase the economic activity in a particular area. 

We are only limited by the resource envelope – the amount of money we have - but we are determined to push this continuously until we have enough. Our plan, as we have announced in the past, is that in the end we will have distributed animals to increase our stock of cattle, for example, to 30 million because right now we have about 14 or 15 million. Our idea is to double this and we intend to give to as many homes as are able to look after animals so that we raise every home’s ability to generate income. This is part of our battle against poverty in homesteads. So we will give out to as many as we are able to reach depending on the resource envelope at any given time. 

Of course, it is this House that appropriates that money and therefore, at the end of the day, it is this that determines the number of cattle or things that we are able to distribute. We are not looking at when it will end; yes, of course, eventually we will have stocked enough and generated enough in society to stop the supply from the central government, but this will go on as far as the funds allow.

On the question of acting capacity, I have taken note of your point that in some cases it is the ministries that have not acted or referred these matters to the Public Service Commission and that is why we have people in acting capacities. However, this should not be the case and we should take steps to make sure that this does not last long.

On translating the Constitution, I simply answered the question asked by hon. Nalubega to the effect that, “as Government, do we admit that we have failed to translate the Constitution?” I told her, “No, I do not.” Now you are saying that we have failed and I will answer the same way by saying, “We have not.” 

For the information of this House, the Constitution has so far been translated into Luo, Ateso, Akarimojong and work is in progress on the Luganda translation. You should know that this is work in progress and so you cannot say that I have failed. My answer was precise, concise and correct.

On the question of the national ID registration exercise, I have heard the argument by the Leader of the Opposition that for the Constitution to be implemented there must be an implementing law or something like that. Well, it makes it easier, of course, but when we come to this House and pass laws, it makes it much easier because we are specific and we give clear guidelines since we give detail which is not covered in the Constitution regarding how things are to be done. However, even if there was no law like that, if the Constitution says that no one shall be condemned of a criminal act without a fair hearing, then you cannot say that Government has acted properly if it actually condemned you without giving you fair hearing because there is no law but the Constitution says so. So, we must be compliant with the Constitution all the time. What you are talking about is the implementation mechanism which can give problems, but it is not true to say that you cannot act on the basis of a constitutional provision. The Constitution is the basic law; all others derive their legitimacy and authority from it. 

I think I had answered the other point about there being too few tools - they are actually called registration kits including a camera and computer. You are lucky you have one in your parish; in my sub county, we did not have any but this is because we did not have this equipment, now it is on the way – (Interjections) – we started with what we had. For those areas which received, they are working well. For those areas like mine which had not received, we are patiently waiting and I hope by the end of this week or next week, they will have arrived so that all the centres are active. 

I filled this four-page form and I can say that it is elaborate; it is comprehensive. I think it was necessary to make it so if we were to be sure that the people we are registering are indeed Ugandans because it comprehensively covers you - where you were born, who your father is, what your tribe is and all that is required. I did not know that people take the forms home. We will have to find out. However, I think the most important point here is that, naturally, there will be teething problems in the beginning and as we go along, I think we should all co-operate. I am happy that we are all together on this. It is not a partisan issue; this is a bi-partisan thing. The most important thing is that we take interest in what is happening, we see where difficulties have arisen and we inform the authorities with a view to correcting those difficulties so that the exercise can go on smoothly. 

On what may be happening in the Republic of South Sudan, of course there is fighting going on. I have seen the reports in the media and I do not have any report that Ugandans, either soldiers or civilians, are among the dead. I do not have that report, but it is a situation that concerns us. Even if they are South Sudanese, we are as concerned because these are human beings and you know that this Government has a view that all human beings deserve better. We do not think it is proper to kill other people. We think that the region – IGAD - is trying its best to broker peace between the warring factions in South Sudan and we urge the authorities on either side to act with maximum restraint and especially to avoid killing normal civilians. We will do everything possible to encourage both sides to –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Mr Prime Minister, for giving way. Could you clarify to the House whether the on-going fighting in South Sudan is what prompted the north to withdraw their ambassador in Kampala?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: The north of where –(Interjections)– The minister was telling me that we do not have an ambassador of North South Sudan. What is on record is north - 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAYI: Mr Prime Minister, I meant the ambassador of Khartoum in Kampala.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Ambassador of Sudan. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, it is common knowledge that we have been having issues with the Republic of Sudan and I had personally hoped that we had put these behind us. However, as you know, our relations have not been warm. I am sorry to tell you that as we speak, - I did make this point in the summit of the Organisation of Islamic Conference, where I represented the President - Sudan has not stopped supporting Kony and the LRA. We will finish him, the support of Government of Sudan notwithstanding. 

So our relations have not been good. We had hoped for the best; we had hoped for improvements but this has gone on. They have in turn accused us of supporting rebellion in Sudan. Of course, I did deny that; I denied it because it is not true. We have not supported that rebellion. That is the issue that exists between us and the Republic of Sudan and my sincere hope is that we can meet around a table and resolve these issues. 

At the Organisation of Islamic Conference, it was agreed that this conference would look into this matter. Therefore, the conference took note of our position and took note of the position of the Republic of Sudan. I am looking forward to the day we will sit around a table, discuss them and normalise our relations, and we can only normalise our relations with the Republic of Sudan when they stop supporting Kony and the LRA. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and honourable members. I have taken note of those who have not been able to raise questions to the Prime Minister. When we start on Wednesday next week, we will start with those Members so that we can see how to finish. 

Learned Attorney-General, the Prime Minister has made a response on this issue of a legal requirement for a law to carry out this process. Even today in the papers, some lawyers were making the same augment. You might need, at an appropriate time, to clarify on this issue because I think the Constitution makes some very clear declarations on what Parliament can legislate on and and how Parliament shall by law prescribe this. However, in some cases, it is silent on what Parliament can do about certain provisions of the Constitution. So, you might need to guide us in a more comprehensive way so that even the country is guided on this debate about the requirement of a law for registration of citizens; you might need to do that so that we are guided.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE HIV/AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that the motion for second reading of this Bill was moved. Also, the chairperson of the committee responsible for this Bill presented a report and did propose the question for debate on its general principles. The debate resumes today. 

If there is no debate, can I put the question that we go to Committee Stage? Should I put the question for the motion for a second reading?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I put the question that the Bill entitled “The HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE HIV/AIDS PREVENTION AND CONTROL BILL, 2010

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you, Mr Chairman. Our proposal begins with the title of the Bill. I do not know whether it is appropriate to propose amendments on it now. Otherwise, we propose to amend the title of the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We will deal with the title at the end.

DR OMONA: In Clause 1, on the commencement date, we propose a deletion of the entire provision. The justification is to ensure that commencement of the Bill takes effect on its date of publication as notified in the Gazette, rather than waiting for the minister to issue regulations appointing a date on which the Bill will come into force as a common practice. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is the justification for the deletion of that provision for a requirement for a statutory instrument to commence the law. The committee proposes that the law comes into force on publication. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2

DR OMONA: Mr Chairman, we propose that since this is the interpretation clause, we can come back to it later.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 2 deferred.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 5 on counseling to be conducted by trained HIV/AIDS counsellors, we propose to rephrase that provision to read as follows: “Counselling of any person under this Act shall only be conducted by a medical practitioner, qualified officer or counsellor.” The justification –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I rise on a point of procedure. Mr Chairman, you know that these days, the issue of quorum is a serious matter. It looks like we do not have quorum. Can we check to ensure – I do not know whether it is procedurally right to conduct business without quorum.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no serious requirement at this stage for decision. We are just seeing where there is agreement on the clauses of the Bill. So, if there is agreement, we can proceed. The decision will be taken when we are passing the Bill. But if the Members feel we cannot proceed, then we will not proceed.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Chairman, but we are already voting. Putting the question to a vote means we are deciding on the provisions of the Bill.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Chairman, I would like to think that we have a middle position. The House, a few minutes ago, was full. So, I think we can proceed as Members are called back; a bell can be sounded so that – they must be having a late lunch. I think they can be called back to the House.

MR WANGOLO: Mr Chairman, I propose that we continue. Our colleagues will join us later.

MS ALUM SANTA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. This Bill is very sensitive because we are dealing with criminalisation in the clauses. If we proceed like this, we will not be moving in the right direction.

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say that the House has sufficient membership. Colleagues who just walked out for a cup of water or pick an item or two and come back – you can see that even the Leader of the Opposition who was outside is back. I propose that our sister reconsiders her motion so that we proceed and complete this Bill. We have a lot of work.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Chairman, I do not want us to proceed as if we do not know the rules. We know the Rules of Procedure because we are lawmakers. So, I would not like us to pass a law that will cause controversy like it has happened recently. I propose that we simply move procedurally to the next item, Mr Chairman.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Chairman, like my colleague observed, we have sufficient numbers in the House. The Leader of Government Business is in this House as well as the Leader of the Opposition and the Frontbench is full.

Mr Chairman, according to the rules, we only need quorum when we are voting over a contentious matter. As of now, we have not yet reached a point of contention or stalemate. Can I, therefore, propose that we move on; if we get to a point of contention, then we may stay a decision over that. I thank you.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Mr Chairman, our Rule 23, the quorum prescribed under sub rule (1) shall only be required at a time when Parliament is voting on any question. You have been asking these questions. That means we are approving or voting on these issues. So, it is important that we should respect our own laws. 

So, if the honourable member has raised the issue of quorum, it is important that we should respect our own rules.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Chairman, I think it is just allegation. Does she know the number of Members of Parliament here in the House? We do not have the number.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, can we have the motion by the person processing the Bill? It is a Private Members’ Bill? Can we have the motion for the House to resume?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.25
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Chairman, I move the motion that the House resumes. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.26
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control Bill, 2010” and adopted Clause 1 with amendment, deferred clause 2, adopted clauses 3 and 4. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

4.26
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted)

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON A FIELD VISIT TO KAPCHORWA CO-OPERATIVE FARMERS’ ASSOCIATION, BUSIA LEATHER FACTORY, BUSIA SUGAR FACTORY AND HOTEL TOURISM AND TRAINING INSTITUTE IN JINJA

4.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Mr Speaker, I am here to present a report of the Sessional Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on a field visit to Kapchorwa Co-operative Farmers’ Association, Busia Leather Factory, Busia Sugar Factory and Hotel Tourism and Training Institute in Jinja. 

The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry carried out this field visit in the eastern districts as I have mentioned and the objective of the field visit was:
    1. To establish the factory, ie Busia Leather tannery and Busia Sugar Factory.
    2. We were doing oversight on the warehouses, that is, Kapchorwa warehouse and Agroways warehouse in Jinja.
    3. Hotel Tourism and Training Institute in Jinja.

Mr Speaker, the methodology we used was that we travelled to the districts of Busia, Kapchorwa and Jinja and had tours of the warehouses, factories and Hotel Tourism Training Institute. We met and held discussions with the following: The area Members of Parliament, the district local leaders, community members of Busia District, management of Busia leather tannery and Busia Sugar Factory, management of Hotel Tourism and Training Institute in Jinja, and the management of Kapchorwa warehouse store. 

The minutes are here; I beg to lay them on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, I request that the House allows me to read the observations and the recommendations, which are in the report, in summary form.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you very much. Summary of the committee observations and recommendations:
    1. Jumbo leather tannery in Busia District:
    a) The tannery generates alot of chemical waste, most of which is characterised as being potentially hazardous to public health and to the environment. The tannery in Busia has a number of management problems including storage and disposal of effluents. There were a number of environmental concerns that included, among others, a bad odour. 
    b) There is need to bring all leather tanners and stakeholders in the sector under one umbrella.
    c) The promotion of processing of hides and skins into finished leather requires heavy investment into waste treatment and purification, which Government needs to partner with reliable investors.
    d) The extensive process of leather tanning leads to exposure to high levels of chemical effluents and to decomposing biological or organic matter, which adversely affect human health and the environment.
    e) The Jumbo Tannery in Busia lacks modern facilities, expertise and skills to mitigate the adverse impacts of chemicals on human and animal health and the environment.
    f) The scattered nature of the tannery industry in Uganda makes it difficult for them to attract assistance from Government, especially towards constructing a common point for effluent discharge and treatment.
    g) Laws governing the tannery industry are scattered, inadequate and poorly implemented.

Recommendations

    a) Monitoring: There is a need for Government, Civil Society Organisations and other stakeholders to monitor activities of leather tannery industries and to closely work with them and other regulatory organs for improved production in the industry.
    b) On waste management, there is need for clustering the leather tannery industries in the country so that they may be able to pool resources for a common treatment plant of effluent since individual plants are finding it difficult to construct their own modern treatment plants. Upon clustering of the leather tannery plants, Government should also come in to support the industry by contributing towards a common modern waste treatment facility for leather tanning.
    c) On national policy, there is need for Government to fast-track the process of establishing a comprehensive policy on national hides and skins, leather and leather products. The absence of this policy is greatly affecting economic and environmental benefits from the leather tannery industry. 

The policy will also regulate leather tanning, the export of raw hide or skin and set procedures on how the animals will be skinned and transported to maintain the quality of the skin before processing.

2. 	Busia Sugar Factory

Observations
    a) The committee observed that Busia Sugar Factory is not yet operational although the investor has acquired 17 acres of land where the sugar factory is being set up and 90 acres of land for sugarcane growing.
    b) The committee further noted that the investor plans to supply the out-growers with cane seed and has already registered 1,200 out-growers in the districts of Tororo, Bukedea, Butaleja, Mayuge and Soroti. The factory shall begin with production of 5,000 metric tonnes a day.
    c) Currently, the management is setting up an installation for spirit distilling with a capacity of 5,000 litres a day.
    d) Due to non-collaboration between Uganda Investment Authority and National Environment and Management Authority, the investor has faced delays in setting up the factory.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that before an investor is permitted or granted an investment license by UIA, they should ensure that the investor carries out an environmental impact assessment.

3. 	Observations on Kapchorwa Warehouse
    a) The committee observed that the members of KACOFA are faced with the problem of poor feeder roads especially in the neighbouring district of Bukwo, whose members cannot access the warehouse services and, therefore, sell their grains to Kenya.
    b) The committee further noted that there is no clear policy on subsidy to farmers and yet, the same is granted to some investors in the industrial sector.
    c) There is no policy on farm insurance and thus, need for Government to come up with one to insure farmers against losses incurred due to environmental hazards.
    d) The committee also noted that there is no user-friendly financing to farmers with Centenary Bank offering agricultural loans at 38 percent.
    e) The laws on fake and substandard products are very weak.
    f) The committee further noted that the Bill on agricultural inputs has been shelved.
    g) The committee observed that farmers wait for a period of six months to get better prices for their produce, so the Price Stabilisation Bill should be expedited by the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives.


4. 	The Hotel Tourism and Training Institute in Jinja

Recommendations

    a) The committee recommends that the Government should refurbish the facilities at the institute since this will increase student enrolment at the institute.
    b) The committee recommends that laws establishing the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute under the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities be expeditiously approved by Parliament. The Uganda Wildlife Training Institute law also be equally expedited. While Uganda Wildlife Education Centre still operates as a Trust, there is need for an enabling law to establish it as a statutory body in order for it to benefit from Government funding.

This recommendation can now be answered by the fact that the laws are with the Committee on Tourism and Trade and we are handling them. I think by mid-May, we shall be presenting a report about the same laws.

In conclusion, from the findings of the field visit, the committee came to the conclusion that a lot still needs to be done to fix the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute in Jinja, the operations of factories with regard to their refurbishment, the Warehouse Receipt System, monitoring of activities of leather tannery industries with regard to waste management and establishment of a comprehensive policy on leather products, as well as putting in place relevant laws and guidelines on investment in this area.

In order to fix this sector, all stakeholders must be involved; stakeholders at the local or community level, district authorities and at the national and global levels. These should include both the political as well as technical or professional ones. 

The committee also came to the conclusion that with more vigilance, more funding, more accountability and partnerships, the Tourism, Trade and Industry sector challenges will be addressed.

Lastly, the field visit enabled the committee to learn from the perspectives of farmers and local authorities. To that extent, the committee hopes that the implementation of its recommendations in this report will lead to an improvement on the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute, factories and industries in Uganda.

The committee, therefore, would like to urge the House to adopt the report. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for this report. Hon. Members, the motion is for the adoption of the Report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on a field visit to Kapchorwa Co-operative Farmers’ Association, Busia Leather Factory, Busia Sugar Factory and Hotel Tourism and Training Institute. 

That is the motion I propose for your debate. (Ms Amelia Kyambadde rose_) Hon. Minister, do you want to respond at this stage? Yes, hon. Minister for Trade. If you would like, speak now as you have stood up. I do not know whether you want to speak now or at the end. Okay, proceed.

4.45
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND CO-OPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Mr Speaker, I rise to respond to the motion raised by the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

I wish to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for the comprehensive report on the three institutions they visited. I appreciate the interest they have exhibited and I would like to respond to those few issues.

First and foremost, the Hides and Skins and Leather Policy - this policy is being handled together with the Ministry of Agriculture. We have held stakeholder meetings and we will soon present it. We realised that the two products, although they are related, have unique difference – hides and skins and leather. So, we want to address them separately. 

We as the Ministry of Trade and Industry decided to take on leather and we already have a draft; Ministry of Agriculture will handle hides and skins. So, there will be two policies. I am glad to report to you that we have already drafted that policy and I will be submitting it to Cabinet next month for consideration.

The other point is lack of capacity and competence to handle waste matter by Jumbo Tannery. I would like to announce that in February, we also visited that tannery and realised that they have the challenges that have been highlighted by the chairperson. We agreed with the management that the following measures must be taken and we gave them three months with effect from March: they were supposed to purchase and install a chrome recovery plant, thus ensuring zero discharge of chrome into the environment. Another condition was to expand the effluent treatment plant through construction of additional segmentation ponds and an artificial wetland. This has improved the quality of effluent discharged – they have started working on this – and significantly reduced the complaints from the surrounding community, especially about the bad odour. Nevertheless, we have had some complaints that it still prevails.

We requested them that the factory should construct a store for storage of chemicals and other toxic and hazardous raw materials, including acid. This is because they were just throwing them all-over the place without any form of organisation. We requested them to draw a programme for issuing personal protective gear, including gloves, masks, gumboots, overalls etcetera. We gave three months and we shall go back since the three months will expire by the end of this May. But I thank the committee because it is apparent that some of these challenges actually still prevail.

We also realise that we need to establish a leather park that would have a common effluent treatment plant facility for the entire sector because most of these dealers were complaining that it is very expensive to establish an effluent plant on their own. We have applied to Uganda Investment Authority to give us land for that and we are still following it up with them.

We are working with COMESA to organise these dealers – the tannery and leather dealers – into an association. This is because we realised that they were working in clusters and as a result – since it is a capital intensive industry – they could not meet all the requirements. So, we requested them to form an association, which they have done and COMESA has been taking them through a lot of training and also benchmarking in some of the countries like Ethiopia, which is doing very well in the leather industry.

Another issue is on Busia Sugar Factory. The sugar industry has grown tremendously in the previous year and the domestic consumption has gone up. But we are producing about 400 metric tonnes for domestic consumption whereas, previously, we were producing only 280-something. And we have five major sugar mills, namely Lugazi, Kakira, Kinyara, Mayuge and Kaliro. But the challenge is still the policy. Whereas that industry favours the climate that is around Kaliro and Jinja, you will find that all these industries want to establish their factories there. We apparently need to amend our policy, which is binding because it says that you cannot establish an industry within the radius of 25 kilometres. 

So, what we have been trying to tell them is that at least, they should form an association like it is in Mauritius; they formed a co-operative and each decided to deal with different by-products: One deals with ethanol, another with jaggery and yet another with white sugar. And so, they have a consortium. However, in Uganda’s case, it has been very difficult to convince them. So, we have decided to fast-track the drafting of the principles of the Sugar Bill, which we have already submitted to Cabinet for reading. However, it has not yet been put on the agenda. This Bill will guide us even in Busia.

The other issue is on Kapchorwa Commercial Farmers’ Association. This one has been licensed with us under warehouse receipt system but the challenge of the poor feeder roads has rendered the warehouse inaccessible. And yet the warehouse was recently refurbished by the World Food Programme into a modern and effective facility. So, we are working with the Ministry of Works and Local Government and UNRA to see that we address this challenge of the road because we are losing a lot of products, which are sold across in Kenya cheaply.

The issue of absence of policy on subsidies to farmers – as is the case in the industrial sector – we need to keep in mind that the least developed countries are negotiating with developed countries, especially Europe and USA to make reduction commitments on the domestic support they provide to their farmers. Therefore, as we think of an agricultural subsidies policy, we need to ensure that it is in compliance with our multilateral commitments to the World Trade Organisation. And we are currently the chair of the 49 least developed countries. Therefore, we have to be very careful about some of the policies we introduce here to avoid contradicting some of the multilateral commitments.

Another point that has emerged is agricultural insurance - absence of a policy of farm insurance. Indeed, we need this policy. However, there are insurance firms – like Jubilee Insurance, UAP, Insurance Company of East Africa – that have agricultural insurance packages. However, we are going to work with the relevant Government institutions namely; Agriculture, to develop and implement this policy that would harmonise these policies that are currently under the insurance companies. 

Mr Speaker, about the lack of user-friendly financing to farmers, with loans of about 38 percent; I know we all had hope in the agriculture credit facility. But apparently, it decided to operate through commercial banks. And as a result, the interest rate rose and our farmers could not afford them. So, what are we doing about it as the Ministry of Trade? We, as a ministry, have prepared a Cabinet paper on revitalisation of the Co-operative Bank. The Co-operative Bank is the only medium that would salvage the farmers and the co-operatives at the moment. Mr Speaker and honourable members, I seek your support in this matter because it is the only way in which our farmers will be able to access affordable credit. 

On the price stabilisation Bill, it has gone through stakeholders’ consultation and we will present it. 

On the issue of weak laws on fake and substandard products, we have just cemented the UNBS Act and this has to be enforced. I know they have been quite slow in enforcement. 

Furthermore, PIVoC is another issue that we have brought on board and it has helped by 45 percent to curb the substandard and fake products that were being imported into the country. PIVoC verifies goods from the point of origin – and it has met a lot of resistance. 

By last year, 45 percent is such an achievement because we implemented it in June, now it is less than a year but we already feel the impact. I would request that the honourable members bear with us on the substandard commodities. I seek your support. 

We will work closely with the Ministry of Agriculture on pesticides, fertilisers and some of those other drugs. I beg to submit. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members for listening to me. I will wait for other comments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Minister. 

4.54
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am wondering whether we still have –(Interjections)– I know we have inter-ministerial coordination for some of these operation efficiencies. But in the olden days, the Ministry of Labour used to supervise the operations of these factories or industries. That is where they would check on the operations as far as human protective gear is concerned and the issue of managing waste.   

I am wondering whether the Ministry of Labour is still mandated to do that because as a Ministry of Trade, these factories are the basis of the ministry and it would be unfair for you to do the checks and balances. I think it should be the other way round. You should be able to support but the other ministry should do the monitoring and evaluation of the operations of those factories, and that is where they would be able to use a carrot and stick to enable them operate efficiently. Thank you very much. 

4.56
MS GRACE ASAMO (NRM, PWD): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the sugar factory, I have heard a number of districts mentioned. I get worried when we have a number of 1,200 and already in Busoga, we have a big challenge from these out-growers. They put their land to sugar canes, which takes about three years in the gardens and people have nowhere to plant food crops. 

I would like to know from the minister and the chairperson of the committee whether there is any regulation to restrict people with small land to avoid this. Sometimes, the plots people have are too small and at the end of the day, our people have nowhere to plant other crops for subsistence. 

The other issue is about promoting “enguli”. You know, when molasses come from the sugar factory, “enguli” will increase and people will get drunk. So, can we be educated on how our people will be kept from being drawn into “Waragi” and they become useless and do not produce any more. The sugar will bring in profits but it might not help the community.

On the issue of training in the Jinja Tourism Institute, I do not know whether our products are of quality. When you go to most of our hotels, like Serena and Sheraton, you find other people. I respect the issue of integration but really, I do not know where our graduates are. Even when you go to the tourism sector, you cannot see our graduates. So, let the Minister of Tourism advise us where we should put our young people after that training. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.58
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well-done. I will start off with the issue of sugar. 

An investor was given a licence but the environmental impact assessment was not cleared. I would like to ask the minister, who is present here, whether there is coordination between UIA and NEMA. Do we really have a well-laid up procedure of how investors come and get licences? Or does someone just start from the top and move to the bottom and then to the middle? What is happening?

I would expect that before someone is given a licence, they should have started with getting an environmental impact licence. On that note, I would like to pose this question: Now that an investor is given a licence, supposing NEMA says, “We cannot licence this”, what will happen to the investor who already got a licence?

Secondly, on the Hotel and Training Institute (HTTI), which is the only one for the Government, we all agree that tourism has serious potentials to generate revenue in this country. So, having only one Government institution, HTTI is not enough because throughout the country, we have enough tourist sites. We have hotels distributed throughout the country. If we are to be serious, the ministry has to do something, as far as the institute for hotel training is concerned. 

If we go by the integration process that we are pursuing with this kind of skills gap, as far as tourism is concerned, it means we will be out-competed. I do not think that will be in the best interest of this country.

Finally, it is good that the Public/Private Partnership Bill is just within Parliament. Otherwise, I join the committee in praying that this Bill is passed into law. This will let serious investors who can invest in capital intensive businesses of this nature come to partner with Uganda. On top of that, there are many local governments that are in need of this kind of partnership – (Member timed out.)

5.02
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Mr Speaker, I want to dwell mainly on the issue of Kapchorwa Farmers’ Association. While I would like to thank the committee for the very good observations they have made, I want to say that the committee did not come up with substantive recommendations on the remedies that the ministry can employ to sort out the issues of farmers. Following the response of the minister, it leaves a lot to be desired. 

Hon. Minister, you are saying that on the issue of policy, we have to wait for the other least developed countries to first design related policies before Uganda comes up with a policy that will suit our farmers. My simple question is: if your children are sleeping hungry, should you wait until the neighbours have cooked food before you start looking for food for your children? You know for sure that most of the rural population in this country practices farming. You also know that over 80 percent of the population in this country is actually in agriculture. Most of the challenges facing farmers rotate around issues of policy formulation, financing and infrastructure. These leave farmers out from benefitting from what is called – actually we are not helping our farmers. We need something that is going to work out very fast, ranging from financing – because you have heard for yourself what the chairperson of the committee insinuated here that in the industry sector, finances are availed though to a few people but the problem is that this arrangement is leaving out this 80 percent of the population engaged in agriculture. They are the majority of Ugandans who are trying to struggle for their own. 

We would rather put more money into the 80 percent of the population to finance their activities. Actually, farming does not require a lot of money to the tune of what you are giving to industries.  Yes, I know we are moving towards industrialisation but if we do not have inputs and other factors that would come from the farming sector to feed them, our industries will be as good as nothing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have been notified that in the public gallery, we have people living with HIV/AIDS and members of the Civil Society Coalition of the HIV/AIDS Prevention and Control. They had come in to observe the proceedings and discussions on that particular Bill, which we have now deferred.  Please, if they are still here, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

5.05
MR JACOB WANGOLO (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. My submission is about the Busia Sugar Factory. We are all aware that in Eastern Uganda, land is fragmented. So, when you talk about setting up a sugar factory in Busia, where is the land to support it? They are talking about 90 acres, but can anyone establish a factory on 90 acres of land –(Interjections)– they have 17 for the factory and for the sugarcane plantation, it is 90 acres. I heard them talk about Butaleja, where is that land in Butaleja? I come from Butaleja and many people have shifted to Kiboga looking for land to cultivate.

When you talk about Mayuge, there is a factory there, but there is no land. Recently, I went to Busoga Sub Region and came across many issues in there associated with sugarcane growing – poverty, early marriages, teenage pregnancies – are in Busoga because of sugarcanes and people were complaining – (Interjections) – yes even defilement cases. Do you want to extend those issues to Butaleja, when we are already aware that most parts of Butaleja are occupied by swamps? Actually, people there have now resorted to reclaiming these swamps. When you go there - we need Government intervention. We do not need our people to also host sugarcane growing problems. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.07
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The report and the responses by the minister are an exposure that Parliament and Government have a big task to accomplish beyond just appropriating money to these sectors. Clearly, you can see very little inter-ministerial coordination and collaboration because if these ministries were working in an integrated manner, a lot of diagnosis rightly made by the minister would not be there. These are Government departments that we finance year in year out but getting the same lamentations. This is a matter of very serious concern.

Without addressing the policy challenges right from privatisation because if you are talking about cooperatives, that is a policy review. The country agrees that there must be an import substitution – the “buy Uganda; promote Uganda” slogan will remain in words until we get to realise that we need supplies that come from Uganda –(Member timed out.)

5.09
MS KWAGALA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. I also thank the minister for making those remarks though we still need explanations. Regarding setting up sugar factories, I would like to add onto the observations of hon. Wangolo. It is in the eastern region where sugar factories are being concentrated. I do not know whether that is proper planning. In fact, even before the policy we have an assessment that the person establishing a factory must have over 500 hectares but these people proceed and give licences to them when they have less than 500 hectares. So, hon. Minister, we do not know whether you are really in touch with your office as in the ministry but they are doing havoc to this country. 

In the same vein, you were talking about agricultural financing. I would like to know whether, before the Cooperative Bank is re-established, the farmers should just wait and sit. Are we not financing any farmers currently? Another concern is about the environmental link with the people establishing industries, when you talk about going three months after to see whether the Jumbo industry workers have gumboots, what about the people who monitor their conditions? I appreciate that in Jinja, the effluent was dangerous but at least an intervention was done. We do not need to wait, because even the effects of industrial pollution do not need to wait. 

Lastly, hon. Minister, the warehouse system; we talk about it every day, we appreciate you enrolled the warehouse system in Jinja but do the farmers know about it or it is only centered in the factories? Thank you.

5.12
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the report. I propose that we must invest more in industrialisation. We have heard the President talking about moving away from depending on donors. Therefore, if we invest more in industrialisation, I pray that even through taxation, we shall be able to benefit and move our country. 

Secondly, I would like to know from the ministry; to what extent have they carried out countrywide survey to establish the potentials of the different districts in establishing industry whether big or small scale? Because minus doing that, we are increasing the gap between the regions for which people have been crying. I wish also to know as we are talking about policy reviews, to what extent has the privatisation policy helped this country? We have often gone out as committees to benchmark in other countries but to find that many governments owning their own assets are more empowered than Uganda. So, I would like to know the extent to which privatisation policy has helped this country to move towards its independence financially, politically and so forth.

Lastly, there have been many initiatives. I thank the President, for instance, there is this banana initiative. In West Nile, we have too much cassava production. What are you thinking about it? The other time, Nwoya talked about our mangoes but the response we got was that it had a lot of fibre; but there is need for value addition, these products are rotting because we cannot consume them all. What are you thinking about our fruits, what are you thinking about our cassava? 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.15
MR MATHIUS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also thank the chairperson of the committee and the Minister for Trade for her remarks. I have personally been disappointed by the minister’s remarks on the agricultural subsidies. The minister was appealing to us that we should consider multi-lateral agreements that are signed with Uganda. She was of the view that Ugandans are not entitled to these agricultural subsidies because you mentioned that because of the agreements that Uganda signed with these countries like Europe and America in the WTO, we are not supposed to benefit. 

We know that 80 percent of our population live in the villages and they are farmers. Those of us who grew up during those days when cooperative societies were very strong - I am sure you were also the Minister for Cooperatives not these SACCOS. We should encourage and even negotiate with these European countries because in Europe, for example, the farmers are heavily subsidised. Go to America and Canada, the farmers are heavily subsidised. Go to China, those of you who were in China recently, you could see how Government of China encourages farmers to make sure that they grow. When they grow more with the population of China, which is more than 1.4 billion people, they do not import food because the government subsidises the farmers. So, madam minister, just like recently, we signed the anti-gay Bill, I think time has come up for us Ugandans to stand on our feet and say our farmers cannot go on without being subsidised. We must be independent. We must tell our people that your government can help you to grow more. 

Look at the farmers – recently, Government was giving coffee seedlings to go and plant to encourage farmers, but you need herbicides, fertilisers, hoes, tractors. How can an ordinary farmer in the village, especially you Members who represent rural constituencies, be able to meet these prices and at the same time, make some profits out of these agricultural products? 

So, I am appealing to you, hon. Minister, that the next time although you have told us that we are the chair of the 49 least developed countries in WTO, I think we should for us say, “In Uganda, our issue is that farmers…”, just like in Europe, as I mentioned. Thank you.

5.18
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for the good report.  The issue for the Bukwo is a very serious matter - that those people do not have a bank; they do not even have storage facility. I expect the Minister of Trade to come up with a proposal in this year’s budget that that road be done, a bank should be opened there immediately because this is an issue that we should not keep lamenting about and make part of our country belong to Kenya even if we are in East African region. I am saying “belong to Kenya” in terms of economic activities. 

Secondly, the issue of sugar is very serious. These sugar people of Busia wanted to acquire forestland in Tororo. I managed to mobilise my people to resist forest land. I have now heard that they have agreements with local farmers. There is no free public land in Tororo and Busia. All that is Government forest land that the people have been using it courtesy of National Forestry Authority. So, you need to ask this sugar factory whether these people own land because I have been discussing with National Forestry Authority making arrangements, seedlings are going to  be given to the people including Office of the Speaker, the one million tree project, they are going to give seedlings so that the farmers plant trees.

So, when did you people licence to put sugar factory and you do not have land for sugar? We discovered their intentions to make Waragi spirit, which we do not entertain in Tororo and Busia. I would like the committee to come up with the report, this sugar factory should be closed; we should not allow them to put Waragi spirit in Tororo and for me, whether vote or no vote, we cannot allow a Waragi factory in Tororo.

Mr Speaker, the next issue is the industries. I would like to request you, because of time, that you direct the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to go to Tororo. We are going to have a phosphate factory in Tororo but as of now, we have a problem on who the investor is, acquisition of land, there is blackmail, intimidation and a lot of violation of the law as regards the phosphate project in Tororo. 

I request that this Parliament interests itself very seriously on the Tororo Phosphate project and the committee responsible get to the ground very urgently. Otherwise, my people of Tororo are being intimidated to sell their land under customary arrangement so that we lose royalties. We do not know who the investors are. 

Mr Speaker, next week, with your permission, I want to table documents here and I want the Minister for Energy to come up with a report so that we know who are the licence holders throughout the – (Member timed out.)

5.21
DR KENNETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for this report. I will address myself to the question of the Hotel Tourism Institute in Jinja. Tourism is one of those fast growing services sector in the world. Unfortunately, the quality of the operators or service providers in this sector is very poor in this country. 

If you go to many of our hotels and look around, even our own here and others who have even attained this training at the university, their services are really wanting. You go to a hotel and you find a waiter or waitress moving with toothpicks in the mouth or picking the nose while serving clients. And then, we will complain because they have others who have come from other places and have taken over our jobs. 

I think that it is important that this institute be refurbished. What I did not agree with as is indicated in the report of the committee is about Government intentions of borrowing money to build a hotel. I do not think that we need a hotel but to refurbish this institute and then, we will use our hotels - the hotels within here can be accredited for attachment of these students because I think as indicated here, $10 million to construct a four-star hotel – I would not buy into this. Our students can benefit from the different hotels we have in this country for accreditation and internship.

I thank the hon. Minister on the comment about the cooperatives. I think all I need to say is that the issue of cooperatives is not new in this country. Even us who are young and just saw the dilapidated structures, which were once used by cooperatives, know about cooperatives. 

All I want the honourable minister to do is to bring those that you want this House to support you on - the issue of cooperatives, because I think this is the only way that will help our farmers to develop – with establishment of farmer banks where farmers can easily access low interest loans. 

With these cooperative arrangements, I think that the farmers in our country – in fact, it is the agricultural sector that employs over 80 percent of our people. I think this is what we need now. How can we support you - because there is nothing new about cooperatives but we only want you to come up with the issues that this House can support, in this area of cooperatives? I thank you.

5.24   
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank the committee members for the report. The committee has highlighted challenges of Kapchorwa Commercial Farmers’ Association. It is one of the model institutions that we have for training farmers in that region; even from Bugisu, all the farmers move to Kapchorwa. One of the Chief Executive Officers is a husband to hon. Phyllis Chemutai, one of the Members of Parliament from Kapchorwa but she is not in the House. They are facing huge challenges financially; all the assets are under foreclosure and the bank has started selling all moveable equipment and they are now waiting to sell that warehouse. 

I do not know whether the committee was told of that because the chief executive is my friend and he has been telling me that they have tried to approach the President for a bail-out but they have not succeeded.
But above all, we need to put systems in place like what hon. Nsubuga said. In 2009, I was in China and the CNOOC that is here has a refinery in Zhengzhou in South China. Part of the byproducts, they use for fertilizers and when I was there I asked them whether it was possible for one – because it is cheap – to enter into business to import. Basically, I wanted to import fertilisers. But they told me it was not and that the fertilisers were for only farmers in China, free of charge. 

The challenge we are getting here is that the prices are high and even the inputs are fake. These season farmers are crying because the inputs we are using are all fake, with more than 50 percent of planting material beans, maize- I hope Members of Parliament are lucky that what you picked has succeeded but for majority of them, it has failed.

So, we need to get a clear policy to regulate some of these institutions –(Member timed out.)

5.28
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee members and the chairperson for this good presentation. To me, this was like a sample but it represented most areas that were not sampled. 

First and foremost, I do not know what happened to most investors who come to Uganda. When they are given licenses from different ministries, they do not even go to where those activities are going to take place but they just give licenses and a go ahead. 

You often hear people saying that, “We are asking Government or we put this to Government.” But who is Government? I put this blame, first of all, to the different ministries because they are the people who give licenses. I used to sit on the Committee on Agriculture where I was Vice-Chairperson. 

I want to tell you that it is most especially through these ministries that these investors are getting loans, Government money that we pass in this House and this is the money that goes to those people down there to convince them to sell their land to these investors.

Like hon. Wangolo and hon. Ekanya said, even if you say that in our places we do not have land for sugar cane, it is true that you may not be having land but because these investors already have money, they will come to our poor people, convince them, give them the little because they are poor and they will give away their land – and moreover, they are using taxpayers’ money. 

I am very disappointed because if our money is going to those investors and Government has a plan that maybe they will give taxes in return – let different ministries, since every year they allocate money for monitoring, go down there and see how our people are going to be affected. 

I will give an example and in future, it will happen. We have the oil palm project that is coming to Buvuma but I want to tell you that it is a small place where they are concentrated and they have kept on buying land since 2002, up to now but there is nothing seen on the ground. And right now, they tell people not to plant because they already counted and they were going to pay them. Can you imagine a situation where people are even going to fail to get food? But this is an investor into oil palm who was given money – and who Government is still giving money – to buy land in Buvuma. (Member timed out.)

5.31
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the committee for this report. I will start with the issue of Ministry of Labour like one colleague mentioned. This ministry – I am not shy to say – has let us down as far as inspection and monitoring is concerned. We have seen a number of steel mills in my sub-region and many people are dying out of explosions in the scrap metals. But our minister has never visited these factories. When people are complaining of their loved ones who are dying, no one has come to see what the real problem is. So, I appeal to the Minister in charge of Labour – it is unfortunate that he is not here but at least, the point is captured.

The other issue is to do with sugar cane growing. The acreage holding of the people of Busia is half an acre per family; if they make a mistake of licensing a sugarcane processing factory in Busia, we shall have mortgaged this country and in the process importing food insecurity in the area. I appeal to the minister – I always trust you and you have been our ally – to stick to your guns and do not license this factory. Uganda Investment Authority is letting you down – this should also be on record. Uganda Investment Authority is under the Ministry of Finance and so, it keeps issuing licences behind the back of the Ministry of Trade. We want to appeal to the President – who is now the unifying factor – to prevail on this issue because these people are betraying this country. If we keep operating in a piece-meal manner, we shall not progress. 

On the issue of the Hotel Tourism Training Institute in Jinja, a colleague was castigating the issue of putting up a new hotel or infrastructure. However, some people have been accusing Government that it has neglected Jinja but this is an opportunity of putting up a four-star hotel to show that Jinja and the whole of Busoga is part of Uganda and Government is mindful of it. Therefore, I applaud Government for this grant; just carry on. However, we need to synchronise the issue to do with the training institute and the existing hotel -(Member timed out.)

5.33
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Basing on what my colleagues have been submitting, I was prompted to come up and say something about sugarcane. I come from a sugarcane growing area but at times, I always hate to listen to issues being raised from an angle, which is not researched. I was disturbed by a statement from my senior colleague from Tororo and another one from my colleague from Butaleja. I come from a family with a serious history of peasantry but as a small boy, growing up, my parents used to grow groundnuts and maize. But now, the only crop that can be grown in our area is sugarcane; our people are not growing sugarcane out of choice but Government has neglected them.

I believe that if hon. Ekanya had paved way – let me say it because he is here – for our fertiliser plant in Tororo so that Government could supply fertilisers to all our farmers, I believe that our people could have gone back to planting groundnuts and maize.

Mr Speaker, the issue of teenage pregnancy is not all about sugarcane. Even when our parents were growing groundnuts and maize, I used to see girls conceiving at the age of 15. So, I do not think that sugarcane is the only reason we are experiencing teenage pregnancy. There is a saying that “Water is life” but I believe that even sugar is life. We had a crisis some few years back when a kilogramme of sugar was going for Shs 6,000. And almost every Uganda was mad because sugar was very expensive - (Member timed out.)

5.36
MR MARTIN MUGABI (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also come from Busoga sub-region, which is a sugarcane growing area. (Interjections) This time it is not jiggers. (Laughter)

We have heard the minister talking about licences being given out to factories. In our district, we have also attracted one and most of our farmers have gone into sugarcane growing. But what we have realised of recent is that our farmers are failing to break even – the prices for sugarcane have seriously gone down. Hon. Minister, I would like to inform you that our farmers have committed their small pieces of land to sugarcane growing, aware that the prices were high. But as we speak now, they are very low.

The other issue I wish to tell you, hon. Minister and committee chairperson, is that when we started sugarcane growing – recently, we were hit by a heavy rainstorm as a result of growing sugarcane. This is because farmers have cut down the forests and trees; all the swamps have been reclaimed. My proposal is that if possible, your ministry and that in charge agriculture should go to the sub-county authority and help them to come up with bye-laws that can govern sugarcane growing. 

The other issue that should not be left out is that people should be told that as they plant sugarcane, they must also plant trees along the boundaries.

My colleague from Bukoto talked about – in fact, the minister talked about agriculture financing and he was talking of subsidising inputs. Hon. Minister, I would like to inform you that on the issue of agriculture financing, it is only a class of about 10 percent that can access and benefit from this. Our local farmers, who constitute the largest percentage in this country, cannot qualify for this financing. Therefore, I urge Government that where possible, let us go into direct financing of agricultural inputs like fertilisers, seeds, tractors – I have personally tried it with three farmers –(Member timed out.)

5.40
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A few days ago, I was in Hoima and we visited some tobacco farmers; and it was everywhere in the papers that we made a mistake. But we realised how much BAT was contributing to the value chain in growing tobacco and we commended them for that. And the farmers were really happy. Sugarcane production I think is also being supported because there is a value chain being supported by the industries. 

I say this because farmers are pursuing these crops that are dangerous or difficult because Government through the Ministry of Agriculture and NAADS has not effectively pursued the policy of value chain development on crops that yield high returns to our farmers. I think it is height time that Government came out to look at this problem seriously. There are a number of crops that farmers would grow, but simply because of lack of support in the system, they resort to growing sugarcane. Sugarcane growing is such a big problem in my own district in Kayunga. We used to repair these roads once in a year, now we are required to repair them every month because of the damage caused by the tracks carrying sugarcanes. So they are imposing such a huge burden on the district to repair these roads and to the country at large and yet if you look at the taxes collected from that sector, you may wonder what the benefits are; you may even justify importing sugarcanes from another country. The cost is higher than the benefit we get out of this. 

So, Mr Speaker, I think the Ministry of Agriculture through NAADS should persistently pursue the relevant value chains in crops that can yield high returns to farmers to save the farmers from growing crops that are dangerous to our communities. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.43
MS KEVINAH TAAKA (FDC, Busia Municipality, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of this committee but I am complaining. Yesterday, I stood up but I was not catching your eye – (Interruption)

5.43
MR BERNARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I commend the committee for a good report. I have come here to offer the minister some solutions. In Arua, we have land enough to accommodate sugarcane growers. Actually, most of the labourers in those sugarcane growing districts are from West Nile. And recently, our district local Government passed resolutions requesting Government to direct investors who would like to do sugarcane growing on large scale in West Nile. So there is land, if you can cooperate with the local people, we will readily welcome you. 

Secondly, I want to correct the information a member has just given here that BAT is doing a lot of good in Bunyoro sub region. The information I want to give my brother from Ntenjeru is that BAT started in West Nile; they have depleted the quality of soil in West Nile and are now moving away to virgin land - preferably Bunyoro. So BAT is not doing any good in those areas because very soon, the land will become infertile like it is in West Nile. 	

Recently, they took us to the warehouse where they store tobacco; you can imagine tonnes of tobacco leaves were packed there worth hundreds of billions! I kept asking myself, if BAT can do this; why not Government doing the model of BAT and encourage our farmers - of course, of late there are no food crops; every food crop is now a cash crop because of the market in Sudan. 

So why can’t the Ministry of Agriculture endorse the BAT model and encourage our farmers to produce on large scale because the market is readily available. People are in tobacco growing because BAT is offering them ready market even though they cannot determine the prices. 

So, while I agree with the recommendations of the committee, I think it is important that the government looks across the board as we address this matter. And when the Tobacco Control Bill comes on the floor, let us all support it because tobacco is not the way to go. We can generate taxes even from food crops. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I see the Member for Buvuma Island and Igara, but I think we have had enough debate on this debate. If the ministers want to make some responses, very briefly, then we can close at 6.00 O’clock.

5.46
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Well, I will be very brief. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and honourable members for your contributions.

About the agricultural subsides, I do agree with the presenters and I think we need to use our position as the chair of the least developed countries to advance this cause. I thank you for this contribution.

On the issue of sugar in Busia, we must admit there have been some uncoordinated movement within us where Uganda Investment Authority issues licences yet we are the ones who know whether that area qualifies or not. I want to assure Members that we are streamlining that arrangement. 

But I would like to bring out one point, that if Busia is producing ethanol - ethanol is supposed to cater for about three areas: electricity, pharmaceutical products – you can attain a lot of by-products from ethanol. So once you have ethanol in your area, it is an achievement in one way or another; so let us embrace it.

Another point is on Iganga – well, I need to be briefed on whether we have managed to identify other industries in other districts. We have district commercial officers who are issuing information on the industries that are coming up. We also launched the national industrial database. We worked with URSB and URA and in this database, we have managed to identify a number of industries in the districts. 

Another point is the cassava. Cassava is being marketed and we are opening up a cassava factory in Mbale. We are going to roll out to other areas and we are encouraging investors to also look into that industry because when you compare us to Nigeria, cassava has a lot of products that are not tapped into: making pharmaceuticals, starch and very many other by-products. We need also to come out aggressively and market it with the ministry of agriculture. 

As far as the Kapchorwa Road is concerned - unfortunately the Minister of Work is not here. But it is very high on the agenda; Kapchorwa – Bukwo Road has been on the agenda for some time. But in this financial year, we are also going to push to see that they prioritise it. 

Another point that I need to talk about is that of BAT. I want to support the honourable member; they did more harm than good. They relocated their industry to Kenya instead of adding value here; they were taking all the tobacco to be processed in Kenya. That is one.

Two, they bought tobacco at an extremely low price. So, they were not supporting tobacco out-growers though they did that at the beginning. They stopped this in the last four years. So, on BAT, that was misinformation, Mr Speaker.

Another point is about labour and gender. The Ministry of Gender is responsible for the health and safety – I mean occupational health and safety but they are represented on our board just as we are also represented on theirs. I can recall that they have been doing – I remember when the hon. John Nasasira was still the minister, they used to move around. So, may be the responsible minister will talk about it.

Our role as Ministry of Trade is to do technical guidance to these industries; to support infrastructure; training in skills. Those are our major roles in regard to industries. But we have been also doing a bit of monitoring and well, the Minister of Gender will maybe say something about their role.

I would like to thank West Nile population for providing land for growing sugarcane. There are a number of investors that have come to our offices expressing interest in growing sugarcanes in West Nile. I also know that Atiak is one area where there is going to be constructed a very big state-of-art factory by this investor called Amina. Thank you very much for doing that.

The cooperative bank is vital and we are pushing for it to be revived. We promised that we are going to get involved in the affairs – we have been informed that they are heavily indebted. We want to also move to Sebei Union. We have just sorted out the issues of Bugisu Cooperative Union, which had been a big issue here. Mr Speaker, I can report that we have managed to sort out its issues. We are now moving onto Sebei Cooperative Union in May. But I promise we will also look at KACCOFA (Kapchorwa Co-operatives Farmers Association) and see how we can resolve some of these issues.

Thank you very much for listening to me, Mr Speaker and honourable members. I wish to submit.

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM (Ms Agnes Akiror): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. I stand to respond to the issues that have been raised.

This Bill and others were read to the House for the first time in March this year. The House referred the Bills to the Committee of Tourism, Trade and Industry. We secured a loan from, the World Bank of $12 million. This money has been allocated to HTTI for the construction of a modern state-of-art training institute.

I also would like to report that my ministry has put in place an interim supervisory committee to steer the institute. And as soon as the law is passed, we shall appoint a substantive board to govern the institute.

Part of the World Bank loan shall be used to secure the required software. We are negotiating with the European Union for a grant to refurbish the kitchen and the laundry. I can report that they have expressed a lot of positivity.

In the next financial year, Shs 160 million has been earmarked for the rehabilitation of the hotel. We want to make an undertaking to refurbish the hotel though this will depend on the availability of resources.

Hon. Asamo wondered where our graduates go. I would like to reassure her that majority of them have got employment within the country. I have met a number of them. But there are some who have gone to the neighbouring countries.

The law is now before this House.

Hon. Santa raised the fact that one institution not being enough. I would like to inform the House that plans for the establishment of other hospitality training institutions is premised on our national resource envelope. So, as soon as resources are availed, that will be undertaken.

Hon. Dr Omona raised something - I think it is not very factual because throughout the many years I have lived in this country, I have never met that kind of trained person even if I got to be in charge of the sector. Unfortunately, he has disappeared. But very honestly – maybe at the extreme ends of eating places in cattle markets but even then, I have never come across anybody trying to do what he said. So, I beg that the House does not take him very seriously on that point.

Mr Speaker, we welcome the recommendations of the committee. We pledge to implement them depending on the availability of resources.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Okay, let us listen to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

5.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND CULTURE (Ms Lukia Nakadama): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank all Members for their contributions and concerns about the labour department.

As far as we are concerned, I would like to say that it has been the concern of the Members and the committee. 

On monitoring, like the minister of Trade has said, we have been monitoring. We have been doing it but because of the inefficient funds, we have not been able to perform as expected.

So, what we are trying to do now is to turn OCSH Department into a fully-fledged agency so that it can be able to execute its mandate as expected and as stipulated in the Occupation and Safety and Health Act, 2006. So, we are working with the Ministry of Finance to approve the budget as planned. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  Chairperson of the committee, I think you do not have any matters to respond to, except to restate your prayer.

5.58
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Mr Speaker, only one thing and this is to correct the Member who did not support the idea of a hotel as a demonstration. This is because I know for sure that, for example, teacher training colleges have demonstration schools; medical schools have demonstration health centres. So, there is no harm for the hotel institute to have a demonstration hotel for applied skills and just to send the students for mere internship in other hotels.

I would like to thank the Members for speaking to this report. I also thank them for raising those very pertinent issues. Further, I thank the responsible minister for responding to those issues that were raised. I implore them to implement the recommendations as given by Members of Parliament because as you all know, this is always a challenge. They can accept that they will take on the recommendations but end up failing to implement them for the reasons best known to them. 

Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I pray that the report be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, the committee was proactive. They visited a number of places before writing this report with recommendations. We have debated the report and ministers have made responses confirming what the committees have recommended.

I now put the question that the Report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on a field visit to Kapchorwa Cooperative Farmers’ Association, Busia Leather Factory, Busia Sugar Factory and the Hotel Tourism and Training Institute, be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, thank you very much. We have another report from this committee that we will be handling tomorrow. I urge you to come so that we can handle the Bill tomorrow. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 5.59 and adjourned until Thursday, 24 April 2014 at 2.00p.m.)



