
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Wednesday, 27 April 2022

Parliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today's sitting. To the sports lovers, over the weekend, Uganda Rugby Sevens Team emerged champions of the 2022 Africa Men’s Seven Cup that took place at the Kyadondo Rugby Club, Kampala, between 23rd-24th April 2022. (Applause)

By doing so, the Uganda Rugby Sevens Team qualified for the Commonwealth Games, slated for July-August 2022 and Rugby World Cup Sevens 2022, which is slated for September in South Africa. I, therefore, take this singular honour, to join you colleagues in congratulating the players, fans, sponsors, the Ministry of Education and Sports, Government and Uganda Rugby Union for enabling this success. (Applause)

Honourable Members, the Ministry of Education and Sports has achieved a lot these days; enormous success has been registered in the sports sector. Therefore, during the process of appropriation, I urge you to look at the sports sector and give it more support. Otherwise, most of us are youthful, young and we love sports. I urge you, during appropriation, to look at the sports sector and give it more support so that we can register more successes at the global stage.

Honourable colleagues, as we draw to the close of the First Session of the 11th Parliament, I have noted that we currently have 15 pending Bills in committees. Of these, 10 are tax and appropriation Bills, which are within the four days rule as stipulated under rule 129. 

We have some Bills whose time has expired. I urge chairpersons of those committees to ensure that the Bills are brought. We want to be the first Parliament to complete all business given for that session and we are about to beat that record. The moment we clear these Bills, which are pending, I can assure you that we shall conclude all the tax and appropriation Bills. The Leader of the Opposition and the government side shall have achieved tremendously as a whole House because of the commitment of colleagues. 

Chairpersons of these committees, I need those reports ready by the end of this week. I would like to inform the chairpersons who will not have their reports ready that I will be putting those Bills on the Order Paper next week to be processed without committee reports because the rules allow so. 

I would like to repeat that. Any chairperson of a committee that is handling the Bills, apart from the tax Bills, which we have - You asked for time and we gave you time within our rules, but it expired. You asked for more time, again it expired, and then you went quiet. So, those who have gone quiet, if I do not receive those reports by Friday, next week, we shall put you on the Order Paper and process those Bills without committee reports, because the rules allow us to do so. I hope you will have finished by then, to avoid such a scenario.

Of course, we have reports, which are ready, but pending harmonisation because we believe that the best way to work is harmonisation. This business of bringing a report and then, you have a lot fighting for - it is always good that Government and the Opposition, under the leadership of several leaders like the Leader of the Opposition, the Government Chief Whip, committee chairperson, the shadow minister and the minister, meet to reconcile positions and come to the House when we have appreciated each other as a team. 

Finally, I would like to join the Rt Hon. Speaker in thanking you, colleagues for the tremendous effort you have put in. I would like to specifically thank the Rt Hon. Speaker, who sat here for long hours to ensure that you processed the ministerial policy statements. You really led by example and I am sure history will reward you. With those few words, I will allow a few matters of national importance. 

2.17
MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rule 149 is about consideration of the reports on policy statements and the proposed annual budget. Rule 149(1) states, “A Sectoral Committee shall consider and review policy statements and budget estimates …… and present its report to the House, not later than the 20th day of April each financial year.”

Mr Speaker, 14 sectoral committees recently presented their reports to the House in accordance with the above rule. However, the Committee on Education and Sports did not submit its report and, therefore, it breached rule 149(1). I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports here? Are you rising on the same, Hon. Ssewungu? Do you also want to talk about the same since you have a procedural matter? 

Honourable Colleagues, I would like us to look at what is practical. You all know because of the misfortune, we lost around three weeks. In fact, we tried to put you under pressure to ensure that you finish. Rule 149 is not among the rules entrenched under Rule 16 of our Rules of Procedure. In short, we could find a way, as the presiding officers, to adjust the time because of the situation we are in. However, allow me to first consult with the Rt Hon. Speaker, who has been chairing these sessions so that I know which explanation she gave and tomorrow, I will give you feedback on this matter. Otherwise, I take your concern seriously.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I would like to thank you for the good communication.  

In your communication, you talked about the work of the committees. Through you, I pray to the appointing authority that we need a Government Chief Whip. Otherwise, most of this work is under that docket – and we have whips on our side to see what goes on. 

Even as we talk, the position of the Governor of Bank of Uganda is vacant. I think it has become a practice that we must first raise these matters in Parliament for the appointing authority to do his due diligence. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we know, maybe from the Prime Minister, why there is no Government Chief Whip, after we elevated you as the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Otherwise, every day, we hear different people saying “I am now the Government Chief Whip” and yet, that is a key position in Parliament, which must be carrying out its work. I know some of those Members might wish to get there, but we want that position filled. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Colleagues, the Prime Minister cannot answer such a question because she is not the appointing authority - she is also appointed. Also, the situation we have is where you find that the law does not give a timeline on when such a matter should be concluded. 

I would propose that we leave the appointing authority to do his work. However, as presiding officers, we shall share your concern with him. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, we want that person there because the rules are very clear that “there shall be a Government Chief Whip.” 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You can propose a name. (Laughter)

MR SSEWUNGU: I cannot propose because I cannot be one. (Laughter) However, even the issue of the Governor of Bank of Uganda is a key.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As presiding officers, we shall share the concern with the President. Hon. Rukia, would you like to say something about it? 

2.21
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I would like to inform my honourable colleague that the work of Government is being coordinated by the Office of the Prime Minister, but you guided well that it is the appointing authority to do that. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good. Hon. Silwany?

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on procedure on your communication, specifically in the area of sports. We are almost concluding the budgeting cycle of this Parliament and I would like to thank Members and the Committee on Education and Sports that this time round, they really did well when it came to the area of sports. 

However, in Busoga region, we have a stadium that has stood the test of time and has always been there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the procedural matter? 

MR SILWANY: I am coming, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what is the procedural matter? 

MR SILWANY: Mr Speaker, Bugembe Stadium, where all Ugandans used to gather and play football and it had raised the level of development of sports in Busoga region and Uganda at large, is very dilapidated. In every budget that the committee has done – and Government is doing – this stadium is never considered.

I would like to ask the minister to tell us – Members of Parliament from Busoga together with the Members of Parliament of Uganda – when Bugembe Stadium is going to be renovated as it has always been promised. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany, I can see that you have tried to smuggle in a matter. (Laughter) However, I will guide you to utilise Rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure and ask the Prime Minister a question. You can also use rule 43 to ask a question for oral answer or use rule 45. If it is a procedural matter, let it be a procedural matter. (Applause) Let us try to differentiate, please. 


Hon. Silwany, I guide that you write your question properly and then it will be answered. (Members rose_) Colleagues, I have a programme I am working on. I hope we want to finish the business on the Order Paper. Let me allow Hon. Patrick Oshabe first. 

2.25
MR PATRICK OSHABE NSAMBA (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to congratulate you upon ascending to that position. (Applause) Let me use this opportunity to congratulate you because I had not got a chance to do it. 

Mr Speaker, you congratulated the Rugby Sevens and I would like to thank you for that. The team made us proud, as Ugandans.

Continuously, these associations that make us proud rarely receive anything in our budget. I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sport,s but all those associations, except Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA), have zero shillings allocated to them. These are the people who, when they win, we come here and say, “We are proud to be Ugandans.” However, when they need money to improve their talents – to do better – we do not do anything to support them. 

I thank you for raising it, but I would like to inform you that all their requirements are in the unfunded priorities. Therefore, you may have to use your position as the Deputy Speaker to direct the Budget Committee to do something when they are scrutinising the budget. At the moment, there is nothing for all the associations in sports, except FUFA. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, that is a very serious concern. Since you are a member of the Committee on Education and Sports – and you have not yet presented your ministerial policy statement report – that is an issue that should be captured there so that we debate it here and look at the recommendations of your committee. The Budget Committee will follow the recommendations from your committee. (Applause) 

MR ONEKALIT: Thank you, Mr Speaker. My procedural matter is anchored on rule 25(7) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, which states, “An item of business standing on the Order Paper on any particular day, which has not been completed or reached on the interruption of business under the relevant provisions of these rules shall be placed on the Order Paper for the next sitting in such order as the Speaker may decide.” 

Mr Speaker, I request for your indulgence on the matter of the compensation of victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army and National Resistance Army activities. This particular item appeared on the Order Paper on the 28th of December. Since that day – with the wise ruling of the then Deputy Speaker, Rt Hon. Anita Among, when she ruled that the office of the Attorney-General “should come back to Parliament within a period of one week to present matters relating to compensation of Acholi, Lango and Teso” - Since October – which is about five or six months now – this matter has never appeared on the Order Paper again yet, this particular item is of national importance and the citizens of this country are waiting to hear the debate on this item of the compensation of the war debt claimants. 

Mr Speaker, I pray that you allow this item to be debated wholly. When an item comes before Parliament and it is not thoroughly debated, we, the representatives of the people, become casualties of criticism because – you remember how it was actually – 

THE DEPUTYS PEAKER: Honourable, you have made your point and it is a valid one. 

MR AMERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: However, this is a statement from the Attorney-General. It is not a matter we can just discuss. It is a statement and we can only discuss a statement. As presiding officers, we have taken your concern and we are going to go back and ensure that it is scheduled on the Order Paper so that the Attorney-General makes a statement and we debate it.

We shall deliver on it. Thank you. 

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, congratulations upon being elected Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. 

I have risen on a point of procedure. I would like to know whether we are proceeding well because the Office of the Prime Minister of the Republic of Uganda has many prime ministers designate. But the Prime Minister wrote a letter mentioning one prime minister in particular to be representing her or the office in the Parliament. I do not know whether we are proceeding well because I have seen many times, the Government Chief Whip – back then when you were still in that office – and Hon. Bahati, standing in for the Office of the Prime Minister. 

I, therefore, do not know whether that letter will make Parliament proceed well. What if that particular Prime Minister gets a problem? Will government business not be represented in Parliament? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Macho, unfortunately, I am not privy to the letter. I have not seen any letter. That is number one. Number two, whether there is a letter or not, as long as our issues are handled – and you have a deputy prime minister here. Those are the administrative issues. I do not know how LOP deploys or how the Prime Minister deploys. 

MR PETER MUGEMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join my colleagues in congratulating you. I have risen up on a procedural issue. Last week, I raised a matter of national importance. The reason as to why it is called a matter of national importance is because it needs urgent attention. 

Last week, the Speaker guided well and directed – there are people who are building in a green belt in Iganga and they are doing it illegally. Last week, the Speaker directed that they halt the construction until a committee of Parliament and that from the physical planning body comes out with a statement and gives us the status of the project. But up to now, they are building day and night. I have also got another directive from the National Physical Planning Board and it was copied to the Town Clerk of Iganga and yet they disregarded this letter too. 

My only opportunity to raise issues affecting the voiceless in Iganga is here at Parliament. It is Parliament which enacted – because it came as an Act of Parliament which created the National Physical Planning Board. Incidentally, these civil servants disregard the directives from the physical planning board. 

In fact, last week on Thursday, my physical planner, named Mr Constantine Wandera, who is a relative to the former Vice President, Wandera Kazibwe, had taken a bribe to this lady so that they can give way for building. Incidentally, they laid a trap and he was arrested. He was released on police bond, but nothing has been done in terms of an interdiction or something like that -(Interjection)- I take the information – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, on matters of national importance, which are urgent, you do not give information because they are clear and straightforward. Colleagues, we have to use our time in a valuable manner. 

MR MUGEMA: To conclude, Mr Speaker, I seek your indulgence. I am the voice of the voiceless in Iganga Municipality. I should not keep quiet when the green belt is going. It is these people who gave us the votes. If I let them down, I will be doing a disservice to them. 

We had to choose our leaders here. Mr Speaker, you are our representative and the representative of our people. I, therefore, seek your indulgence to assist me direct the Minister of Local Government to say that this is minor. When animals were eating people in Buyaga and other areas, they directed the line committee and the minister went there. Now it is an issue of a municipality of the Basoga. I need your assistance. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you lay those documents on Table so that they can be part of our record? 

MR MUGEMA: Yes. I beg to lay at the Table a letter from the National Physical Planning Board directing to halt all developments going on. This is another letter which was written last year by the PS of the Ministry of Local Government directing all accounting officers not to build on any of the green belts and all the public land, not until they have come and gotten a directive from Parliament under the Public Finance Management Act, section 95 of the – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Just lay the documents at the Table. 

MR MUGEMA: I beg to lay, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is not a matter where I will require a quick response. It is a matter where we need action. It is an administrative matter. It does not take long. Tomorrow, please, report back to this House telling us the actions that have been taken. 

If the Physical Planning Board has directed the Town Clerk clearly that “do not do this” and he has allowed it to go on; this is professional misconduct. Please, tell us the action taken. Please report back on this matter tomorrow, Right Honourable Prime Minister. 

2.36
MR ALFRED EDAKASI (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me take the opportunity to congratulate you upon taking that seat. I rise on issues of urgent national importance for the people of Kaberamaido. I have two issues – 

On 20 March 2022, there was a big storm in Kaberamaido that destroyed three facilities. It destroyed Alwa Seed Secondary School, cleared all the three makeshift classrooms, together with Alwa Health Centre III staff quarters. Just before that, there was another storm that blew off the roof of Kaberamaido Secondary School. I have tried, since then to make a follow up so that we could get iron sheets to replace these roofs, but we have not been successful. 

When I spoke to the Minister of State for Disaster, she said that they did not have anything in store. 

As schools start in a week’s time, I am caught in a crisis with a school without any classrooms. Just so you know, Alwa Seed Secondary School was allocated Shs 300 million this last year – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, please go to prayers. 

MR EDAKASI: Just one more before I go to the prayers, I beg your indulgence. There is the issue of cattle traders in Kaberamaido – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, one matter at ago, please. You can ask for more time tomorrow. Today, you are going to handle the emergency issue -(Interjections)- is this your maiden speech? 

MR EDAKASI: Yes, it is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then I am going to allow you to present all of them. (Applause)

MR EDAKASI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The second issue is the one about cattle traders in Kaberamaido. Since 03 February 2022, the President made a directive that affected cattle movement into Northern Uganda. Whereas Kaberamaido is in Eastern Uganda and has had no history of Balalo, this directive affected us as well. 

When I spoke to the minister then, he advised that we wait until 31st of March when the directive would be lifted. Since then, the security operatives have continued to restrict movement of animals, yet that is the local economy of the people. 

It is in the interest of this House to note that the only biggest market in Kaberamaido is the Ochero cattle market. As I speak, I have traders whose animals are in Nakaseke, Nakasongola, but they cannot move them.

Recently, Government, through compensation, gave out some money - our people need to restock, but they cannot get animals from Nakasongola. My prayers are three:

One is that the House directs the Minister of Education and Sports or the Office of the Prime Minister to help us with iron sheets so that children can go back to school when we open.

Two, Shs 300 million, which was allocated to Alwa Seed Secondary School for construction of a four classroom block be provided because the financial year is ending and my constituency thinks I am not lobbying for them. 

Three, the Minister of Security should clarify why they have continued to restrict the movement of animals, even when the directive by the President expired on the 31st. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Education, the Member visited one area and was told that it is dry land, so he thinks that the gods must have visited your side and you might be doing fine. He needs your help on two things; one is iron sheets under your emergency programme and the second is money for the construction of the seed secondary school.

2.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is my first time to speak while you are in that Chair. Therefore, allow me to congratulate you, for ascending into that Chair.

I would like to thank my colleague, Hon. Alfred for raising this very critical issue. I sympathise with the people of Kaberamaido for the destruction caused in the secondary school. It is true, this financial year, we do not have resources for rehabilitation and repair of schools. However, in this coming financial year - I would like to thank the committee that is right now putting resources together and allocating resources for the rehabilitation of schools that have been destroyed by disaster. Nonetheless, our technical team will get to the ground to assess the level of damage, report and take action in that line. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you do not access a microphone before I allow you. Please, continue honourable minister.

DR MORIKU: Our technical team in the Infrastructure Disaster Unit together with the district disaster committee will get to the ground to assess the level of damage and give a report for action.

In the meantime, we will work with the Office of the Prime Minister as the Member has raised, to see how best we can provide emergency, as schools are soon reopening in a couple of weeks.

Mr Speaker, I have taken note about the funds meant for the seed secondary school. I will cross check that information and give appropriate information to my colleague, Hon. Alfred. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, please, do anything you can to help this colleague. Otherwise, when he came to my office, he really sounded desperate.

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you. On behalf of the people of Nakapiripirit, I would like to congratulate you, Mr Speaker.

I would like to bring notice to Members that when disaster strikes in a district, we get reports from the district disaster committee and this report by the district disaster committee is written and compiled by the Chief Administrative Officer.

I implore Members of Parliament to follow this procedure because when you come here without the assessment report done by the district disaster committee, we shall not take it very seriously because it will be mistaken to be political. So, be encouraged to get these reports and we shall respond from there.

I have a big number of requests from Members of Parliament especially, those requesting non-food items like iron sheets. At the moment, we have got some iron sheets, but Uganda National Bureau of Standards is yet to test them. Otherwise, we already have a compiled list of Members who are going to receive iron sheets to be given to these schools though it will not be enough.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister and Hon. Edakasi, please, talk before you leave here. The minister has already sat. From whom are you seeking clarification?

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there is an issue of security blocking movement of cattle. Honourable minister, reach out to the Member and get details of the matter he has raised and then, report back to the House on Wednesday next week.

Honourable members, I have received a communication from the Rt Hon. Speaker - she has also been following up on a matter. It is not only just debating here. Sometimes, we take administrative steps and follow-up with the relevant authorities. The Speaker said it is being handled and payments are ongoing. In case you have a problem with the payments, that should come as another issue. But as we speak, people are being paid.

Colleagues, point of procedure has been used as a shortcut to address many issues. So, allow me to call Hon. Luttamaguzi.

2.47
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In the same vein, I would like to congratulate you for having attained the position of Deputy Speaker. I am proud of you, more so, as a Makererean. 

I rise on a matter of national importance. Mr Speaker, you are aware that we are going through hard economic times. I noted yesterday, I read in a Government newspaper that renewal of national identity cards has been increased from Shs 50,000 to Shs 500,000, including those who have lost them. Since we are going through very hard economic times, I would think - the people we represent in rural areas cannot afford Shs 500,000 for renewal of a national identity card. This is too much.

As Parliament, we should find a way to intervene. Otherwise, having a national identity card is not a privilege, but a right. My prayer is that Parliament, through Government agencies, finds a way of helping Ugandans especially, those who are living through very hard times, including those we represent here. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable. Can we have the Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

2.49
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, on that issue, the Minister of Internal Affairs will make a statement here in Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Minister of Internal Affairs will make a statement on that issue on Tuesday. If we open up that matter, we are going to repeat ourselves and we will not finish the business we have.

2.49
MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Mr Speaker, congratulations. Last week, Kampala City Council Authority bundled up 121 children, took them back to Napak and dropped them at Koblin Child Rehabilitation Centre. I appreciate the emptying of the streets. Removal of the street beggars is a good thing and we have been advocating for it. However, there are two things that went wrong and one of them was the manner in which KCCA handled the children. They were manhandled as though they were criminals, yet they were victims. The real traffickers, who are criminals, have not even been touched. The way the children were being thrown in the cars – I saw the clips and I think you also saw them – was really bad. 

The second thing that went wrong was that the children were dropped at the Koblin centre. Koblin is managed by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It is an institution meant for rehabilitation of children, but it is meant to accommodate 60 children only. Now, we have 161 there. Koblin is bursting with more children than they can manage.

The staff of Koblin have reached out to the Members of Parliament to provide basics for the children. We do not have that money – you are aware the MPs cannot take over the responsibility of Government to provide the requirements that those children need for resettlement. 

My prayers are only three. One, the minister for Kampala should give this Parliament a clear and sustainable strategy for managing the issue of street beggars, with emphasis on dealing with criminals. Let us find out what they have for dealing with the criminality of child trafficking rather than the easy targets - the children. 

Mr Speaker, the second prayer is for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to immediately respond and provide those children with basic needs that they need to stay in the centre as the district local government finds a way of reconnecting them with their families. Of the 161 children, some are sick and Koblin does not have any health facility to take care of the children. Should those children die in the hands of Government, I do not know what we will do. 

My prayer number three is that the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development presents their report. In November, I raised a motion on how we could handle the issue of these children here in this House. The Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development has been working to process that motion. They have even gone to the field, but the report has not yet come to this House. 

You had given them two weeks and it is coming to the fifth month. It is my prayer that that report gets to this House so that KCCA and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development can be guided better on what to do to respond to the issue of these children. These children, like I said earlier, are also Ugandans. 

I am a mother. When we are cleaning a home -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I request you to conclude. 

MS NAKUT: Yes, Mr Speaker. When cleaning your home, you clean knowing that you must also wash your hands. When you are a mother and you do not wash your hands before cooking, you make the whole family fall sick. Therefore, when we are cleaning Kampala, we should be mindful of the whole family of the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I am going to limit matters of national importance to two minutes only for each Member so that we can be able to summarise – Hon. Chemutai, you have a matter of national importance, you want to give information. Please! The Member has already finished and so – Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development? 

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Sarah Mateke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join my colleagues in congratulating you. Let me also take this opportunity to thank my sister for raising that very important matter that touches the children. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House that the mandate of the social wellbeing and protection of a child lies in the hands of the local governments, as per the Local Government Act, 1997, as amended. It stipulates very clearly how childcare and protection is a function that was decentralised. Unfortunately, this item is not normally funded. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is supposed to be giving or supporting in the formation of the legal framework as well as oversight. 

I am aware that KCCA rounded up our children and they were taken to Koblin. Yes, the manner in which it was handled was wrong, but they took 161 people – and they were not only children; there were even some adults. 

I would like to inform this House that it is not true that we do not have food. The food is available because every quarter, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives us funds. This is an institute that is meant to train the youth that have dropped out of school and we normally train between 60 and 80 students. 

Training 60 to 80 does not mean that we do not have the capacity to accommodate more than 200 children. So, we are able to accommodate the 160 and we have food to cater for them. Even As for now – this fourth quarter – they have released funds and we are going to buy food for them. 

I think the issue of health was raised because one of the adults, who was the lady, was taken there and she was bleeding. She was taken to the hospital and, as I speak now, she is fine. We do not have only street children, but even adults. I think you have seen them.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this seems to be a comprehensive matter that is even multi-sectoral. Even the Koblin you are talking about – when I was reading the committee’s report on Gender-Based Violence (GBV), they said Koblin is doing extremely badly. 

Therefore, I would  - 

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, the matter on which I would like to seek your procedural guidance relates to the law. First, these children – and even the adults – we are talking about are Ugandans. They are entitled to freedom of movement and to stay anywhere in Uganda. Forget about the conditions under which they live, which we need to work about as a country. 

One, would it not be procedurally right that in that multi-sectoral approach, we get the opinion of the Attorney-General on the legality of those “deportations of Ugandans”? I would be very much understanding if they are talking about removing these kids from the streets to take them to schools. 

Two, what informed the choice of Karamoja? There is war in Karamoja. You do not study the conditions and the reasons these children left there. We have other homes in the country. What informs the choice, apart from the tribal inclination, that these came from Karamoja? You are not taking them to Karamoja to hand them over to their parents. I think even the Attorney-General must come in to advise whether this action itself is proper. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I am just worried when I am told where the children were taken. Koblin is where the warriors are even abducting children - even disabled ones. It is not protected. It is one of the areas - the report will be coming from the Committee on Gender. If you have read it, Koblin is doing extremely badly. Therefore, by taking children there, you are taking them to more trouble; a place that is not even safe at all. 

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, co-ordinate a multi-sectoral response on this matter and on Thursday, bring us a statement regarding the issues raised by the hon. Faith Nakut. Then, the Attorney-General will also come in. If you have one meeting of around three or four ministers who are concerned, we can have one comprehensive response. Let us move, colleagues. 

3.01
MR APOLLO YERI (NRM, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to congratulate you on being elected the Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament. 

I am raising a matter of national importance. Fire gutted one of the markets in Tororo Municipality on 08th February and several things were lost in that market. Eighteen boutiques were burnt down. Kiosks were also put down. 

The RDC and the team - the security team in the district went and inspected. They were consoling the people, saying: “Wait, Government will come in and so on -” I hear the minister saying “compiling the report”. I think this was done and they even gave the value. They tried to contact the Red Cross, but nothing has happened so far. 

My prayer is that the Minister for Disaster Preparedness looks at these people. Let us not discriminate. When other markets get burnt, they are attended to. Also, attend to Tororo. 

Secondly -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister – no, one item honourable member. 

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Ms Esther Anyakun): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I have just got the communication this morning from my colleague regarding the market and I think we shall respond accordingly.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, he wants Tororo to be considered. Kindly, do that – Hon. Yeri, please take your seat. You came to my office and told me that you had an issue with Tororo market and I have allowed you to raise it. I have many issues here. 

Colleagues today, I think I am using nearly an hour on matters of national importance. Going forward, I will be using only 30 minutes because we have an agenda, which we must finish. Today, being the first time when I am around matters of national importance, I have been generous. However, most of the issues you raise fall under rules - if you look at chapter nine of our rules of procedure, most of the issues you are raising fall in the different questions - questions for oral answer and Prime Minister's time. 

3.04
MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  Allow me and the people of Aruu Constituency, to congratulate you on elevating into the position of a Deputy Speaker. We pray the Almighty Lord blesses you and gives you the wisdom to run that office. 

Allow me to thank the Minister of Education and Sports for organising the just concluded National Primary School Athletics Competition in Mbale. It is from this platform that I stand to raise - when I am bold, fierce and proud of the pupils from Pader District. Honourable members of Parliament not much has been heard from Pader - appeasing at least, for a long time. Today, I stand to present to you the national winners of the primary competition. 

Mr Speaker, it is not the winning, but the difficulty the district has gone through to achieve this title. These pupils do not have sports teachers or coaches. They lack even footballs to train on. The same pupils who have gone ahead to win amongst the 135 districts in Uganda today, sit in schools, which are in dire conditions. 

Despite all that, with a catastrophe of the nodding disease syndrome in Pader, 600 children suffer from the syndrome. Pader has stood tall and gone ahead to win the national championship in athletics –(Applause)– today, they are being welcomed as heroes. 

My prayer goes to the Ministry of Education and Sports. Many of the teachers are volunteering in these primary government schools. They have never been appointed. Can the minister take an initiative to at least give appointment letters to these young and powerful teachers who are rendering such services? 

Our schools are in dire condition. We do not have electricity. An example is Purang Primary School. A pole of electricity is just a meter away. Parents were told to contribute Shs 10,000 so that they could get Shs 4 million to get electricity in a government primary school so that these children can get a decent education. 

I request the Minister of Education again; is there a way you can come and help these parents to get electricity at these primary schools?

Finally, my prayer goes to the Minister of Health. Nodding syndrome disease has been sung all over, time and time. Is there a way we can get at least a psychiatric Clinical Officer? We do not have any professionals in the psychiatric field managing these children. They are in the hands of enrolled nurses who do not have training in psychiatry. Could the Minister of Health at least appoint anyone - if not a psychiatrist, at least a clinical psychiatric officer to come and manage our children? Thank you, for giving me this moment.

3.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, this is my maiden submission from the time you ascended into the office of the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Permit me to congratulate you on behalf of the fraternal family of the Ministry of Education and Sports for your elevation to the position of Deputy Speaker of Parliament of Uganda.  We are happy that almost every day, we are talking about sports. I hope and pray that as we plan for the next financial year, we will make the environment for the athletes much better. 

On the issue of Pader winning the competition in Mbale, the Ministry of Education and Sports, under the leadership of the First Lady, who is the senior Minister of Education, believes that we should invest in talent identification. This is why after COVID-19, we have started the process of organising competitions for children in primary schools. 
On the question of facilitating these young kids, Mr Speaker, I would like to confirm to Parliament that the Ministry of Education and Sports, under the leadership of the First Lady and the minister have started the process of facilitating every district, municipality and city in Uganda with funding earmarked towards sports, and co-curricular especially, sports in schools. Every district in Uganda –(Interjections)- if you want me to confirm –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Obua, there is a point of order.

MR NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, Hon. Obua is a good man and I like the way he speaks, but I do not like what he is saying here, that they have set aside money for cities and districts. 

I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports. We want ministers to come here and tell us that they have done this, when in actual sense, they have done something. Mr Speaker, I have a letter written by all sports associations to the same Minister of Sports, complaining about disfranchisement in the allocation of available sports funds - the minister received the letter.  

We sit here as Members of Parliament - and the minister should tell us that something is going to come to Kassanda or going to the districts so that I know something is coming to Kassanda. Therefore, can the minister go through, how much money has been put in next year's financial budget for those sports activities? It is then that we can sit here, talk, and say when time comes, we are able - Is the minister in order to stand before us and tell us about money that has not been put anywhere in the budget?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsamba, you are trying to trap me. You have said the man is good. You have even said you like him. Now, the same Hon. Nsamba, who declared Hon. Obua, good, wants me to say he is shabby and not in order. You are making my work difficult. 

That aside, colleagues, the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Education and Sports is coming. The issues he has raised are issues that I think the Committee on Education and Sports should interrogate. 

Honourable members, the Minister of Education and Sports gives her wish list, yet, sometimes, finance comes in and says there is no money, then as the House - Honourable minister, are you in order? Is it true that you are not in order? (Laughter)

MR OBUA: Mr Speaker, if you could give me some little time. I am not talking about the next financial year; I am talking about the Financial Year 2021/2022. 

Mr Speaker, I have forwarded to every Member of Parliament a copy of a circular dated 14 December 2021, addressed to all district Local Government Chairpersons, Resident District and City Commissioners, Chief Administrative Officers and Mayors. The subject matter is proper usage of capacity building, sports and co-curricular non-wage grant. This letter is signed by Janet K. Museveni, First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports. If you allow me, can I read the content?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please do, for record purposes. I do not know how long it is.

MR HAMSON OBUA: It states: 
“Reference is made to the approved budget for provision of education, skills development and sports services at the local governments level for Financial Year 2021/2022. 

As you are aware, Government, in partnership with the World Bank, agreed to implement the Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers (UGIFT) Programme for a number of activities under the local government besides construction of seed secondary schools in subcounties without schools. 

One of the core objectives for the implementation of the UGIFT programme was to uplift the transfers under wage, non-wage and development budgets to improve service delivery to local governments from Financial Year 2018/2019. 

I would like to draw your attention to the non-wage component, which was introduced for capacity building, sports and co-curricular activities. 

Each administrative unit, local government, municipality and city receives an annual allocation of Shs 10 million earmarked for capacity building and Shs 30 million earmarked for facilitation of schools in sports and co-curricular activities at regional and national levels. 

For ease of reference, I have attached a schedule of how much is allocated to each local government as annex one.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think my colleague will allow me to rule that you are in order, because it was very important. Tomorrow, lay this letter on the Table so that it can be scrutinised. If you have a copy, please, lay it now. 

MR HAMSON OBUA: Mr Speaker, if you give me time, let me move, print and come and lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is much better so that it can be scrutinised very well. Colleagues, the Member says they were put in the pigeonholes; please, check check. 

MR RUHUNDA: Mr Speaker, I am sorry to interfere at this point, but I would like to give information before the minister goes. Actually, that information was put in our pigeonholes, so he should not do double work.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was never laid on the Table. What I have said is requesting him to lay it on the Table so that it is part of the record of Parliament.  

3.17
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Mr Speaker, there is an issue that was raised by the Member regarding psychiatric services in our districts and at local government level. 

This House passed the Mental Health Bill, which became the Mental Health Act, assented to by the President in 2018. We do not know if now, the Ministry of Health has operationalised that Act because it provided for provision of such services at the lower local governments. Remember, we repealed the then existing Act because mental health services and psychiatry were only restricted to Butabika Hospital. With that new Act in place, we are supposed to see diploma and certificate holders of this psychiatry training employed in local governments and at the health centres III and IV so that our people access these services. 

So, it would be good, since the Minister of Health is here, to update us on where they are with that to answer the issue raised by the colleague, who raised the matter of the nodding syndrome disease and the need for psychiatry services.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you for reminding me on that. Honourable Minister of Health, give us a comprehensive response on this matter on Wednesday. Hon. Patrick Isingoma - 

3.20
MR PATRICK ISINGOMA (Independent, Hoima East Division, Hoima City): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me also to join the rest of the honourable members in congratulating you upon your elevation to that high office. At times what honourable members forget to say when they are congratulating you is that you are a very nice man. (Laughter) Therefore, some of us are very excited to have you in that office. Congratulations, Mr Speaker. 

I rise on a matter of national importance and this is to do with Shs 30,153,000,000, which was voted for our USMID projects in Houma City and other cities – this concerns most of the 10 new cities. This money was meant for Financial Year 2021, but sent back to the Consolidated Fund at the conclusion of June 2021. 

Our town clerk has written to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting that the entity be allowed to revote these funds as supplementary budget so that they can be used this financial year to implement the unimplemented projects. 

Unfortunately, Mr Speaker, all efforts to convince the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – I can see Hon. Musasizi is looking at me – has been met with a lot of procrastination. 

Therefore, my prayer is for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – represented in this House by Hon. Musasizi who I can see here – to return this money to us so that we can conclude our projects within this financial year. Hon. Musasizi, can you send that money back tomorrow because we badly need it?

Mr Speaker, that is my prayer and I would like to lay on Table a letter dated 22 February 2022, written to the Secretary to the Treasury by the accounting officer of the entity. I beg to lay as evidence that efforts have been made to ask the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to return that money, but all in vain. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance -

3.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Hon. Isingoma is my friend and he is a good man. (Laughter) Even this morning, I was with him in the Budget Committee. I am just wondering why he decided to ambush me in the House with this matter of urgent attention. 

I pray that I sort out this matter with Hon. Isingoma in my office because it is a matter, which can be resolved when we sit in office.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, we do not need to clog the Order Paper, with every issue being reported here, if a minister can liaise with a colleague and have the issue sorted. Maybe, if it is an issue that affects many other areas. Honourable minister, the Member said this is an issue –(Mr Isingoma rose_) Honourable, do not access the microphone without my permission, please. 

The Member has said that cities were affected. Okay? So, it is an issue beyond you and Hon. Isingoma. Therefore, honourable minister, I would propose that you meet representatives from new cities and then, report back to the House on the way forward.

MR MUSASIZI: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I would like to invite Hon. Isingoma to undertake to mobilise – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is your issue. Coordinate it. You are a minister and we have not assigned Hon. Isingoma. We have delegated you. Report back on Thursday next week. Thank you. Hon. Betty Nambooze -

3.25
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I travelled to Dubai some three weeks ago. On return – I would like to raise a matter that I think is urgent in nature. Mr Speaker, on the streets of Dubai, there are some Ugandans – young people – who travelled to United Arab Emirates in search of employment, but failed to get placed anywhere. 

At railway stations and other open parks, many of these young people sleep there at night. They do not have anywhere to sleep, they do not have any address they belong to and they are on the streets. This is very bad because we must be accountable for every Ugandan. It is bad that these young people were taken by labour exporting companies and misled to believe that they would get jobs in those countries and it ended up being untrue and they were abandoned. 

Some of those people do not even have their travel documents. The explanation is that their travel documents were confiscated either by the company that exported them or by their masters. 

Every embassy and commission belonging to Uganda has a military attaché and I do not want to fault them. What I would like to say is that in this world, where we have started exporting labour, I would like to pray that Government explores ways of deploying a labour officer to help Ugandans in those countries where we have many of them working, especially in the Middle East –[Member: “Information.”]-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, on matters of national importance, there is no information. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, the other prayer is that the Minister of Foreign Affairs, together with the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, should get a way of bringing back the children of Uganda back to Uganda. I know some of them might even need rehabilitation. 

Then we should find out who took them there. These labour agents are exporting our – Emirates, for example, is taking our young people every day. You find them dressed in uniforms. The situation is very ugly. The image of this country is tainted. 

Ugandans have been misled to think that they will get jobs in the Middle East. However, a lot of problems have occurred involving them. Some are murdered; others have had their kidneys – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, you have made your point. Rt Hon. Prime Minister - 

3.30
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, we have a paper from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. It is going to be discussed this afternoon. All these issues that are coming in now can be discussed in this paper. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Right Honourable, the paper is on gender-based violence, not on the mistreatment of Ugandans abroad or other issues. We have to be specific. Madam Prime Minister, let me give you time to go, study this matter and report back to the House. 

I know when we open this matter up for discussion, we will not finish, yet time is not our best ally. We have people here who have come for business that is on the Order Paper. Madam Prime Minister, please report back in two weeks’ time. 

Honourable minister, we will not exhaust this matter. If you feel the answer you want to give now is satisfactory, then go ahead. 

MS ASAMO: Mr Speaker, I know you have ruled, but I think the question is coming with incomplete information. How I wish Hon. Betty Nambooze could give us the name of the company. All companies officially taking these people are registered with the ministry of gender, but there are people who go underground. We need more information given to us and we crosscheck the facts to see whether that particular group of people who were taken and are suffering were taken by registered companies. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, Honourable Minister, Hon. Betty Nambooze is here. She can easily be contacted. We have the address of each and every colleague. 

Colleagues, like Hon. Fadil who also has information, any colleague who has information on this matter, please, pass it on to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister or the minister of gender so that it is captured and they give us a comprehensive response. 

3.33
MS EVERLYN CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukwo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I take up this opportunity to thank you and congratulate you on behalf of the people of Bukwo and Sebei Subregion. I rise up on a matter of national importance concerning cattle theft. On the night of 25 April 2022, that is a day ago, cattle were stolen from Bukwo in Kortek Subcounty and they were taken through Mt Elgon National Park, and taken to Sironko District. 

This thing has been happening every week and this month alone, we have lost more than 50 animals – especially the bulls. These animals go through the park that is protected. If our people go to the park, they are shot – they have killed so many of our people – but it has come to our notice that the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) staff aid the thieves. This is on record that last night, they aided the thieves. They moved with 10 heads of cattle, with one gun and five thieves. As we speak now, our people are stranded in Sironko District in Budadiri. They want their cows back. 

These are my prayers, Mr Speaker. We want the stolen cows that are right now in Budadiri in one of the villages where – the UWA team knows where they kept the cows. 

Secondly, we would like to have the Local Defence Unit (LDUs) because they know all the corners where raids take place. 

Number three, the UWA staff that are armed should be brought to book and should inform the people of Bukwo why UWA staff is aiding the thefts in our districts and in the whole subregion. The honourable minister of tourism is around and I think he is going to guide us and tell us why his team is aiding cattle thieves.

3.35
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, I think this is similar to what the honourable colleague raised about the movement of cows. I am going to consult. I will request the ministry in charge – mainly security – to come and give a statement here concerning all those raids.

Even yesterday, they wanted to raise it when we were in a certain meeting – that was our caucus – but they did not get an opportunity. The minister will come here and make a statement. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Right honourable, this is attributed to UWA, which is tourism. This is what I am going to do; Hon. Everlyn Chemutai, please put your question in writing, clearly specifying which areas and then you give it to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for action. 

Hon. Gilbert, first wait a bit. Colleagues, I know how you use the points of procedure. I have been in this House. I know how we use it. Sometimes when you see me resisting – if we were not abusing it, there is no way, as a presiding officer, I would refuse a point of procedure. 

Now, I think we are going to make it clear. Whenever you are raising a procedural matter, you show us the rule; we can go that route. You tell us which rule you believe we are violating, so we are not moving procedurally well, and that will make it easy. I wouldn’t want to be that strict, but it will depend on where you push me. 

3.37
MR SAMUEL OPIO (NRM, Kole North, Kole): Thank you Mr Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your ascension, elevation and upliftment to that big seat. 

I raise an issue of national importance in regard to the 44 years of delayed payment of the former employees of the defunct East Africa Community. 

On 30 June 1977, the East Africa Community ceased to exist. Thousands of workers were laid off. Their expectations were that they would be paid their pensions and their gratuity. 

However, that did not materialise, resulting in a court case which was ruled in 2000 in which a consent judgement arose. In that consent judgement, the government agreed to compensate and pay them their gratuity arrears, their pension arrears with a seven per cent interest. 

With me right now, I have a list of 48 former employees of the East Africa Community who have not been paid to date for the last 44 years. Justice delayed is justice denied. Payment delayed is payment denied. 

I, therefore, want to move my prayers;

One, is that the Minister of the East African Community Affairs makes a comprehensive statement on the status of payment of pension and gratuity for the former employees of the East Africa Community.

I beg to lay on the Table the list of unpaid claimants who were former employees of the defunct East Africa Community. I pray that this list be verified and considered in the next budget.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, on the issue of livestock compensation, I request that you direct the Attorney-General to publish the list of all the persons that have been paid so far in every district. We have 80-year old people, sleeping in banks, waiting for their money because there is no way they can know whether they have been paid or not. I humbly submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable Member. On the issue of war claimants, which Hon. Onekalit had already raised, I was informed by the Speaker about the progress made.

The Attorney-General is here. He wrote to the Vice-President and copied it to the Rt Hon. Speaker. It is important that you lay it on the Table so that Members can access it. 

3.40
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We give a fortnight report of the names, amounts and the dates of the persons who have been compensated.  We do that to the Vice- President and the Speaker of Parliament. We hope that this information can get to you. Every fortnight, we shall be making a report on the updates. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, you can read the title of the statement so that it is well captured.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: The title of the statement is, “Progress report on the payments of war debt claimants in Acholi, Lango and Teso subregion dated 14 April 2022, from the Attorney-General’s chambers to the Vice President.”

It is copied to Rt Hon. Speaker, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the Deputy Attorney-General, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Solicitor-General and Deputy Solicitor-General. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, ensure it is uploaded on the system so that Members can access it. I would like that statement uploaded. Attorney-General, update this House on this matter every two weeks. Colleagues, let us move to the next item.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, the Attorney-General has remained silent on payment, where there is a consent order and I was waiting –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the issue raised by Hon. Samuel - Hon. Atkins, for matters of national importance, come to my office. You do not ambush me here. No. You stood up on procedure and this is why I told you that I know the people who abuse the point of procedure. I have been here and so, I know how we behave. Please, take your seat.

 MR SAMUEL OPIO:  Mr Speaker, I would like to lay this –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I cannot have two Members standing.

MR SAMUEL OPIO: I beg to lay the list of unpaid claimants and former employees of the defunct East Africa Community.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will follow up with the Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance. Otherwise, our work at the Attorney-General’s chamber was concluded because the case was completed and payments for any case that is done by the Attorney-General’s chambers was decentralised to the respective ministry that is concerned with that. I will follow up with the Minister of Information, Communications Technology and National Guidance and come back and report to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, report back to this House on Wednesday next week. Minister of Education, you had a letter to lay on the Table.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Denis Obua): Mr Speaker, I committed the Ministry of Education and Sports in terms of laying the necessary documents. I have three documents to lay;

Document No.1 is a letter dated 14 December 2021, the one I partly read, signed by Janet K. Museveni, First Lady and Minister of Education and Sports, on the subject matter of proper usage of capacity building, sports and co-curricular nonwage grant. I beg to lay.

Document No.2 is annex one, referred to in the letter enumerating the list of all districts, cities, municipalities with the budget of capacity building and co-curricular activities and sports management. For capacity building, Shs 10 million per financial year, co-curricular activities and sports, Shs 30 million per administrative unit. I beg to lay.

Letter No.3 is dated 29 –(Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, the Member is just laying on the Table. I do not know what someone can clarify from laying.

MR OBUA: Document No.3 is dated 29 March 2022, addressed to the Rt Hon. Speaker, Parliament of Uganda, signed by Hon. Obua Denis Hamson, MP, and Minister of State for Education and sports (Sports)

The purpose of this letter was clear. It states that by copy of this letter, the Clerk to Parliament is requested to make copies of the circular and schedule of funds allocation per district, city and municipal local government to be distributed to all Members of Parliament for ease of reference as they monitor the usage of these funds.

I have been informed that the Office of the Clerk compiled and photocopied all these documents and they are in our pigeonholes. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, please, go ahead and upload them on our Alfresco System so that we can access them.

Hon. Christine, you do not need to stand up because you raised your issue very well with me. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, when responding to the issue of national identity cards, Hon. Christine is requesting that the Ministry of Internal Affairs comes back with a response on some colleagues who are denied identity cards and passports after fulfilling the processing fees, yet they are Ugandans. Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, you can link up with her for more information.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AMEND THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022

3.46
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, l would like to add my voice to those that have congratulated you, upon the ascension and elevation to that very important office. Some of us that have got the honour to work with you have faith and believe in you and your capabilities together with the Speaker to deliver on our mandate.

What has been itching me is the news I have just got that is taking place in my community, in Kasese District and I imagine this is not restricted to Kasese District; it could be countrywide.

We have three rivers that have unleashed terror and havoc on the citizens of this country and this is something that is well known to the sitting Prime Minister in the House. I would like to bring to the attention of this Government that three rivers namely; Rubiriha, Nyamugasani and Nyamwamba have again burst their banks and people are right now struggling for their lives. This being a matter of life and death, I think we can come to terms, if we woke up in the morning and heard that our fellow citizens in Kasese have been affected and their lives and property have been destroyed. 

My procedural issue is just simple. Disaster and floods have become a song. The people settled in IDP camps in Muhokya were affected by further floods. You saw these people in a state of helplessness on TV last night.

My procedural issue goes to the Prime Minister. For how long is this going to continue, specifically, given the fact that we know that this is a rainy season and so, the usual floods are bound to unleash terror and disaster on the population? 

The Prime Minister, Vice-President and the deputy Prime Minister have been to Kasese. What, specifically, are they going to do in the short term, medium term and long term? The fact that the floods are on right now, can I ask the Prime Minister what it is her office is going to do to rescue our fellow citizens? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, I think you have seen what I have been talking about. (Laughter) This is what I have been talking about and sometimes, people say you are tough, you are hard. You can see. 

Colleagues, allow me to guide you. For questions of national importance or questions of urgency, we always want you to come to the office of the presiding officer, inform us and we share or relay it to the Government side so that you can get quality answers. Otherwise, people will be coming here and promising “I will come back. I will come back. I will come back”. That is why I was insisting that you should have come to my office. 

However, honourable, I thought you wanted an urgent intervention – your people are in danger. So, the Prime Minister should answer as we also discuss the long term solutions.

3.51
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, I was in that constituency of the honourable member. One time, I was with him and we were looking at the long term, short term and medium term interventions on those issues. What we have to do is to see which areas belong to – do they belong to the short term, medium term or long term? I think we have to go back, sit and revise what we agreed on. That is what we have to do. 

Honourable member, we were with you in Kasese that time. We have to follow our procedures on what we agreed on – if it has been implemented. If it has not been implemented, what can we do? We need to call those people to order. I thank you

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: [Member rose_] Hon. Atkins, that is not how they access the microphone, please. The Minister of Finance -

3.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the resolution of Parliament on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 for Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sorry, honourable minister. I need to get you properly.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the resolution of Parliament on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 1 for Financial Year 2021/2022. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Minister of State for Trade – Hon. Bahati – Hon. Oboth –[Mr Sseggona: “Point of order.”]- Honourable, please, switch off your microphone, sit and ask for me to allow you to speak. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, this motion is moved under Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, first sit.  Colleagues, I did not sit here for my patience to be tested and I do not think we are doing gymnastics. When I am speaking, you need to sit. Number two, you cannot get a microphone, shout in it and then, when I tell you to sit, you put it down and before you even sit down, you again shout “order”, “order”. Please. Colleagues, let us be courteous to each other. I give you a chance – I do not have a problem giving you a chance. 

Sometimes, when I tell you to first sit, I just need like five to six seconds and then, I can call you. However, when you approach in another way, it looks like you are ordering me. 

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rule 222 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament is instructive. It reads: 

“222. Reconsidering a decision of the House

It is out of order to attempt to reconsider a specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion during the current session.” 

This matter has been considered. It is out of order – reading the rule – not simply “to start”, but “to attempt”. (Laughter)

However, a way forward is provided in the subsequent subrule.

“(2) Notwithstanding subrule (1), the House may reconsider its decision upon a substantive motion for the reconsideration, moved under notice …” – now, these are the instructive words – “of not less than 14 days.” 

What my colleague, the honourable minister, is doing is to move a motion and not to give us notice of not less than 14 days. 

The second portion of this is the abuse of processes of this Parliament. This matter was referred to a committee of the House. It went and considered it. I understand, because I am keenly interested, the committee has even signed the report, which is due for presentation. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister to, one, attempt – but not only attempt – and present a motion in abrogation of our rules for reconsideration of what we concluded?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is the chairman Budget Committee here? National economy? No, the matter in the Committee on National Economy is totally different from this. Yes. It is totally different, if you have read the motion –(Member rose_)- Leader of the Opposition, I have not yet ruled on this matter. I had to consult with my technical people to see whether, indeed, there is any notice that had been given. It was not there, to begin with. 

However, what I would like to know from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is how urgent this matter is. Colleagues, when you are doing work, you have to be practical. These rules - we are here, we handle them in a very practical way. That is why under Rule 16, which you passed, that you have some rules suspended depending on the urgency. This is not one of the rules that are entrenched. Therefore, if a Member moved a motion that you suspend that rule, for example, you can suspend it. 

First, I would like to know from the minister how urgent this matter is. Before then, hon. Oboth Oboth was also rising on the same.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Congratulations - from Government Chief Whip to Deputy Speaker, Parliament of Uganda. What is before us, my learned friend, who benefited from being my classmate for five years in Makerere and LDC is - I will not bring that here - very pre-emptive in this motion with the procedural issue he is raising. Even when he read the whole rule, he came to subrule (2), which gives an exemption. 

The genesis of this, if you listen to the motion by the Minister of Finance, is curing a mistake - an oversight committed by the same Parliament. It is not anybody else. As a matter of fact, it relates - the Minister of Defence at one point wrote, quite a number of weeks ago, to the Rt Hon. Speaker and – (Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Continue, honourable member.

MR OBOTH: The urgency of this matter is that a budget process has a timeframe. In this, if it appears at any time, which hon. Medard Sseggona, at least until the other day was still my friend, knows very well. 
We cannot wait when the fault - if you can listen to the motion, it is not the fault of the Minister of Finance nor everybody else. It is an oversight where the placing of an item of the budget was not made in the right budget item. Therefore, Hon. Ssegona, I would like to implore you like I always do and you listen, to let one of these go, to allow Parliament to make the correction. If we could only listen to the reasons, the ground and merit of the motion, then you would be clearly in support. 

Hon. Sseggona has been very pre-emptive and that is why we are going through this. I know him, he has been like that for a long time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, indeed, this rule is clearly instructive in nature. I have consulted colleagues here – Hon. Abdu, did you want to add something as Chairman of the Rules Committee?

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is on that point that I rise. Hon. Oboth Oboth is a good man – (Laughter) - because it looks like now that is the precedent. Despite his goodness, on this particular point, I beg to differ. If there is a problem with the rules, we cannot ignore it. These rules are made to be obeyed.

We do not give chance to somebody who would want to challenge Parliamentary business, saying we offended our own rules. There is a way out and that is; if the matter is that urgent, suspend the rule and we proceed in accordance with the rules. It is as simple as that other than requesting the Hon. Ssegona to ignore it.  To ignore would be –(Interjections)– much as you went to the – did you say you were in the same class? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, that is what I referred to from the beginning; that indeed, when you have such a situation and it is not an entrenched rule, you can suspend it. However, as of now, the rule is instructive. We have no way out.

Honourable minister, I request you to withdraw your motion and then - no, it was already seconded. You can have another way of bringing it. Leader of the Opposition, is there something new you want to add?

4.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Mr Speaker, some of these situations that make us look shabby are actually avoidable. I had a meeting on the sides with my honourable friend and I introduced him to the subject of the law and procedure. However, I also challenged him, “Why would you bring this kind of motion without the knowledge of the LOP?” You cannot surprise us with these kinds of movement of funds. 

Clearly, Government wants to repurpose funds that were already voted. If you want to, you must as a matter of law and procedure, return to the committee that made the report to Parliament. Therefore, I would like to advise that in the future, these honourable ministers can help this Parliament avoid looking shabby yet they are smartly dressed. First, to consult before various critical motions are brought and we get to agree on how to move to the centre to process them.

Secondly, now that this is coming up - and I would like to assure you that the arena where he was migrating relates to the business in the Committee on National Economy - you probably instruct the committee to urgently bring their business to the House. I am advised by my team on the committee that it is ready and that their report can be presented. The minister can borrow from the report to reconsider his motion as advised by the Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, Hon. Oboth Oboth, do not mind. Just take your seat - There is no one on the Floor. Do you want to order me? No. There is no point like that. (Laughter)

Raise it under procedure, but not order. I grant a point of procedure.

MR NABOTH NAMANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The rule on a Member’s dress code is clear. Is the Member, seated next to Hon. Okeyoh, in order to be dressed the way he is without a necktie? Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, there are issues we do not need to rule on; make your own ruling by quietly stepping out. Thank you. Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you. Mr Speaker, with your guidance, I withdraw the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

4.10
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Abdu Katuntu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The last time this matter was called, I did lay on the Table the original report together with duly signed minutes of the committee. 

Parliament decided that day that the report should be presented today because Government needed to look through the report to make the necessary consultation and they requested for one day. The House in its opinion gave Government two weeks. It is my pleasure, therefore, Mr Speaker, to present the report of the Standing Committee on Rules, Privilege and Discipline on the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, we are looking at rules 12, 41, 158, 175, 187, 235 and Appendix B of the current Rules of Procedure. I will try as much as possible to summarise. I do not know how many minutes I have. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Twenty minutes.

MR KATUNTU: Let me do my best. There is a background, observations and recommendations. 

On 28 July 2021, the Leader of the Opposition, proceeding under rule 59(k) of the Rules of Procedure, moved a motion without notice to amend the Rules of Procedure Parliament regarding election of Uganda's representative to EALA. This followed a recommendation by the Verification Committee of the Nominees and the Applicants for the By-election to EALA. The Verification Committee, chaired by Hon. Fox Odoi, had observed that the Rules of Procedure do not provide for EALA By-elections in case a seat falls vacant during the term. 

Mr Speaker, this is what was identified as the existing gaps in the current Rules of Procedure.

Election of Members of EALA is governed by Article 50 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community, which provides that the Parliament of Uganda operationalised Article 50 of the Treaty for the Establishment of EALA under rule 12 and Appendix B to its rules.

Case Law interpreting Article 50 of the Treaty 

The report provides around five cases including:

 Jacob Oulanyah v. the Attorney-General. 

Prof. Peter Anyang' Nyong'o & Others v. the Attorney-General of Kenya.

 Democratic Party & Mukasa Mbidde v. the Secretary-General.

Abdu Katuntu v. the Attorney-General of Uganda & the Secretary-General of the East African Community.

Among A. Anita v. the Attorney-General of Uganda and the Secretary-General of the East African Community.

Below is the summary of the rulings in those cases 

The Constitutional Court held and faulted rule 11(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of 2006, which essentially locked out candidates that were not affiliated to parties. The rule stated: “Representation shall reflect the proportional party membership based on the numerical strength of the parties in the House and take into consideration gender and other shades of opinion.” Appendix C of the 2006 rules further provides for nomination of candidates on nomination day by each party represented in the House. 

Mr Speaker, the next paragraph is about the ruling in the Peter Anyang' Nyong'o case, where the court stated: “These electoral process may or may not involve such preliminaries as campaigns, primaries and/or nomination… The bottom line for compliance with Article 50 is that the decision to elect is a decision of and by the National Assembly.”

The Mukasa Mbidde case ruled: “…as much as feasible, the political parties in the National Assembly; shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups” - and emphasised that the procedure of election shall be determined by the National Assembly.

The court further held that, “any election, or rule of procedure for Election of EALA members that departs from the above clear requirements risks contravening the Treaty”.

The Abdu Katuntu case on whether all the six political parties represented in Parliament should send a member to EALA, the court answered in the negative. Court took judicial notice of the fact that the number of political parties in the partner states differ from one to the other. Court re-echoed its position in the case of Anyang' Nyong'o that the framers of the Treaty expressly left that to the National Assembly of each partner state to determine its procedure for election.

Mr Speaker, on the case of Anita Among, court left the question of “feasibility” to the discretion of the National Assembly of the partner states. Court further questioned rule 13(1) and (2) of Appendix B, which provided for consultation and consensus between voting by secret ballot and the declaration of results. Court emphasised that any consultation and consensus building are done in the earliest stages of the electoral process and certainly not after voting. Court ordered the rules to be amended prior to the next EALA election.

The current rules, under rule 12 provide that the nine members of EALA representing Uganda shall be elected by Parliament, not from among Members of Parliament, representing as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender, and other special interest groups. 

The current Appendix B, provide for a more elaborate procedure of elections, but as observed by the House, the rules are silent on by-election, in case a seat in EALA falls vacant. The rules only provide for what happens when a nominee from a specified party, gender or interest groups withdraws or dies before the election under Appendix B, paragraph 8(4) and (5).

Observation 

(i) 	Whereas the EALA Elections Act provides for vacation of office by members of EALA through various ways including death, the current Rules of Procedure do not make reference to vacation of office by a member of the Assembly, including the guidelines for filling this vacancy, for example, whether the replacement of a Member of the Assembly should be drawn from the same political party or organisation represented by the previous holder of the office.

(ii) 	The rules are also silent on the timeframe within which the by-election should be held, considering that the East African Legislative Assembly Elections Act, 2011 provides for a period of 90 days within which a by-election to fill the vacancy must be held. Sections 8(2) of the East African Legislative Assembly Elections Act, 2011 provide that:

“(2) 	After notification of a vacancy under subsection (1), a by-election shall be held within a period of 90 days.”

Section 9(1) provides that:

“(1) A by-election shall be conducted whenever a Member of the Assembly –
(a) 	dies; or 
(b) 	where the seat of a Member of the Assembly becomes vacant under this Act.”

(iii)	The committee further notes that the current rules do not specify for how long a person elected in a by-election shall hold the office. The East African Legislative Assembly Elections Act, 2011 gives guidance, though, in section 9(2): 

“(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a Member of the Assembly elected under this section shall serve for the remaining term of the Assembly.”

(iv) 	The committee notes that Section 9(3) of the EALA Elections Act bars a by-election to be held within a period of six months before the expiry of the term of the Assembly, except where failure to hold the election affects the quorum of the Assembly.

(v) 	We also observe that whereas the Rules of Procedure of Parliament provides for a verification committee, the rules do not provide for the report of this committee to be tabled in Parliament. It is important to note that Members of Parliament are the electorate who ought to be given better particulars of the persons they are to elect to make informed decisions.

Recommendations

(i) 	The committee recommends that by-elections should, in principle, be held, as much as is feasible, in accordance with the rules on the election of the nine Members of Parliament representing EALA.

(ii) 	The committee recommends that the rules should be explicit by listing the circumstances that give rise to the occurrence of a vacancy at the Assembly. The EALA Elections Act, 2011 provides for various events, the happening of which a vacancy occurs.

These events include – 

resignation; 
ceasing to be qualified to be elected;
upon his or her election or nomination as a Member of the National Assembly of a partner state;
upon his or her appointment as a minister in the government of a partner state; 
upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for a term exceeding six months;
upon his or her appointment as an officer in the service of the community; 
upon the dissolution of the Assembly; or 
upon death.

(iii) Regarding the timeframe within which the by-election should be held, the committee recommends that the election should be held within a period of 60 days to allow for any flexibility since the EALA Elections Act, 2011 provides for 90 days.

(iv) 	On the observation of the tenure of a Member elected in a by-election, the committee recommends that the Rules of Procedure should, in compliance with the EALA Act, provide for the tenure of a Member elected in a by-election to be for the remainder of the term of the Assembly.

(v) On the issue of the reporting procedures of the verification committee, it is recommended that the report of the verification committee should be presented to the House. In arriving at this conclusion, the committee is alive to the fact that the electorate of the Assembly are Members of Parliament. In addition, the committee was guided by the precedent set in the last by-election, where the report of the verification committee was presented to the House.

Prime Minister’s Time (Rule 41)

During the 23rd Sitting of the First Meeting of the First Session of the 11th Parliament of Uganda held on 2 September 2021, the Rt Hon. Speaker, during the Prime Minister’s Question Time, directed the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to expedite the exercise on the review of the Rules of Procedure, especially rule 41, and accordingly report back to Parliament.

Observations

The committee notes that rule 41 provides as follows: 

(1) 	There shall be a time designated as Prime Minister’s Time, commencing at 4.00 p.m. every Thursday – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abdu Katuntu, if you are to read word for word, we will not finish. Like for rule 41, Members have their Rules of Procedure. So, let us try to summarise.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am trying to make sure that somebody who is reading the Hansard also follows, much as I am summarising because it has to be sort of captured. However, I will try to summarise.

Mr Speaker, on page 11, we have our observations. During the Prime Minister’s Time, it is stated that–
 
(3) 	Question to the Prime Minister shall be made in writing and submitted to the Clerk. 

(4) 	The Clerk shall enter all questions in the Prime Minister’s Question Record Book and select 15 questions by raffle, which shall be forwarded to the Prime Minister.

Mr Speaker, this is just the procedure – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, what we will do – Clerk and the Hansard team, type the whole report in the Hansard so that it is captured so that he is able to make a summary and whoever is referring to the Hansard will be able to access the whole report.

(The Report will appear in the Hansard monthly bound volume of April 2022.)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much for that direction and guidance, Mr Speaker. On page 11, it gives the current status, where the Prime Minister’s Question is just entered in the record book and, to select a question, you just play a raffle. 

Mr Speaker, we recommend the following:

The questions put to the Prime Minister should be both oral and written. 

The criteria for selection of the question to the Prime Minister should be on a “first-in-first-out” basis and not a raffle – like some sort of Betway. (Applause)

The question time should be enlarged from 45 minutes to 60 minutes; 40 minutes dedicated to responses to the written questions and 20 minutes to responses to oral questions.

The Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation (rules 158 and 187)

Mr Speaker, while announcing the new Cabinet, the President announced that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation was now under the Office of the President, to be serviced by the State House Comptroller.

By implication, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation would fall under the Committee on Presidential Affairs. This also meant that the Sectoral Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation no longer had a ministry to oversee as per the mandate spelt out in rule 187 and rule 189.

The committee recommendations are:

(i) 	That the mandate of the Sectoral Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation be taken over by the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs.

(ii) 	The Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation should revert to its previous status as a Standing Committee of Parliament exercising the same mandate as that of the previous Standing Committee (we reproduced that mandate in the report).

(iii) 	Accordingly, the Parliamentary Commission should revise the committee’s funding from Sectoral to Standing Committee.

(iv)	Furthermore that on the above recommendation, the party whips, that is the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Chief Whip and other party whips, should regularize the constitution of the membership in compliance with the rules of procedure. This is because once you turn this committee into a standing committee, then there is – actually Members will be belonging to more committees than they are provided for. So, both the Government Chief Whip and the Opposition Whip should now reconstitute those Members so that they belong to committees in accordance with the rules. 

v)	We go to rule 175, which provides for the Standing Committee on the rules. We note that we do not have original powers to initiate business because all business to this committee is on the orders of the House. And it sometimes renders this committee very inactive until the House orders, though there might be a lot of business to be done. Therefore, we recommend that in addition to the House having all powers to initiate business, the rule also provides for the committee to have those powers. 

The committee recommends that rule 175 be amended to allow the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to initiate its business except for matters of privilege and discipline. This is because we thought that one should remain with the House or the Speaker. 

(vi)	Lapse or reinstatement of business upon dissolution of the House:

We had the same problem, because the rules provided specifically that business lapses except that which has been considered on the first – I think I need to read this – under our current rules 234 and 235 of our Rules of Procedure, it provides that the business of a committee does not lapse on prorogation of the House, “234 (1)Business pending before a committee shall not lapse only by reason of the prorogation of the House.(2) A committee which is unable to complete its work before the expiration of its term or before prorogation of the House may report to the House that the committee has not been able to complete its work. (3)A preliminary report, memorandum or note that the committee may have taken shall be made available to the new committee.” 

Under rule 235, lapse or reinstatement of parliamentary business upon dissolution of the House 
A Bill, petition or any other business before the House during a term of Parliament lapses upon dissolution of the Parliament. But it also says in subrule (2) that that motion before the House may be reinstated in the next Parliament by resolution of Parliament.

The restatement of a Bill, petition or motion shall be treated as a fresh reference to that committee. The resolution referred to in subrule (2) shall be passed in the Second Sitting of the First Session of Parliament. That is the rule that caught us last time, because it was not possible. And all the business that had been saved got lapsed. 

We do recommend, therefore, Mr Speaker, that rule 234 and 235 of the Rules of Procedure should be maintained except that rule 235(4) should be amended to enlarge the timeframe for consideration of the motion to be within the first 14 Sittings of the First Session. This is because 235 had restricted it to one meeting. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move. The rest are the amendments as they should appear in the rules, but principally, that is the report. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairman and your team for doing a great job. The Attorney-General had requested to make a short response to some of these issues, which would also guide us in the debate. Then I will open up the debate.

4.33
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Congratulations once again. I do not want to depart from the precedent. Hon. Katuntu, the chair of the committee, is believed to be a good mind. 

Here with me, I have a response to his presentation or to the report to the committee. Honourable members, you are all aware that this matter came – I think I can skip that for purposes of time. 

The timeframe within which a by-election should be held. I would like to go to the point. This is our response. Restating the timeframe for the by-election, for which the by-election may be held – May I request to remove this thing? It is really making me uncomfortable. 

Restating the timeframe for which a by-election may be held in the rules for purposes of emphasis, and to avoid cross referencing legislation in this case, referencing users or implementers of the Rules of Procedure to “The East African Legislative Assembly Act, 2011”. On whether Parliament can deviate from the rules set by the East African Legislative Assembly Act, 2011 under section 9, subsection (1). The Rules of Procedure of Parliament cannot deviate from the rules set by “The East African Legislative Assembly Act, 2011” under section 9. 

The proposal by the committee to hold a by-election within a period of 60 days is contrary to the EALA Act, which provides for 90 days. So, we disagree with that proposal. 

I wish to draw the attention of the Members to Article 8, clause 4 of the treaty, which provides that the community organs, institutions and laws shall take precedence over similar national ones, on matters pertaining to the implementation of the treaty. 

On the issue of the Prime Minister, the justification for changing from the position that the Prime Minister must answer oral questions orally to the position that the Prime Minister must receive written questions in advance. In accordance to the committee, the justification for the change was to allow the Prime Minister to receive and provide more quality and helpful answers. I note that this position is reflected in rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure. It is my considered opinion that there is a danger in allowing oral questions to the Prime Minister, as the Prime Minister may be ambushed with redundant – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, you will have a chance to debate. Let us have order.

MR KAFUUZI: Let me repeat. Hon. Nsamba needs to hear this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was asking myself all along where you put your glasses. (Laughter) Go on, minister.

MR KAFUUZI: Mr Speaker, it is my opinion that there is a danger in allowing oral questions to the Prime Minister, as the Prime Minister may be ambushed by redundant questions and wastage of time, some of which may be superfluous or overtaken by events. 

Allow me present my report -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please go on.

MR SSEGGONA: Mr Speaker, one of the virtues for which we stand as a Parliament is decency. My young brother, Hon. Kafuuzi, I am told, is a good man, even when I know him more than the person advising me.

The use of the word “redundant”- that Members of Parliament will ask redundant questions to the Attorney-General is not only unparliamentary, but offensive. I am happy to listen to him with patience, but Mr Speaker, if you find that he is not in order, I hereby apply that he withdraw the use of the word “redundant”, otherwise, I will listen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It seems I do not need to even rule because he wants to voluntarily take action.

MR KAFUUZI: For purposes of decency, the Rules of Procedure require parliamentary language. I, therefore, wish to withdraw the use of the word “redundant”. I replace the same with superfluous. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us handle business and finish. Attorney-General, let us use courteous and very clear language. You withdrew the word “redundant”, but please try to be courteous to colleagues.

MR KAFUUZI: I have withdrawn the word “redundant”. Can I proceed? 

Initiation of business of the committee by order of the House. 

Rule 2(1) defines “By order of Parliament or the House or any expression of similar import means ‘ordered by a majority decision of the House.’”

Rule 175 provides for the function of the committee as follows -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Learned Attorney-General, you do not need to read the rules.

MR KAFUUZI: Okay. I will skip that. In its recommendation, the committee proposes to amend rule 175 to allow the committee to initiate its business, except on matters of privilege and discipline. It is my considered opinion that the initiation of business by the committee should be based on a majority decision of the House.

In addition, nothing bars the committee from seeking concurrence of the House or the Speaker. The danger in allowing the committee to initiate its business is that the committee will have wide powers unchecked and the resources at a time may be wasted.

With the exception of matters relating to privilege and discipline, the committee does not clearly state what other business it would like to initiate and which should be included under rule 175. Nothing stops the committee from seeking concurrence from the House or the Speaker. This is repeated for emphasis.

Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation

The committee recommends that the mandate of the Sectoral Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation be taken over by the Sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

The committee also recommends that the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation should revert to its previous status as a standing committee of Parliament exercising the same mandate as that of the previous standing committee. 

The committee further recommends that the Parliamentary committee should revise the committee’s funding from sectoral committee to a standing committee. 

Whereas I agree with the recommendations of the committee in paragraphs one to three above, we would like to add that the Standing Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation should handle matters relating to policy and matters relating to functions that should be handled by the Office of the President. 

Proposed amendment to the Rules of Procedure –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. With respect to the Attorney-General, the chairperson of the committee read a report here and after reading the report we, the backbenchers, are expected to have a debate on the report, as the Attorney-General or minister record what we say. Then at the end, he comes in with his views, before we go to the Committee Stage.

Right now, I am seeing the Attorney-General rebutting the whole report of the committee – Mr Speaker, there has always been a very big problem in this House of attorneys-general not being around, when we are at Committee Stage, debating a Bill.

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, for the Attorney-General or anybody else, to give us room, Mr Speaker, to debate the report and then, the minister comes last to handle our issues and what he feels is not comfortable with. It should be at the Committee Stage that we battle and argue. Right now, the Attorney-General is busy answering everything, leaving us with nothing. He is even stealing from us what we would like to put up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, you can sit. I have captured it. Attorney-General, stop saying what Hon. Ssewungu will say. As Hon. Ssewungu has said, you have said it all and left him with nothing. In short, conclude your submission.

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged. I am about to conclude. We agree with some of the proposed amendments to the Rules of Procedure namely; rule 158, which is on Standing Committees, rule 187 on the Sectoral Committees and rule 11, in Appendix B, except on the timeframe of holding elections. 

We do not agree with the following proposed amendments. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, take your seat. You have finished. Your views are already expressed; what you are doing is a summary because we captured each and everything.  Thank you.

Honourable members, I now open up the matter for debate. Hon. Okupa had stood up on a point of order. I do not know whether you have changed to debating.

4.47
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since this is my first time to appear before you, I take the opportunity to congratulate you upon your ascension to the highest office in the land.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not the highest. It is just high. 

MR NIWAGABA: On behalf of the people who hail from Kigezi, I applaud you. I would like to thank the committee for this report. By and large, I agree with their recommendations, save for one area in respect of the elections of Members of the East African Legislative Assembly. I think the report has not gone down well to help us determine the question of feasibility and the question of other special interest groups, in terms of electing the candidates. How I wish the committee had gone, at a deeper length, to go beyond the judgments and rulings of court and helped us to bring this matter to a rest. Otherwise, I see more litigations coming because we have not gone too deep. 

Secondly, in respect of rule 175, the recommendation by the committee that it be given the latitude to initiate, on its own, amendments to the rules, is a very good initiative. If you look at our rules of procedure, particularly rules 189 and 123, sectoral committees and other committees are given latitude to initiate, on their own, some of the businesses, including initiating Bills. 

Therefore, why wouldn’t the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges, on its own, initiate amendments to the rules? After all, every report it makes will be subjected to the House’s approval? So, I recommend that we do allow this rule to pass and agree with the committee on this recommendation. 

Finally, in respect of the Prime Minister’s Question Time, I have listened to – well, he is now senior to me by virtue of the office he holds - but the essence of this particular rule on the Prime Minister’s Question Time was actually adopted from the Commonwealth, particularly the British Parliament: the House of Commons. 

If you restrict a Prime Minister to answering written questions, then, why do you have written questions in advance to ministers? The Prime Minister – of course, I know the kind of system we have is different from the one in the UK. However, we assume – and we should assume, legitimately – that the Prime Minister here should be well versed with the entire governance structures, systems and administration. 

Therefore, if you limit the questions to the Prime Minister to written questions only, then the Prime Minister’ Question Time will be not only redundant, but also questions to ministers will no longer be there –(Interjection)- you will have time to debate. 

For that matter, those who wish to put their questions in writing to the Prime Minister could be allowed, yes, to do so, but I would implore Members to use more of the oral method. For that matter, I disagree with the committee that there should be criteria on selecting questions to the Prime Minister. That criterion of “first-in-first-out” should be deleted.

How are you going to make a criteria when questions are oral in nature? Will you know the question I intend to pose or the one Hon. Oboth – if he at all comes back to this side – would want to put to the Prime Minister, if it is oral in nature? 

Therefore, I implore the House to allow both oral and written questions, but the criteria should be deleted since it may not be applicable, especially when it comes to oral questions. 

Lastly, I would like to thank the committee for coming up with the cure in respect of rule 235. It is an important rule, honourable members. Most of our businesses, which should have come in this House, expired because we did not invoke that rule. Let us allow the rule, as proposed by the committee, that time be extended to 14 sittings so that businesses that expire in the previous Parliament do not completely expire. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us use two minutes each. We have a programme which we must follow. The problem is that we repeat ourselves. You find that what so and so has said is what you are trying to emphasise. Okay, three minutes.

4.52
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Thank you, committee, for the compilations. My first comment is on the Prime Minister’s Time. We support the inclusion of the oral questions and, in case the Prime Minister cannot respond, it can be referred to the next sitting. 

However, why do we refer her time to the last periods of the sitting? Why don’t we start with the Prime Minister’s Time? Let that one hour be at the start of the session other than referring it to begin at 4.00 p.m. 

The other one is on the reelection of the EALA candidates. I am happy that the committee recommended 60 days because I feel the 90 days recommended by the East African Community, probably, is the maximum. So, it is to our advantage that we utilise the 60 days such that we have even a reserve to fulfill the 90 days. 

My last comment is in relation to the composition of the representatives to EALA. In the case of Abdu Katuntu v. Attorney-General, we were informed that we are given leeway by the treaty framers to let countries express what they want –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable. Don’t give yourself more time. Colleagues, in the gallery, we have a delegation from the Parliament of Mozambique. As you know, President Filipe Jancito Nyusi is visiting us and you know the role played by Mozambique in the liberation struggle of our country. 

Therefore, in the VIP gallery, we have Hon. Raimundo Diomba, Hon. Elcina Marindze – sorry about the pronunciations. (Laughter). We also have Hon. Inacio Joao Relis and Hon. Jose Domingos Manuel. You are welcome. (Applause) Kindly, be watching the proceedings. Thank you.

Hon. Okupa? Colleagues, let me do here and then come here. Luckily enough, Hon. Fox divides the House properly. (Laughter)

4.56
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Independent, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me also to take this opportunity to congratulate you once more. I can see FDC prepared leaders for this House – from the Deputy Attorney-General, Hon. Kafuuzi was our member, and now the Speaker. I congratulate FDC for preparing them. 

Mr Speaker, these are rules of procedure of the Parliament of Uganda not rules of procedure of the Executive. So, when the Attorney-General comes here to start giving the position of the Executive, I think that should come last. Allow us to present, as Members of Parliament, because these are our rules. 

Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister’s Question Time, where it originates from: the House of Commons, has lasted for 60 years and there have been only seven changes to the way the Prime Ministers’ Question Time is handled. 

I would interest Members to read about the origin of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I would like to agree with the committee that we only delete that part of the selection of questions. 

There are questions I put to the Prime Minister. It is now five, or six months and I have not got the answer so we find it difficult. 

I even do not know why we shifted from the original way the Prime Minister handled questions. Do not make us think the prime ministers have inadequacies. I know they are capable people who can be able to respond to questions. If the Prime Minister does not have ready answers, he can ask the minister. We have seen it previously here, how Hon. Amama or Hon. Nsibambi would say, “Honourable Minister of Works, can you respond to this.” It is not an exam that we are setting for you, but you must be able to answer questions properly and to the satisfaction of the Members.
 
Therefore, I would reiterate that we reinstate the way we used to ask the questions. Spontaneous questions to the Prime Minister and a response - he or she is at liberty to say, “This, I’ll respond to tomorrow.” It is not an offence. 

Mr Speaker, we do not want to lose the meaning of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. Thank you. 

4.59
Ms santa alum (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to start straight away from the Prime Minister's Question Time. The committee is suggesting 60 minutes, which I would like to agree to. My proposal is that we give 30 minutes for oral questions and 30 for written questions.

In the previous parliaments, we had the spontaneous questions to the Prime Minister and they would answer. I would like to believe that even the current Prime Minister can do the same. We have tested this current one - first of all, it is boring compared to the other ones. (Applause)

Apart from it being boring, you submit your questions, wait and it does not come if you are not lucky. It is only the lucky questions that get before Parliament. I would like to say that is very unfair. 

Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister is the leader at that level. He or she cannot answer the same questions as the other ministers. Other ministers answer written questions and I would like to believe that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is above. He or she must be conversant with the questions and the answers that must be provided at that level in the business of the Government. 

Secondly, on the issue of the committee, I would like to state that let all the standing committees be the same as far as our rules of procedure are concerned. The Attorney-General is trying to make some proposals, but all committees are the same and should be treated the same. I would like to believe that as the leaders of the different parties and the Independent Members, we are going to provide Members to cater for this proposal by the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. 

Finally, on the issue of EALA, I would like to concur with the committee that we have to stick to the 60 days. Even our Constitution talks about 60 days. If we align our rules of procedure to the 60 days, I think that is so much better in the sense that when we give 60 days, we give room in case of anything – (Member timed out.)

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, I am a presiding officer. I do not want to be part of the debate. However, if we have our rules conflicting with other primary laws, then we shall be in trouble. I think the issue of EALA by-election, Mr Chairman, you would have to agree with colleagues here and we look at it more before the Attorney-General.

Mr katuntu: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I agree only that the learned Attorney-General had not addressed himself to what the cases have decided. Let me read it to him. Both the cases of Peter Anyang’ Nyong’o and of Abdu Katuntu have clearly stated that point. I repeat the court’s holding.

“This electoral process may or may not involve such preliminaries like campaigns, primaries and or nomination. The bottom line for compliance with article 50 is that the decision to elect is purely a decision of the National Assembly.”

Go to page 4 of the report. They have already interpreted this. The whole process, that decision has been left to us as the National Assembly - everything article 50 is citing. There is no contradiction in it.

Let me tell you why - and I invite my friend, the learned Attorney-General, to address himself this. If, for example, the Act gives 90 days and you have disputes, the election has been held two days to 90 days, what happens? Here, it gives you almost a month to sort out any disputes that may arise during the elections. That is why we provided for 30 days. However, the East African Court of Justice has already held that the decision of those processes rest with the National Assembly so there is no contradiction.

The Deputy Speaker: Colleagues, I have two other items, which we must handle today. All business on the Order Paper has to be handled today. I am imploring you, if you have a contrary view to what is being discussed, add value. However, repeating ourselves for the sake of being on the Hansard, we will not finish business here. You have other opportunities where you can speak.

5.05
Mr joseph ssewungu (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The challenge we have is that we make good laws, but those supposed to implement them sometimes frustrate them.  I would like to take the example of what was happening in that first Parliament I attended with – at least I can see Hon. Alex and Hon. Nakadama, the Prime Minister - the Prime Minister then, Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi would appear here every day. Whenever it would come to Prime Minister's Question Time, we could ask. Where he never had an answer, he would come to the Floor and say, “I’ll give you an answer next Wednesday.” That very week, he could give it to you.

The challenge we have now, why we say that all these ministers are unnecessary, is because from Rt Hon. Ruhakana Rugunda, people dodge questions and attendance of the House; like the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister must be here every day, unless otherwise - not representation. Even if he is to come late; that is serious business. He works in tandem with the Speaker of Parliament to look at the Order Paper, get those areas that concern him, and be here to answer.

When we come to Prime Minister's Question Time, you cannot tell me to write the question. What if my question is spontaneous also as he has said –(Interjections)– are you rising a point of order? The Speaker will rule, but I am just debating the report. Is she on a point of order?

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, go on. 

Mr ssewungu: I know she fears what I am saying, but let me maintain my stand. As I conclude, I think as we make this rule, let us go back to the old rule. The questions can be given to the Prime Minister orally because you are going to lose the meaning of “Questions for Oral answer”.

Already, Members write “Questions for Oral answer”, which are given to the Clerk and are posted to the ministers or the Prime Minister. If the Prime Minister can give time to this House and be here in time, those questions she cannot answer immediately, she refers them to another date and Members will come.

Actually, Hon. Amama Mbabazi would come back and report them. For us, we get nothing.

Every Member would raise questions and he would say the NRM Government does this and that and everything ends there. Members want answers immediately and these answers are there, but the Rt Hon. Prime Minister fears to give us the depth of those questions as she is supposed to handle them. 

Mr Speaker, there is no need to write a question. What if my question is against you? If I am an enemy to the Prime Minister, she will choose what question to answer and maybe say Hon. Ssewungu’s questions are redundant and that of Hon. Tom, are okay and even in some instances, she/he may choose to answer the simple questions and leave others. Therefore, I suggest that we maintain the status quo, but the Rt Hon. Prime Minister should be here. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.08
MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report. I have the following observations: 

I agree with whatever they have put, in terms of Members asking both oral and written questions. If we choose not to ask the Prime Minister oral questions, which require oral answers, it denies Members, especially the Member who asked the question, but also other Members present, the opportunity to even seek for clarification or ask a supplementary question, where additional explanation is required. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek guidance from you. We have a challenge especially in my committee. We have had Members coming to complain about rule 70, which is about the rules of debate.  It states that any Member, before speaking, should be able to catch the eye of the Speaker. 

Mr Speaker, we are almost one year old, but there are Members who have not got an opportunity to catch the eye of the Speaker, even when they stand for over 20 times. Up to now, you find Members saying this is my maiden speech. Something has to be done because all Members who have come are representatives of people and their people have issues that are supposed to come to this Parliament. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we try our level best to be fair. We always try, but you are so many. The day you sit here, you find I have only 30 minutes. We also have people who do not attend Parliament. One of the reasons we do not see you is because every day you look new. Where were you? You do not come to Parliament yet when you come you want to stand up once. Therefore, Members please be active and visible even in your constituency. This is why you were voted in. Some are voted 20 times when others have never won. Shall we blame the constituents? No, so try to be visible. 

Hon. Gilbert Olanya is very visible so I will pick Prof.  Mushemeza. You are too visible, Hon. Gilbert Olanya. I will see you later because you are extremely visible.

5.11
PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Independent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join those who have congratulated you, on your elevation to the new position. I will move straight away to the issues raised by the committee, and I would like to thank the committee for the report. 

On EALA, I have listened to Hon. Katuntu’s explanation and the interpretation of the judgments. I had an opportunity to be in charge of the EALA elections at the level of a political party and I was a member of the verification committee of the recent by-elections we had here. I still strongly believe that the recommendation of the committee is against the treaty and so it can be challenged. I would actually associate myself with what the Attorney-General had come up with. Therefore, they need to sit again. Otherwise, we may find ourselves again in court. 

The 60 days vs. 90 days

Mr Speaker, on the issue of the Prime Minister's Time, when I joined Parliament, one of the sessions I wanted to enjoy was the Prime Minister's Time. To use the words of Hon. Santa, I found the session very boring. I would not actually mind, if we used all the 60 minutes for oral questions because the Prime Minister has an opportunity to receive reports from all sectors and programmes. We want to see a vibrant session, where the Prime Minister is asked and immediately responds (Applause) 

The other matter, where I would like to disagree with the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges - I think this is a unique committee. It is not like other committees. The framers of that rule wanted the House and the Speaker to remain with that power to direct issues. Therefore, I would not support that proposal, but I would still want to maintain the status quo, where the House and the Speaker retain the power to direct what would be discussed in the Committee on Rules, Discipline and Privileges. 

Mr Speaker, thank you, for catching my eye. I associate with the views of the other honourable members because this is feedback. We have been receiving complaints from people and so please take it in good faith.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mushemeza, you are basically proposing an amendment to rule 175 that you talked about.
 
MR MUSHEMEZA: Rule 175?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, where the Speaker has no power to initiate business. So by order of the House only - and I heard you talk of the Speaker. Therefore, would you want to propose …”or the Speaker”?

MR MUSHEMEZA: No. I think that was a slip of the tongue. I still agree that the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline “shall by order of the House” and we maintain that status quo. Thank you for the correction. I withdraw the statement, where I invoked the position of the Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fox Odoi, I will get to you. Let us have Hon. Ababiku.

5.14
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I wish to pick from where my colleague has just left. I am proposing that we add the word “or Speaker”. 

My justifications are that the Office of the Speaker has vast opportunities of receiving information in relation to national matters and the Office of the Speaker is the Chairperson of the Business Committee. Therefore, if that opportunity is provided for, it means we will have other alternatives of receiving work to be given to committees. That is my submission. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, do you want to comment on that proposed amendment? 

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, the committee's concern was the restrictive nature of rule 175 as it is. Until the House deliberates, sees the need, then by resolution, it is sent to the committee and the committee, after doing its work comes to the very House, which has sort of deliberated whether there was a need or not. 

Mr Speaker, if there is another option, for example, where the committee can engage with the Speaker's Office - and they can also do this administratively, the Speaker by order - I would concede to Hon. Ababiku’s amendment because it gives us an opportunity. To be restricted to only the House makes it very problematic. As we talk, we have identified several aspects of these rules that need amendment check. For example, the issue my colleague talked about catching the Speaker's eye and so on. 

We are 520 MPs. Getting someone to speak on this Floor is going to be very difficult. Mr Speaker, it is even worse because in some instances, you are given two minutes. When will you ever speak especially the new MPs - It becomes a problem. Therefore, we need to address some of those aspects now to give opportunities, especially to the new Members to also be very good debaters. Some are, but you cannot be judged on two minutes. It is not possible. 

So, these are the sorts of the aspects which we think we cannot bring here; you debate them, we take them to the committee and come back. It becomes so laborious. If there is an opportunity for the Speaker – the committee can engage the Speaker and say, we need to look at A, B, C and D and the Speaker can grant it. I would not have any problem, but concede to it.   

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssegona? I would like us to sort that issue. 

5.18
MR MEDARD SSEGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, this is how much I fear COVID-19, especially when my client, who addresses crowds, has used the microphone. 

I know that I may have my slot in the general debate, but I am deeply getting concerned when we mix the legislative functions and administrative functions of Parliament. What we are witnessing under rule 175 is that we are trying to split. Legislative functions are parliamentary in nature and they are not administrative. Therefore, they cannot be delegated to the Speaker of the House. 

The Speaker of the House, by law, is a Member of Parliament, who, unfortunately, cannot bring motions or debate, but only guide. The Commonwealth practice is that where the Speaker identifies gaps and areas that require remedy, the Speaker goes through Members of Parliament and a motion or other form of presentation is brought in the House. Once the Speaker is seated there, the decision that he or she pronounces is a decision of the House. 

In fact, even without a motion, the Speaker can make a directive from there, which arises or emanates from the debate on the Floor. I dread any possibility or suggestion that we should allow the Speaker to sit in his or her Office and initiate business for the committee without going through Parliament.

Again, because I have been prompted, it is the same for any committee of Parliament. It is very dangerous. I think Hon. Santa Alum said all committees are equal. I will come and demand for the same powers from the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) and the next thing you will see or hear is that I have written to entity A, X, Y and Z to come before me. I do not want to say, “including for mischievous reasons”. 

The business of the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is business of the House. Their work deals with three things: rules, privileges and discipline. What more do they want? My view is that we stick to that distinction. On administrative functions, the Speaker is doing very well. For anything legislative, oversight and anything in that generic string, it is the House. 

If the Speaker has anything he wants, any of us can bring a motion, we debate it and send to the committee. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are two things, colleagues. One, functions for sectoral and standing committees are very clear. There is no committee that is special. So, Attorney- General, on that, indeed, I agree with the Members. You cannot say this is a standing committee, but it should not touch A, B, C and D whereas other standing committees can. I think that would be a very big contradiction within our work. 

Two, from what Hon. Sseggona has raised – which colleagues can conclude on because I would like us to start harmonising some of the aspects, especially those which are not very contentious. Hon. Ssegona is saying that, for that business, which the committee feels is important, it can compile it, come on the Floor of Parliament and seek permission to go and make a review, which would also be the same as what they would be taking to the Speaker, for example, for permission to go and start reviewing. 

So, if the Speaker is interested in that matter, he or she will create space on the Order Paper and then you give the committee an opportunity to go and handle that matter. Therefore, that one will now require an amendment to the report of the committee because I did not want us to go rule by rule. I would like us to clearly agree on certain amendments and then we adopt the report. 

However, if you want, we can go recommendation by recommendation in terms of the specified rules -

MR SSEGONA: Mr Speaker, I think there is a dichotomy here. The first is the general discussion, which has been going on. Now, the inevitable result of this debate is that we must go to the rules, one by one.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I would like us to sort out some so that we know they are settled. 

MR SSEGONA: Yes, if you permit, from our side – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you can, start with the recommendation on rule 175.

MR SSEGONA: On the recommendation – I do not want to repeat what I said earlier. One, we think it is wrong to say we allow the committee to initiate business for itself.

Two, on the Prime Minister’s Question Time, Mr Speaker, the nature of the Prime Minister’s Question Time is about matters that are urgent. So, we want our Prime Minister to be alert, smart and know that there is Parliament, which is scrutinising her or his work and, therefore, she or he should always have the coordination role on her or his fingertips. That is what the former Prime Minister, Amama Mbabazi, taught this Parliament. 

The next is that from our side, the report is good and I am not disappointed, especially by the leadership. Now, if Hon. Katuntu, the chairman can do this kind of perfect job, just imagine his lawyer. (Laughter) The only limitation, where we have problems, is that the instruction of Parliament, in accordance with the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition, was with respect to EALA elections, particularly the question of numerics. 

However, with your guidance, Mr Speaker, we have taken the stand and agreed that we shall bring a fresh substantive motion on this, not to bog down the proceedings of today. 

Finally, on these 60 and 90 days, I think there is only one thing which is magical: the statute. There is a substantive statute. I would request and plead with both the committee and the House that we do not deviate. When the Act is enacted, it only allows legislation on matters of procedure and only on what is not provided for.

Now, we have got to tread very carefully where the statute already provides on the number of days. I would advise that we stick to the Act because there is nothing magical that we need to change. 

Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fox Odoi. We are coming to this side.

5.27
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Rules of Procedure of Parliament are divided into two categories. There are entrenched provisions of the Rules of Procedure; entrenched because the Constitution commands that they must be there. If you take a look at Article 94(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, “Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, Parliament may make rules to regulate its own procedure including the procedure of its committees.” I will address you in respect of that much later. 

I would like to address you in respect of 94(4), “The Rules of Procedure of Parliament shall include the following provisions – 

the Speaker shall determine the order of business in Parliament and shall give priority to government business; 

a Member of Parliament has the right to move a Private Member's Bill; 

a Member moving a Private Member's Bill shall be afforded reasonable assistance by the department of Government whose area of operation is affected by the Bill; 

the Office of the Attorney-General shall afford the Member moving the Private Member's Bill professional assistance in the drafting of the Bill.” 

Now, this afternoon, we are not dealing with any of those entrenched provisions of the rules. We are dealing with rules that are not entrenched. 

I will address you in respect of the proposal by the committee that we permit the committee suo moto, on its own motion, to deal with business, to initiate business. 

Mr Speaker, the justification of this proposal, for starters, this proposal does not offend any written law. It does not offend our power to make rules. It does not offend the Constitution in my –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Fox, please just sit. Okay, you have one minute because you are a former chairperson of the rules committee.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I apologise for taking a lot of time on this. The committee cannot remain redundant and sit there for ages when there's work that ought to be done. It does not take away anything from Parliament if we grant them that leave to initiate business and bring that business to this House to deal with. I submit, Mr Speaker.

5.31
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good report.

I rose on a matter of prominence last time on recommendations 223, subsection (3) on the time allotted for the Right Honourable Prime Minister which the committee clearly indicated that it should be extended from 45 minutes to 60 minutes. I totally agree with that. 

However, the committee also went ahead and divided the time that 40 minutes will be for written questions and 20 minutes to be for oral questions. Why do we need to divide the time? What if there is a case where oral questions exceed the written questions? This is going to be a bit of a challenge. Why don’t we leave it plain? Let it be 60 minutes that the Prime Minister can use in the way she wants. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Colleagues, we want to speak, but this is what we will do – we have two other items on the agenda. And I know all those items are also important; you will also want to contribute on them. The Members who have been standing up and I have not picked you here I will ensure you are the first ones to contribute to the next items so that we allow people to speak. Hon. Nsamba, I know you will contribute seriously to these other items. Yes, Hon. Tony Ayoo?

5.32
MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me start by thanking and congratulating you upon being elected the Deputy Speaker of Parliament of Uganda. 

I thank the committee, and I would like to start by addressing myself to rule 41, the Prime Minister's Question Time. I would implore Members that we make amendments to this rule and go back to having oral questions to the Prime Minister. That is what gives meaning to the Prime Minister's Question Time. This has been the practice. 

We went to these written questions for Rt Hon. Prime Minister after, I think, there was some laxity in responding to questions from Members. I think we should get back to having oral questions. And the Prime Minister would have the discretion, first of all, to answer orally and respond to some of the equations in writing for some of the Members. 

Otherwise, the problem we wanted to solve has started. Now there is backlog. How do we go to using raffle, telling the Clerk to pour the equations in a glass, then you shake and start picking the equations? I think this is too much for – I would think that we get back to oral questions. The Prime Minister will answer and have the discretion to answer some of them in writing. 

Then number two, on rule 12, the election of EALA Members of Parliament 

The treaty says within 90 days. Now, 90 days gives you the discretion to have elections carried out within 20 days, within 40 days, within 50 and 60 days. I think we would be much smarter in supporting the treaty by also leaving it within 90 days so that there is consistency from the treaty to our Rules of Procedure. Then elections can be conducted within the 90 days, but not saying we are conducting election on the 80th or 85th day. Let us support the position of the treaty which is described as 90 days instead of changing to 60 days. Those are the submissions I wanted to give. Thank you.

5.35
MR BOSCO IKOJO (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to thank you for having attained that high office. That has been our dream. And also, to thank the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline for the report that they have presented to the House. I need your guidance. At one point in September last year, as the amendment of the rules was referred to the committee of rules, I wrote to the Speaker of Parliament seeking for the proposal to amend rule number 155 sub-rule (2) and sub-rule (3). 

We noted with concern, the absurdity that will result in the implementation of rule 155(2) and (3). The requirement to commit the loan to two different committees makes the rule appear a little ambiguous. The Rules of Procedure spell out the role of the Committee on National Economy in relation to matters of processing loans. 

On the same note, when you look at rule 155(2) it states:  “The Speaker shall commit the proposed loan or guarantee request to the Committee on National Economy and to the relevant Sectoral Committee....”

When we were processing the loan for the Uganda Secondary Education Expansion Programme, we realised a lot of duplication. The same documents reviewed by the Committee on National Economy, were the same documents being used by the Committee on Education and Sports. We found a lot of duplication. Therefore, I would like to implore this House and the Speaker to consider amendment of rule 155 (2) and (3) so that it does not -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Ikojo. Your letter was received and that is an issue we had to bring here. Which rule is that? It is rule 155.

Colleagues, I implore the House to refer that specific rule to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline because what used to happen was that when a loan comes here, it could go directly to the Committee on National Economy.

A sectoral committee would have already played its role during budgeting, where it allocated that money. The Committee on National Economy only looks at the financing the source of money. This is because the sectoral committee would have considered all those issues. When we changed the rules, we said it should first go to the sectoral committee two weeks or months and after, it goes back to the Committee on National Economy. We more or less made the Committee on National Economy redundant.  

This is an issue for which we do not need much debate. The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline should look at it and we will debate when they report. Regarding rule 155, I expect a report within one week. Honourable chairperson, this is just one item. I expect a report in one week.

MR KATUNTU: Are we specifically looking at that particular rule?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes. If there are others, we shall receive them from Members.

MR KATUNTU: We can complete it in one week.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. First, I would like to congratulate the chairperson of the committee, Hon. Katuntu, for a good report on our rules. I am not very surprised that he is doing this wonderful job.

Mr Speaker, the debate has gone on and we have touched on each rule and the amendments proposed by the committee and so many ideas are coming on each amendment that is coming. As Hon. Sseggona proposed earlier, I thought this would be the right time to go rule by rule, since we have already built consensus on almost all of them. If there is any divergent view about the amendments made by the committee, we can look at that. Otherwise, it is time we move rule by rule, adopt it and then move forward, given your concern of time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleague, I gave you a lot of time on this matter because these are our rules and we are the ones who use them.

Like I promised, on the next item, I will start with colleagues who did not get an opportunity to speak. You still have another chance, when we are handling rule by rule. So, chairperson, let us proceed to the next stage; rule by rule, starting with rule 12.

Rule 12

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I move that rule 12 be amended by providing-

“By-election” 
A by-election of a member of the East African Legislative Assembly representing Uganda shall be conducted in accordance with rule 12(1) and (2) of these rules.

A by-election shall be conducted whenever a Member of the Assembly -
Dies; or
where the seat of a Member of the Assembly becomes vacant upon the happening of and events provided for under Appendix B.

A Member of the Assembly elected under this rule shall serve for the remaining term of the Assembly.

A by-election shall not be held within six months prior to the expiration of the term of the Assembly except where failure to hold elections affects the quorum of the Assembly.”

The justification is to provide for a by-election by members representing the East African Legislative Assembly. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I put the question to that? Hon. Olanya Gilbert, do you have a contrary view on that specific proposed amendment?

5.43
MR GILBERT OLANYA(FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, rule 12(1) states “…representing as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda.”

My concern is that whenever we elect members of EALA, it is as if we do not follow other shades of opinion. The interest groups in this Parliament include the youth, disabled persons, workers and the army. Can someone explain this to me? To me, we are not following shades of opinion in this House yet we have very many political parties.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, in your submission, you are also not following because you have left out Hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s constituency.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Yes and the elderly. That is right. My concern is that we have many political parties with Members of Parliament in the House and overtime, when we are electing members to EALA, we normally say “let seven go to NRM and three, divided among other shades of opinion.” To me, this is not fine. It is better we correct this here and now. May I request the chairperson and the Attorney-General to clarify this? Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I refer my colleague to rule 75 because that argument was not referred to the committee. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good. Honourable member, if there is any matter - What we referred to the committee were rules 12, 41, 158, 175, 187, 235 and Appendix B.

Any Member, who has any other issue should write to the Speaker and they should make their proposed amendment, which will be brought here to the House. Otherwise, it is the House that can refer that business to the committee. Please, allow me to put the question that rule 12, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 12, as amended, agreed to.

Rule 41

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This junior lawyer of mine was trying to disrupt me. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katuntu, don’t you know that Hon. Namugga Goretti has come in? She is now in the House.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, rule 41 - Prime Minister’s Time. 

Rule 41 of the rules is amended - 
(a) 	by substituting subrule (3) with the following:

“(3) Questions to the Prime Minister may-
(i) 	be made in writing and submitted to the Clerk; or
(ii) 	be put to the Prime Minister during the Prime Minister’s Time under subrule (1)” 

(b) By substituting subrule (4) with the following:
“(4) The Clerk shall enter all written questions in the Prime Minister’s Question Record Book and select 15 questions on the first-in-first-out principle, which shall be forwarded to the Prime Minister.”
 
(c) By substituting subrule (5) with the following:

“The Prime Minister’s written response to a question shall be copied to the relevant Member and the Prime Minister shall respond to the question during the Prime Minister’s Question Time.”
 
(d) 	By substituting subrule (8) with the following:

“(8) The Prime Minister’s Time shall not exceed 60 minutes.” 

(e)	By inserting a new subrule immediately after subrule (8) as follows:

“The 60 minutes referred to under subrule (8) shall be apportioned as follows -
forty minutes for responding to the written questions; and 
twenty minutes for responding to the oral questions.”

Justification

(i) 	To provide for the option of allowing Members to ask the Prime Minister oral questions.

To remove the selection of written questions by raffle.

(iii) 	To increase the Prime Minister’s Question Time to 60 minutes; apportioned for both written and oral questions. 

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I need you to comment on this. This is a rule about your time and we haven’t heard you say anything. It would be prudent -

5.49
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Mr Speaker, I would like to request the House that we should not go with the oral questions because, initially, we used to ask oral questions during the Prime Minister’s Time – during the time of Dr Ruhakana Rugunda, Hon. Mbabazi and Hon. Nsibambi – but we used to go with unanswered questions and they were very many. 

That is why they said we should start writing because the Rt Hon Prime Minister could not answer all those questions. They used to be very many and they could not all be answered. So, they said let us start writing so that we do not leave the questions unanswered. 

Therefore, I request that let us go with the written questions, not -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In short, are you saying we do not amend the rule?

MS NAKADAMA: Yeah. We go with the Attorney-General’s recommendation. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

5.50
MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the recommendation that we don’t amend. When we come to the House, there are issues that we want to present as issues which are very pertinent and we demand immediate answers to these issues – unless we go the way of playing to the gallery of raising these issues and we don’t get substantive responses.

As a Member of Parliament from Kitgum, when I raise a question to the Prime Minister, I would expect the Prime Minister to give me the response and action.  However, we are looking at a scenario where everybody will be standing up to raise issues and all the Prime Minister can do is to say, “honourable minister or the Government Chief Whip, respond” – and we still have these issues of giving responses which are not substantive. 

I would go with written questions, but also not closing the window for -(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, I ask my sister to forgive me. The essence of the Prime Minister’s Time is to allow the Prime Minister to interact with Members of Parliament on policy matters and matters of the constituencies, among others. 

Mr Speaker, if we are to allow the written answers every time, the Prime Minister’s Time will lose meaning –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order?

MR OLANYA: Is the honourable member in order to emphasise that we should go back to the written document as if the time is for answering academic something yet this one is strictly to interact with the Prime Minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Gilbert Olanya, I know you wanted to submit and you thought I wouldn’t pick you on this matter. You know a Member is entitled to his or her opinion. This is her opinion and, so, it can’t be aligned to yours all the time. 

However, you have made your submission and it has gone on the Hansard. So, I hope you are not submitting again on this matter. (Laughter)

MS ABER: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I still want to confirm that this recommendation looks at both angles. You are looking at written and asking the questions. So, I still insist and propose that having the window of both written and free asking of questions would be proper -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do you support the position of the committee? 

MS ABER: I do support it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. 

5.53
MS JANE AWICH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to comment on the Prime Minister’s Time. I would like to disagree with my colleague -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Bahati, please… Hon. Aber has given her opinion and it has gone on record. 

5.04
MS JANE AWICH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Okay, I rise to talk about the Prime Minister’s Time. I would like to disagree with my colleague because the Prime Minister’s Time is the only time we have to interact with the Rt Hon Prime Minister. Many times we have written and gone to the offices, but these people are very busy: we do not get them. If we cannot express our questions here, where shall we get them? 

In most cases, our constituents want serious answers. I always follow up on our forum. Immediately you asked the question, in the forum in the constituencies, they ask what the minister’s answer was. Therefore, if it is just written, how shall we get the fast answers? Let it remain oral. 

I would also like to say that one hour is okay because it allows us time to interact. I just want us to scrap the aspect of written questions. Let it remain oral so that we have a lot of time to interact with the Prime Minister. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us move this way. On this rule 41 – honourable chairperson, let us go subrule by subrule. Okay? For example, we vote on proposal (a), go to the one on (b) and so on so that we don’t do an omnibus and end up losing focus. 

So, on (a), some people are saying they want it to be oral and we have others who are saying it should remain written. The committee is saying both, but we have others who are saying it should be purely oral and others who are saying it should remain written. 

Mr Katuntu rose_) Let me first allow Hon. Sarah Opendi and then you come, honourable chairperson.

5.56
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I would like to - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We welcome the Prime Minister. So, she is also going to submit on the same. (Applause) You are welcome, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

You have been ably represented by the Rt Hon. Nakadama and the honourable minister.

Ms sarah opendi: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform this House. I came to Parliament in 2011 - the Ninth Parliament. We had purely oral questions and that session was very interesting. Many Members would sit in the House. We come to the 10th Parliament and maintained the same. I would like to let you know that these rules were amended in 2021, as we were ending the 10th Parliament so it did not even apply during our time. We just started it in the 11th Parliament.

Honourable colleagues, let us go back. You have seen that during Prime Minister's Time the House is almost empty because the Rt Hon. Prime Minister comes with written responses. People walk away because they are not concerned and, of course, the issue of the raffle. 

So, I would like to suggest that the Prime Minister's Question Time remains. However, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is at liberty to consult and come with an answer in the next session, which is still okay. It will be confusing for you to say, “Let’s have both.”

When you have both oral and written, supposing you have written and it is just 40 minutes and the Prime Minister does not respond, what happens? Let us maintain it since this is an interaction with the Prime Minister. It is in good faith. The Prime Minister can answer or choose to answer in the next session.

The Deputy Speaker: I would like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to say something. We have a lot of business, colleagues, where you will speak. I might not pick you on this, but on the next one, I will do.
 

5.58
Mr amos okot (NRM, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am not going to take this as my maiden speech in your presence in that seat. I will take another time to congratulate you.

However, given this subsection that we are talking about, in the past, we used to go with oral questions only. Now, we have already started to get used to written questions. It is now becoming almost a precedent that people are following. Ministers plus all other people now know that you write so that you get a detailed report on what you want to be answered. 

However, I would like to add to what the committee came out with. I second both the oral and written questions, but for the written, we should allow any other subsequent question that regards the answer the Prime Minister is giving. Sometimes, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister can answer, but may leave us without any fulfilment to the answer that we have been expecting - 

The Deputy Speaker: Right Honourable, they are addressing your issue.  I wish you could pay attention.

Mr okot: Let me repeat now that she was being distracted –(Interjections)– You are not the Speaker.

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Amos, please conclude.

Mr okot: My submission is that we allow the oral and the written questions. If the answer has been given, the subsequent question that follows that particular question, which might have not been answered well - let us allow it also. 

6.00
Mr alex ruhunda (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I add my voice to congratulate you and to thank the committee. The committee on this very matter has found a cure because it has not just gone only one side. It has addressed the issue of written questions, which are given 40 minutes and then oral questions are given 20 minutes. 

Mr Speaker, the parliamentary practice followed all over the world is clear. You have to subject the Leader of Government Business to serious scrutiny. One of the ways is that the Leader of Government Business must be on the tenterhooks to know that once in a week I am going to be tasked with questions. I must have my technical teams prepare because Parliament is going to subject me to a barrel of questions. 

Therefore, you cannot go to lower the Parliament to say that you do not want to inconvenience a Prime Minister. The Prime Minister must be in the position to subject all of these ministers - he is the coordinator of the entire Government business. 

Unfortunately, we have seen many gaps within our Government apparatus. People go and do different things. They are not taking it upon themselves to feed the Prime Minister with information. This Parliament now is urging Government saying that we must have our Prime Minister given information. That is why I think this is very appropriate. 

I stand by the committee that we have the 20 minutes, which are not so many, and then the 40 minutes for the written questions. (Applause)

6.02
Ms Cecilia ogwal (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I just want to make a clarification on this particular subject. The rule as it is now compels Members to put questions to the Prime Minister in writing. Now, we are saying, “No, writing is restrictive. It is not in compliance with the Commonwealth practice.” We are saying, “Let’s adopt a two-way process that is writing and oral” - the hybrid. This is adopted by this Parliament, which means we have looked at the previous experience and encountered some challenges. I think I can testify to that. 

Where I also feel uncomfortable and I am sensing it, is that we should allocate more time on oral and less on writing –(Applause)– but in principle, the hybrid is the best. I can assure you there are some other parliaments, which are going to adopt our hybrid approach because they are also complaining. Those of you who have moved around, you have sensed that.

Therefore, this will be unique. It is our own approach because it is based on our own experience. Let us allocate 45 on oral and 20 on writing if we could agree. (Applause)

The Deputy Speaker: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a rule that affects your time.

6.04
The prime minister and leader of government business (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, let us to take the trouble to go through our Hansard. I took the trouble, I told the chairperson to go through it and see what was happening before and the logic behind us changing these rules. 

First, at times it was like a theatre. The Rt Hon. Prime Minister would come here - you can go and check – and say, “Oh, we shall bring the answer. That one will be handled.”

However, in the few months I have been the Prime Minister, I have been providing the answers and also following up for action. I can even give you some things we have done through the Prime Minister's Question Time. 

If you want us to go back to the theatre, I am here. I will answer and give you those that can be answered. The fact is, we thought Prime Minister's Question Time should also come up with action points - the way we have been doing it. The only challenge has been that whenever it would come to Prime Minister's Question Time, the Rt Hon. Speaker would prolong whatever has been happening in the House. That is what created backlog. It is not because the Prime Minister has failed to bring here questions. Let me give you an example –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, before you came, we talked about the issue of language.

MS NABBANJA: What issue? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The language we use. Parliament at any day can never be a theatre. What a member of parliament can submit here and all that -

MS NABBANJA: What I am saying is - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we can say the quality of answers were not good. I am mindful of the language. When someone reads and says sometimes back Parliament was a theatre - that is very bad for the image of Parliament. 

MS NABBANJA: I withdraw. Colleagues, I would like you to take trouble and go through our Hansard and see how the late Prof. Nsibambi, Hon. Amama Mbabazi and my predecessor, Dr Rugunda used to answer questions because I took trouble to do it. 

When I was appointed the Prime Minister I said, “I want to perform”. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please continue. Hon. Amos, I need discipline in the House.

MS NABBANJA: Colleagues, we are in these offices for a reason. We want to serve. Recently, I was given a question here on the road from Corner Kamdini to Lira. I was given another question for Rwenkunye-Apac-Lira-Puranga road. 

After these questions, I got answers. I took the trouble to go up to the ministry and I called them and said “Members want answers for these roads”. At that time, Members wanted to demonstrate. We called the World Bank, and then we came here and gave you the answers, which were really action points. As I talk now, the contractor is on site. 

I thought the Prime Minister's Time -  Why don’t you allow me to summarise? I have no problem with having oral questions. We can have both. I have no problem (Applause). Hybrid is quite good so that you can check whether the Prime Minister is up to date. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very great. (Laughter)

MS NABBANJA: Secondly, to also make the Prime Minister try to find solutions all the time. I have no problem. If you are a serious Prime Minister, you will definitely give answers, which solve problems, which are brought here by Members. Therefore, I suggest that we give more time to written answers than oral questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is what we had even done. What I have got now is that the Prime Minister has given you a true picture. 

MS NABBANJA: I would like to make an appeal. Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister's Time is practised globally. When it is the Prime Minister's Time and the Speaker is in the Chair, I request that we respect that time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Tomorrow at 4.00 p.m. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need you here to answer questions. 

MS NABBANJA: No problem. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good. Colleagues, I think we have picked smoothing without really going so much into this. It is now up to you to look at the quality of answer you want. If you insist on oral, you run a risk, according to the Prime Minister, of not getting a more detailed answer, than the one who would have written, because for those who would have written, she goes back and consults. Since all sides are agreeing to the hybrid, can we proceed, chairperson? 

Honourable members, under rule 41(3)(a)(i) and (ii), I would like to put the question that the proposed amendment be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are still moving down. We finished 41(3)(a). Colleagues, look at your report. Now, we are going to 41(4)(b). Chairperson.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I propose that we substitute subrule (4) with the following:

 “(4) The Clerk shall enter all questions in the Prime Minister's Question Record Book and select 15 questions on the first-in- first-out principle which shall be forwarded to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I put the question that the proposed amendment under 41(4) be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I propose that we substitute subrule (5) with the following:

 “The Prime Minister's written response to a question shall be copied to the relevant Member and the Prime Minister shall respond to the question during the Prime Minister's Question Time.”

MR SSEGONA: Mr Speaker, I, first of all, agree with the committee, except that I propose to set a timeframe within which the Prime Minister answers. My view is to give it a timeframe of 14 days for the Prime Minister to answer. 

My justification is to avoid prolonged and delayed responses from the Prime Minister, which has been a vice that we must deal with. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are issues which we are handling administratively and we have made very good strides. The Speaker has been in touch with the Prime Minister in regard to the issue of Prime Minister's Time being given priority, and we are going to give it priority. 

On the issue Hon. Ssegona has raised, when you put that timeframe - for example, you have 200 questions, yet in two weeks, you can only answered 30 questions. No, I mean the questions submitted to the Clerk. You are not telling Members not to send more questions to the Clerk. 

Honourable members, this would work, if these questions have already been picked. From the time they are picked on the first- in-first-out principle, then you can give it a timeline of 14 days, which will compel the presiding officer to ensure that it is done.

MR SSEGONA: I think I receive your guidance with gratitude, Mr Speaker. The point is that you start calculating time from the date when the questions have been submitted to the Prime Minister. Definitely, the Prime Minister cannot be held responsible for questions that have not been submitted. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sure. 

MR SSEGONA: So my view is that this time runs from the time they are taken.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How do you cure the issue of recess? Meaning the Clerk should only send questions, when we are in a session.

MR SSEGONA: When we are in recess, the Clerk is not in recess. That is number one. Number two, the Prime Minister will not be able to present here, but remember these are written answers and written answers by practice are also submitted to the Clerk. When we resume, you handle that administratively. I will handle this with you because in a Business Committee, that is what we do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So you mean when the Prime Minister submits to the Clerk, for example, the answers should be uploaded on the system so that Members can access and then the Prime Minister will come and repeat it here.

MR SSEGGONA: Absolutely, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Very good. Honourable chairman?

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, as Hon. Cecilia Ogwal submitted, this hybrid is the first of its kind. And because of what the Prime Minister, herself, said and what Members have submitted on this Floor, we need both.

We suggested that the Clerk shall enter all written questions in the Prime Minister’s Question Record Book and select 15 questions on a first-in-first-out principle, which shall be forwarded to the Prime Minister. So, the record should show question 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 and once you select the 15, you forward those.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have already passed that one. The issue is on time.

MR KATUNTU: The time for the Prime Minister can only run for those questions he or she has received – and those will be received after the 15 questions have been answered and they are all numbered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what I am asking you is, do you agree to the proposal by Hon. Sseggona to add the time?

MR KATUNTU: The time of within 14 days?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, that is the one I am putting to you as the chairperson.

MR KATUNTU: The Prime Minister is here and we are all here. Does the Prime Minister object to answer a written question in 14 days? Why should she? I think 14 days are very reasonable.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, do you concede on that? 

MR KATUNTU: I concede on the 14 days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us move. Hon. Olanya?

6.18
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, when making the rules, it is very important that we understand well; the timing of 14 days also depends on the urgency of the question being asked.

It is not a must that when the question is asked today, it must be responded to after 14 days. Let us say, “The Prime Minister should select the more urgent questions, which deserve urgent answers” – [Members: “No.”]- If you are talking of the problem within the country that calls for the answer immediately, it cannot wait for 14 days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Olanya, that will also require you to define “urgent”. You will need to go to the rules and also describe all criteria –(Ms Nabbanja rose_)- Rt Hon. Prime Minister, take your seat. Do not bother about this.

Colleagues, we do have provision for questions of urgent nature in our rules of procedure. So, if it is a question of that nature, you can raise it to the minister here on the Floor every day and there are even provisions for oral questions. Yes, that is it.

MR BAHATI: From the committee chairperson, we are giving a certain amount of time to Members to raise questions for written answers. When the Clerk records these questions, he will pick 15 on the basis of first-come-first-served. What happens to the rest of those questions raised in the time specified for written answers and have not been picked by the Clerk?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson? 

MR KATUNTU: The reason we suggested 15 is that you do not have to overload the Prime Minister. You send him or her 15 questions and after she has answered that, you can send another bunch, as long as they go chronologically in the record book.

However, this should always be on the first-in-first-out basis.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: (Ms Ogwal rose_) Colleagues, do you want us to sleep here? This is now a straight forward matter. Yes, Hon. Katuntu needs to go and break the fast and time is running out. I put the question that the proposed amendment under rule 41(5) be adopted with the proposal on time of 14 days, as proposed by Hon. Sseggona.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, the committee proposes that we substitute subrule (8) with the following-
“(8) The Prime Minister’s Time shall not exceed 60 minutes.” 

(e) Inserting a new subrule immediately after subrule (8) as follows -

“The 60 minutes referred to under subrule (8) shall be apportioned as follows –

(a) 	forty (40) minutes for responding to the written questions, and;

(b) 	twenty (20) minutes for responding to the oral questions.”

Justification

To provide for the option of allowing Members to ask the Prime Minister oral questions;

To remove the selection of written questions by raffle, and;

To increase the Prime Minister’s question time to 60 minutes; apportioned for both written and oral. Why? This is because, previously, the Prime Minister’s Time was less than an hour: it was 40 minutes. We are now increasing and dividing it up. 

However, we are amiable to adjusting what sort of minutes go to the oral and written questions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, let us not take much time on this. As the presiding officer, I can even adjust and add the Prime Minister 10 or 20 minutes for more oral answers. You also have matters of national importance, where you bring oral questions. So, let us give time to those quality answers, which are more detailed because of the more research the Prime Minister would have done.

Colleagues, I put the question that the amendment to rule 41(8) be adopted as proposed by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 41, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next.

Rule 158
MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, rule 158 is amended by inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (n) as follows-

“The Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation”

Insertion of a new rule

The rules are amended by inserting immediately after rule 186 the following-

“Functions of the Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation 

The Committee on Science, Technology and Innovation shall –

(a) 	review, discuss and make recommendations on scientific and technological content of all Bills laid before Parliament;

(b) 	initiate Bills on strategic issues of science, technology and innovation for national development;

(c) 	continuously monitor, evaluate or assess activities in the public institutions and any other bodies engaged in national science and technology development;

(d) 	examine and carry out research on the performance of the national science and technology subsector, and;
 
(e) 	examine, recommend and oversee adequate national budgetary provisions for the development of science and technology. 

The committee shall report to Parliament at least twice in a year on its functions.” 

Justification 
To provide for the functions of the standing committee on science, technology and innovation. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I put the question that rule 158 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 158, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next?

Rule 175

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, I have been following the debate on rule 175. I could see the consensus that the House was very uncomfortable to imagine that the committee will start amending rules without them knowing. On behalf of my colleagues, let us drop that recommendation until we examine it further. I could see the consensus amongst colleagues. I always want to go by consensus. I think let the committee drop this one until we discuss it further.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The recommendation for 175 is dropped; so we maintain it. I put a question that we maintain rule 175 as it is.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Rule 187

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, this is consequential. Rule 187 of the rules is amended; 

in paragraph (j) by adding a new sub-paragraph immediately after sub-paragraph (ix) the following, “science, technology and innovation”

by deleting paragraph (p)

Justification 

Consequential amendment to making the Committee on Science and Technology a standing committee. Currently, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation is under the Office of the Presidency.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I put the question that rule 187 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On which one, Hon. Flavia? (Interjection) No, we have already finished. Go to rule 235.

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, rule 235 of the rules is amended by substituting for sub-rule (4) the following, “The resolution of Parliament referred to in subrule (2) shall be passed within the first 14 Sittings of the First Session of Parliament.

Justification 

To enlarge the timeframe within which the resolution for reinstatement of lapsed parliamentary business is to be considered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I put the question that rule 235 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

6.37
MR MEDARD SSEGONA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Chairperson, thank you very much. There is a desire on that very particular rule, I think the chairperson can help us. We have Members who are doing Private Member's Bills, but never get the chance of returning to Parliament. 

For example, last time, I was doing the Local Content Bill; had I not returned to this Parliament, the chances of the Local Content Bill to proceed - yet it is a very critical law, may have challenges. So, as we debate this, we must think about the Private Member's Bills whose people carrying them forward may not have made it to the next Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you see, if you move a Private Member's Bill and you do not return here, you would have gone with all your privileges and businesses and everything. What you do is to look for a Member – it has been the practice – to be the new sponsor of the Bill. Some of the Bills are already moving. For example, the Succession Amendment Bill, which was moved by Hon. Kajungu of Mbarara, I think is already a law. It came already –(Interjections)– the Member is already off the Floor, so there is no one to give information. 

That is the advice given to you. If you sponsor a Bill and you leave Parliament before your Bill is processed, you look for someone to take on that Bill. 

The appendix

MR KATUNTU: Mr Speaker, as you have correctly guided, that is when you do not come back because you have lost an election, but you may not come back because you have gone to meet your creator. The situation changes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have seconders. You are not doing the Bill alone –(Interjection)– might you all go together? (Laughter) Please proceed.

MR KATUNTU: Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure. Appendix B of the rules amended in rule 11, by deleting subrule (2) and (3). By inserting immediately after rule 11, the following, “The chairperson of the verification committee or any other authorised member of the committee shall present the report of the verification committee to the House indicating the list of the nominees verified and found to have satisfied the requirements of rules 4 and 5 of these rules. 

Publication of approved nominees

The list of nominees approved by the House shall be published in the mass media and shall be displayed on all notice boards of Parliament”. I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am looking at how we process this – 

MR KATUNTU: Maybe I can just continue – all of them. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sure. Alternatively, what we can do, since you marked them in our report, we can go by each one you marked, and then our Hansard people will capture it very well, putting each one wherever it should go. We are going to open debate without concluding.

MR KATUNTU: Okay. I intended to concede. The problem is if you have legal debates, sometimes it is better that you do not go for a grey area. 

My own interpretation is different from that of the Attorney-General. But I have explained the harm I wanted to cure. What if, for example, there are contestations after the election; there is some time within which the National Assembly can resolve them. But if the Attorney-General and my other colleagues think we can go by the 90 days, I would not have any problem, but that causes a problem when you have not really fully resolved this problem. We thought there would be that window. And when you read the judgments, they would give it. However, I would concede that we let it remain as it is because it has not arisen before. The harm has not arisen before. We were anticipating.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I totally agree with you, Chairperson, because you see, where the treaty is very clear, you cannot just focus on case law. The treaty is very clear and it says within 90 days. The case law; the case was not about the time, it was about other issues, then, they later on commented on the issue of the time. 

Let us remain within 90 days and then we, as administrators of this institution, can ensure that indeed, we put in place all scenarios. We can do it in 10 days, we can do it in 50 days, but we respect the treaty so that someone does not say we contradict the primary law on this matter. Honourable, please continue and finish because that was the only contentious matter.

MR KATUNTU: I, therefore, withdraw any reference to the 60 days in respect to Appendix B of the Rules of Procedure. I think the Hansard should capture that. 

The justification was to;

provide for the report of the verification committee to be presented to the House; 

Paragraph 3 is a repetition of paragraph 12, so, there is no need to maintain the subparagraph. 

(iii) 	To specifically provide for all the circumstances that give rise to the occurrence of the vacancy;

(iv) 	To provide for notification of the occurrence of a vacancy by the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly to the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda; and

(v) 	To provide the timeframes within which a by-election should be held and that timeframe should be like that provided for in EALA.

Mr Speaker, these recommendations arise out of Hon. Fox Odoi’s verification committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For purposes of clarity, I put the question that the timeline for a by-election under EALA be maintained, as provided for in the Treaty.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the proposed amendments, under Appendix B, be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. The rest are just references under Appendix A.

6.37
MR MEDARD LUBEGA (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to congratulate you upon the successful conclusion of this. However, I would like to put the House on notice that we are coming up with a motion, which contains substantive proposals for amendment with relation to election of the EALA and specifically, the numerical question has got to be resolved. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is always your right and we shall respect that.

MS KABAHENDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on rule 187, not to dispute what we already passed, but to introduce something.

In the Ninth Parliament, the Committee on Social Services was holding a number of sectors and we split it because it was holding health, education, agriculture. We split it to introduce the Standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters.

I would like to talk about the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. These are two sectors, with very huge mandates. These sectors hold the economy of this country and, therefore, each requires a lot of analysis and concentration. Therefore, I propose that the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry be split so that trade is analysed alone and tourism analysed alone because they hold very big mandates for one committee to hold. I beg to propose.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, prepare a substantive motion to that effect. I do not know whether this is a notice or not?

MS KABAHENDA: Mr Speaker, allow me to give notice to that effect. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It could not be a recommittal because this is not an issue we are handling. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Chairperson, Hon. Abdu Katuntu, and his colleagues. (Applause) You never disappoint. You have done a lot of work. I am glad that we handled this matter.

I would like to also thank the Attorney-General, for giving us light on some of these issues. It is always important for the Attorney-General to clarify, especially, on matters of a legal nature so that in future, someone does not say you did not consult the Attorney-General.

Thank you, Prime Minister, for coming and giving direction, especially conceding on the issue of the hybrid. It is under your Parliament that in Africa, we are going to have a hybrid of Prime Minister’ Time. People are going to learn from you and will be coming here to benchmark and ask, “How do you do it?” They have been benchmarking and now it is going to be more. Thank you. Honourable Chairperson, would you like to make some comments?

MR KATUNTU: I would like to thank you, colleagues, for the support of the committee report, but as you may realise, our rules need a lot of second attention. Therefore, I request colleagues to study the rules and try to look at what aspect would make our work a little bit better because we are just too many.

On what looked to be contentious here, I would like to inform colleagues that when you go for a question for oral answer, even your own constituents are looking at you. You are asking questions which regard them. When you go for a written answer, you have a document, which you can take to your constituency. So, this hybrid is a very good innovation and we should all take it in good faith. It is for the good of Members of Parliament and constituents because that is how you report.

When we ask questions here, our constituents are looking at us and they know you are addressing their problem. If the Prime Minister comes with a written answer, you can go to a subcounty council and distribute that answer. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, what the chairperson has said is that go and scrutinise these rules. I have met very many colleagues who say, “I do not have copies of rules” - Attorney-General, we have another item coming up.

Honourable members, after budgeting, we shall go back and review because programme-based budgeting, which is replacing sector-based budgeting, is going to bring a lot of changes on how we operate and how committees work. As presiding officers, we are going to review, meet with the Business Committee especially after the budgeting process and see how best we can adapt to the changing times. Our rules are a living document; so, we have to keep adjusting any time to ensure that we operate properly. 

Colleagues, there is a lot of jam outside. So, if you want to go and get stuck, please escape. Next item.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS ON THE NATION-WIDE ASSESSMENT OF THE DISASTER–PRONE AREAS AND THE PROPOSED SUSTAINABLE STRATEGIES FOR ADDRESSING DISASTERS IN THE COUNTRY
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is yours so, let us dispose of it.

DR NICHOLAS KAMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also take this opportunity to congratulate you. When we started the 11th Parliament, we were following the standard operating procedures and one of the standard operating procedures was putting on a mask, the right way. I have noted, with concern, that it is now optional, yet I have not heard the Speaker’s Office or the Clerk’s office pronouncing themselves on this issue. 

I was with the Minister of Health yesterday in a seminar and she still insisted that we must put on masks especially when we are indoors. Are we proceeding well - or would you like to pronounce yourself this evening that putting on a mask is optional such that Members can put it on at their own discretion? I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. We are looking at very many things and so, sometimes, I do not pay attention to who is or not putting on a mask. This is why you colleagues can see each other. 

Hon. Sarah Opendi, you need to put on your mask properly because COVID-19 is still here. If you do not have a mask, I request you go out. This is a very simple matter. If you do not have a mask, go out and get a mask. Let us move to the next business, Hon. Ssewungu. (Laughter)  COVID-19 is still real. We must put on our masks all the time – Ooh! I wasn’t in the canteen, so, it is your word against his. It is difficult for me. Hon. Ababiku?

6.46
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AFFAIRS (Ms Jesca Ababiku): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Our report has been uploaded on the iPads.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have 20 minutes – maximum. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On page 1, we have our introduction. We were given this assignment on 5 October 2021. 

The terms of reference, under 2.0, are:

1) 	To investigate and establish the forms and likely causes of disasters in the country. 

2) 	To assess the effectiveness of interventions geared towards disaster preparedness and disaster management. 

3) 	To recommend to Parliament sustainable strategies for addressing disasters in the country. 

Mr Speaker, we can leave the methodology and document review for Members to go through. 

Page 3 is about the background to this assignment. Uganda’s disaster risk profile is characterised by hazards, which include drought, floods, hailstorms, windstorms, landslides, epidemics, pandemics, pest infestations, earthquakes and fire outbreaks. 

The emphasis of this assignment is based on the severity and regular occurrences of the disasters that we have been facing and Members outlined their grievances based on the very low responses that they have been getting.

Still under background, we have noted the level of frequency – where disasters have been occurring in an unusual manner: at times twice or thrice a year. Members can read the detailed aspect of the background. 

Page 5 has findings, observations and recommendations on term of reference 1, which was to investigate and identify the forms and causes of disaster in the country. The forms of disasters are highlighted below:

Landslides

One of the forms is landslides. We have categorised the causes to these landslides and they include: 

Torrential rains, and; 

Poor land use practices through uncontrolled land use practices such as deforestation, neglect of soil conservation practices such as terracing, bush fallowing and contour ploughing by surrounding communities. 

Floods

Floods are one of the forms of disasters in our country. The specific causes are outlined below:

Nature of terrain;

Deforestation – where encroachment and degazettement has been intensified in our forests;

Climate change;

Diversion of original water channels, and;

Rising water levels on Lake Victoria. 

Drought

Mr Speaker, another form of disaster is drought. The specific causes are reflected from page nine. They are;

Cyclical weather patterns;

Deforestation and soil degradation, and;

Climate change. 

Hailstorms and windstorms

Hailstorms and windstorms are also another form of disaster

Epidemics and pandemics

Epidemics and pandemics are also another form of disasters

Pest infestations

Pest infestations are another form of disasters.

Earthquakes 

Earthquakes are another form of disaster.

Fire outbreaks 

Fire outbreaks are also a form of disasters. 

Mr Speaker, from page 12, we are reporting on our assessment on the effectiveness of interventions geared towards disaster preparedness and disaster management. 

Mr Speaker, Government has established early warning systems for floods and droughts in the country. Our findings are on page 14. 

The committee established that the early warning systems aimed at reducing the risks posed by weather-related hazards face a lot of challenges and this includes insufficient budget and its associated effects. 

For example, the Uganda National Meteorological Authority (UNMA) – a semi-autonomous government institution responsible for establishing and maintaining weather and climate observing stations, network collections, analysis and production of weather and climate information, including warnings advisories to support social and economic development – is largely underfunded. This has resulted in failure to operate at full capacity. 

For example, only 12 out of the expected 23 agro-meteorological stations are functional; only eight out of expected 17 hydro-meteorological stations are functioning; only one out of the expected four upper air monitoring weather stations is operational, while none out of 10 air monitoring equipment for our cities has been procured. 

The committee observes that inadequate funding to UNMA constraints the effectiveness of the institution’s role of monitoring weather and climate, provision of meteorological, hydrological and related services in support of relevant national needs like protection of life, property, safeguarding the environment, contributing to sustainable development and promotion of long term observation and collection of metrological, hydrological and climatological data.

It is the committee’s finding that UNMA’s objective to improve the quality of its service to this country has been constrained because of the underfunding.

Mr Speaker, another challenge that we have established is the unreliability of the data because of the poor equipment and also inadequate provision of the expected services to the several stations that are expected. There are also poor communication systems in terms of poor timing and the content.

Another challenge is the poor network connectivity. Some of the regions, for example, Karamoja, is not well serviced in terms of connectivity.

Landslide early warning systems

Mr Speaker, that is one of the interventions, but another challenge that we have established in this is the laxity of the leaders in disseminating the relevant information timely. 

Another challenge, inbuilt, is that most of the communities are not responding positively to the cause of Government and their leaders. 

Mr Speaker, on page 16, we have legislation as a measure of intervention.

The Constitution has provided for management of our disasters, and multi-sectoral approach in management of disaster issues. However, under legislation, Uganda has not yet put in place a national law and that is disadvantaging our country.

Mr Speaker, we also assessed the performance of our country in relation to international and regional protocols. One of the examples we have cited is the Hyogo Framework for Action. The details about the principles are elaborated from page 16 to page 17. However, for the purpose of record, the summary of the principles elaborated here is prioritisation of disaster risk reduction through legislation and effective implementation. 

Mr Speaker, the challenge we have observed in this is that our Government has ratified this, but not domesticated it. 

However, our Government has gone ahead to implement some of the aspects of these principles or the pillars. Our Government has established structures at the local level, but lacks the resources to ably do their work. 

Hazard mapping and vulnerability profiling has been done in only 40 districts of the disaster-prone areas of the country. Similarly, early warning systems have been installed in a few regions that are prone to floods. 

In regard to information sharing, little has been done considering that the mode used is mostly electronic, and that reaches a few people. As a result, a lot is still required. Unless our country spreads the effectiveness of connectivity in other parts of the country, dissemination of some of this information is a problem. 

The second framework, we looked at the Sendai framework for disaster risk reduction. Our Government has signed, but not ratified. The pillars have been elaborated here. In summary, Sendai Framework for Disaster Reduction deals with disaster reduction through knowledge acquisition and the use of a multi-sectoral approach to achieve disaster reduction. 

The next protocol we looked at is the Africa Regional Strategy for Disaster Risk Reduction. The pillars are seven and are elaborated here. In summary, this focuses on political commitment and improved governance to disaster risk reduction. We have also signed, but not fought it. This emphasised so much on the requirement of including disaster budgets in our annual budgets. Mr Speaker, we have established that many of our MDAs are not including this in their budgets. 

Under IGAD, we have elaborated on the pillars of this protocol. We have signed, but not ratified. It focuses on specific strategic measures for disaster risk reduction. 

Apart from the protocols, we did an analysis of the national policy for disaster preparedness and management. As I said earlier, we have a very beautiful and instrumental policy, but we do not have a law. The committee established that despite the existence of the policy, Government does not adequately plan for disaster prevention. As a result, it ends up responding more to disaster occurrences than being proactive. 

It is the finding of the committee that the objectives of the national policy for disaster preparedness and management have not been fully implemented. For instance, whereas the policy requires that there be established an effective monitoring and evaluation system, the current system is not effective. It is hampered by inadequate staffing of the monitoring and evaluation directorate under the Office of the Prime Minister. 

The committee observed that local communities and district local governments are not empowered to respond to disasters due to the lack of funding.

We also looked at some of the laws in the various sectors because we have found out that disaster issues, especially the triggers, are coming from different sectors. We looked at the National Environment Act in the aspect of environmental protection. However, as we have outlined the specific provisions of this Act, much will be done by the sectoral committee. We are going to narrow ourselves to only the areas of disaster. 

Our concerns are on page 25. That is, beginning from paragraph three. The committee found out that NEMA has not fully executed its mandate in making proper decisions in environmental and social impact assessments, which has led to the exposure of natural resources to degradation that has augmented disasters such as flooding. 

It is the committee's finding that failure to adhere to the said provisions has constrained the management of the environment for sustainable development and therefore made the innovations geared towards disaster preparedness and disaster management ineffective. That is the area, which is related to our key assignment. 

On page 26, we looked at the Water Act. We did our assessment and established that some of the disasters are a result of inadequate supply for production and human consumption. That is in the last paragraph of page 26. It is the committee's finding that Government has not fully executed its obligation under Section 5 of the Act to ensure adequate supply of water to different parts of the country for production, which has affected crop and animal productivity. 

On the other hand, inadequate supply of safe and clean water for domestic consumption –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, can you go to the recommendations.

Ms ababiku: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recommendations are on page 33. We are recommending the following under the operationalisation of Article 249 of our Constitution. That Government expedites the enactment of the National Disaster Preparedness and Management Act to pave way for the establishment of the Disaster Preparedness and Disaster Management Commission so as to operationalise Article 249 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, minus this law, we will not be able to have the commission because the descriptive structure, the mandate and financing will all be managed by that law. We need first to have that law in place.

Establishment of a robust integrated early warning system

These are our specific recommendations. Early Warning System communication networks be strengthened in addition to continuous sensitisation, so as to enhance the preparedness of communities and establishment of mitigation measures for proper disaster management. 

UNMA should be allocated adequate resources to modernise its meteorological observing, forecasting and warning technology and expand its services in order to effectively execute its role in mitigating natural hazards from translating into disasters. UNMA should ensure that early warning systems are decentralised and accurate.

Under the management of hilly and mountainous areas, we are recommending the following:

Governments should ensure that sustainable land-use practices such as contour ploughing or terracing are adhered to in hilly and mountainous areas of the country.

Government undertakes deliberate efforts geared towards restoration, reforestation and afforestation of hilly and mountainous areas of the country.

 NEMA enforces strict adherence and compliance with the provision embedded in section 57 and section 58 of the National Environment Act, 2019.

Management of lakes, rivers and wetlands

Mr Speaker, I beg that I leave this to my sister committee. Our issue was so specific on environmental protection. 

Adherence to Section 26 of the PFMA, 2015. Ideal 0.5% allocation to the contingency funds. 

Specific recommendations 

Government should adhere to the Act to ensure that approved budgets are consistent with section 26(1) of the Act.

Government should focus the budgeting provisions at all levels towards building resilient communities, economies and infrastructures other than managing and responding to disasters.

Increasing absorption capacity to the Contingency Fund 

The committee recommends that a review be undertaken to ease the accessibility of funds from the Contingency Fund. 

Relocation of persons or communities living in disaster-prone areas 

The committee recommends that Government should enhance its intervention to relocate the population at risk in disaster-prone areas to areas identified to be safe for resettlement. 

The committee also recommends that areas where the population has been evacuated be gazetted as government land and measures be taken to restore vegetation. 

Routine de-silting of rivers 

The committee recommends that Government rebuilds strong gabions and undertakse routine de-silting of rivers. 

Establishment of robust fire prevention and management system

We recommend the following:

Government should sensitise communities on basic fire safety practices and enforce all the fire safety measures at all times. 

Government should ensure adequate distribution of well-stocked firefighting equipment.

Urgently address the problem of high urban traffic congestion that slows down response from the firefighting teams 

Commitment to Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction

We are requesting that Government takes up domestication of some of these protocols. 

Mr Speaker, Members can read the rest. 

In our conclusion, we are saying that the factors contributing to disaster occurrences are both natural and human induced. The increasing frequency of disaster occurrences in the country are highly contributed to low levels of effectiveness of our Government’s interventions and continuous destruction of the environment. It is high time we enacted a national law, adhered to the Public Finance Management Act and adopted a multi sectoral approach to disaster risk reduction. I beg to submit. 

Mr Speaker, before I take my seat, allow me to lay a copy of our report and the minutes attached thereto. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson and members of the committee. Colleagues, I would like us to sort this issue and finish it since the Prime Minister is here and this has to do with her sector. In addition, colleagues who have been here patiently waiting are the ones who should be given the first opportunity to debate. 

This is a very important report, especially on identification of these disasters, but I have seen some issues, which are lapping. For example, issues to do with the NEMA Act. I remember when we were working on it, the reason given to amend it was because we do not have finances and all that. You cannot do away with a good law because you are failing to implement it. Then go and appropriate money so that you implement it. 

Some of these issues will be referred to the Committee on Natural Resources to deeply scrutinise and see how best they can be worked upon. Colleagues, the question for debate is very clear. We are debating the Parliamentary committee report on the nationwide assessment of disaster-prone areas and the proposed sustainable strategies for addressing disasters in the country. Debate begins now. 

I will start with the Hon. Rugumayo. I know people who have been here for long a time and I know those who have spoken for long. Therefore, I will start with those who have not yet spoken. Let us have Hon. Rugumayo, Hon. Netalisire, Hon. Feta, and Hon. Joanne Okia. Since we are not many, each one of you is going to speak. Let us use three minutes. 

7.10
MR EDSON RUGUMAYO (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This being my maiden speech, since you ascended to that position, allow me congratulate you upon ascending to that position. Also, allow me to convey gratitude to the committee for the wonderful report they have put forward for us to debate. 

Mr Speaker, when I looked through this report, I was very much perturbed to learn that as Parliament, on an everyday basis, all issues to do with matters of national importance are questions almost to do with disasters. We come here on an everyday basis and debate disasters and yet solutions to these underlying problems could have been got, if we sat down as a country and as a Parliament and debated these issues. 

Mr Speaker, it is also perturbing to learn that almost all our budget on disaster is spent on response relief, yet nothing is done to ensure we are prepared for disaster. It is over 10 years - since I was out of Parliament and Members from Kasese raise matters of national about River Nyamwamba - and every time the matter is raised, the Prime Minister either flies with a helicopter, accompanied with many SUVs of ministers, yet the problem of River Nyamwamba could be solved with a small thing. 

Mr Speaker, if wazungu, by 1950, could build gabions along River Nyamwamba, channel it, put it in a different direction and manage it for years, how come we cannot do it as a country today? These questions are very perturbing. I think this is a simple problem. If we put our money to preparedness, other than spending it on relief, we would do a lot more in saving this country and our time, as Members of Parliament. 

Secondly, we need to deal with disasters in an honest manner. Just last weekend, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister was addressing a function and she made a statement that you people of Kasese and Ntoroko have been given Shs 500 million each financial year –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, your time is up.  

7.13
MS SARAH NETALISIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me add my voice in congratulating you. I would like to thank the committee as well.  

Mr Speaker, if the disaster preparedness and management commission had been put in place, it would address some of these things. Otherwise, the way we are managing disaster response and the way we are prepared to handle issues of disaster in this country has left a lot to be desired. 

There are many areas that have given early warnings. Regarding the highlands of Bugisu subregion, we have indicated to this Government and the Minister of Disaster Preparedness that we have a very big crack that runs through all those mountainous districts up to Sebei subregion. However, up to today, no action has been taken towards that crack. Tomorrow, when these soils fall on people, we shall see vehicles going to Bududa to now evacuate dead bodies, when the disaster has already occurred. Therefore, with this commission in place, maybe such issues will be addressed. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when addressing the disaster issues, we always look at relocating people, but we relocate people in an undignified manner. We carried people from Bududa, took them to Kiryandongo and, up to today, the houses that were earmarked to be constructed to house the people in Kiryandongo since 2010, have never been completed. 

The other time we relocated people from Bududa to Bulambuli and, as we speak, we have less than 200 houses on the ground out of the over 1,000 houses that had been earmarked. These are factors that motivate people to go back to the areas that they would be actually staying away from. These places need to have a habitable and conducive environment: when you go there, there are no hospitals and schools. Instead of people settling there in a dignified manner, they opt to go back to their places, where their lives can be lost.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, the way we are handling environmental management in this country leaves a lot to be desired. We are giving out wetlands and these are supposed to be catchment areas for all these floods that are going on. You wonder – one entity in Government is saying protect the environment and the other institution is giving titles – (Member timed out.)

7.16
MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Permit me to congratulate you upon attaining that chair of speakership. 

Allow me to thank the chairperson of the committee for a job well done. They have done a job that I think we should appreciate them for. 

The committee has highlighted, correctly, the ineffectiveness of NEMA in performing their roles. Now, if you go to some urban centres like Arua City now, people are busy reclaiming the wetlands and the swampy areas because NEMA has failed to mark these places. And, because of the city, the demand for land has grown: a piece of land there is almost more expensive than it is here in Kampala. However, because NEMA has not marked these swampy areas, people are busy reclaiming them, settling on them and doing other activities that have adverse effects on humanity, climate and leading to disaster. 

As we speak, the dry season that usually comes from December to February started in November and we are ending April with no rains in the region. 

So, there is looming famine arising from the activities of NEMA, where NEMA has failed to implement the laws that we have put in place. This House has a duty to ensure that we make NEMA enforce these existing laws. 

I would like to thank the committee for doing a good job, but I would like to appeal to this House to help the committee to ensure that the resolutions and recommendations are enforced. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving us an opportunity to discuss this particular matter. Tomorrow, another area will become a city – and even for the rural areas where a lot of destruction is being done now, if we do not take action, it will be blamed on this House. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aniku?

7.19
MS JOANNE ANIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for a report well done – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, the other time I started from this side. So, I am starting from this side and, after, I will come here. 

MS ANIKU: I would like to thank the committee for a report well done. I would like to support the findings and recommendations. 

Having said that, I come from Madi-Okollo District, which borders the River Nile – there are five subcounties which actually border River Nile. So, we are prone to windstorms and flooding. We want to thank Government because we have actually benefited from the Ministry of Education and Sports – they have a programme for emergency repairs of buildings. 

However, when I look at the report, I would like to add something small because they list about 46 districts, which are disaster prone, but they left out Madi-Okollo and mentioned us “among others”. 

My request is that since we are disaster prone – we have windstorms and last month, we had a school that lost five roofs and it is not very easy for Government to come in very quickly – we can also be mentioned very clearly in the report. I beg to submit and I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, that is clearly noted. Hansard, capture Madi-Okollo, among the districts. Chairperson, Committee on Climate Change, Hon. Songa -

7.21
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee on Presidential Affairs for collecting this important data for us to make a decision. 

My position would be for us to go step by step: what should we do first if we want to control disaster? That is the missing link. If it is environmental degradation causing climate change and disasters, what should we do first? 

Many attempts are pointing at NEMA. If you look at the budget now, NEMA is only given Shs 16 billion and the funding gap is Shs 123.7 billion. So, apparently, we are paying salaries. What do you expect NEMA to do? The climate change department is given Shs 2.5 billion only out of Shs 17 billion. What do you expect these bodies to do? The money is just for salaries. 

We need to know, step by step, what to address first, second and third if we want to control disasters. 

The ministry for disaster preparedness is supposed to do disaster preparedness, not taking relief after disaster. By now, the ministry should be mapping the trends. For example, we know when River Nyamwamba floods and the areas that get affected. Why don’t we map those areas so that in the next rains, we avoid those disasters?

In other parts of the world, they would be putting barriers – what you call maybe “dikes” – to prevent disasters. This is my position: let us focus on disaster preparedness. For how long are we going to buy saucepans, rice and iron sheets to address disasters? Let us focus on disaster preparedness and increase the budget. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we need to get the experience of local governments. Yes, former Chairperson LCV Kumi - Local government plays a very critical role.

7.21
MS CHRISTINE APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr Speaker, I congratulate you, on behalf of the people of Kumi, for attaining that position. 

I thank the committee. Somewhere, there is a recommendation to have a commission. However, there is less being done by the disaster committees of districts and subcounties. I implore that the department of disaster makes use of them. 

Also, the indicative planning figures (IPF) that is always given by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to local governments to support environmental conservation is very low. Mr Speaker, when I was there, the department of natural resources would always be given Shs 2 million in a financial year. What can that money do?

In our local governments, we still have unutilised public land that would be utilised for tree planting, but the resources that are provided are not able to support that. Since we are in the planning time, I beg this Parliament to look into this as we appropriate resources so that we have true environmental conservation.
 
Mr Speaker, when it comes to the implementation of the law – the directive that the President made – it is very hard. In Kumi, for you to say “stop cultivating rice in the wetlands” when they are seeing serious rice cultivation in Pallisa - So, if it is implementation of the law, it should be uniform. 

As I speak, there is terrible famine in Teso Subregion; terrible. A number of families are sleeping without food. Many times, I sympathise with my sister, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, because even as she gives the relief, for a family of 20 people and you give a Nomi of beans; for how long can that sustain families? It is really a very serious issue. 

Finally, I would like to talk about the provision of alternative livelihoods. Like in my case, in Tisai Island, the main activity people depend on is charcoal burning. Many times, you try to arrest and they will ask, “What else can we do in order to sustain our lives?” This is planning time, let something be done to address these calamities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. I will first give priority to those who have not spoken. There are those who have been here for a very long time. I know those who have just come. So, I am watching.

7.26
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of disaster preparedness is a big topic. Whenever disaster occurs in this country, it is true that we are unprepared, most times. I have been in this Parliament for a number of years and the same talk we are having now is what has been had. 

Where is the problem? Implementation. Who is supposed to implement it? At times, you find that this person is also involved. I can give you an example of environment officers in districts that have built in swamps. So, this person loses moral authority. Who is occupying these swamps? Top government officers. So, you lose moral authority. 

When you look at corruption, who is abating it? Ourselves, I would say. Why? It is clear that we have reasonably good laws, but the implementation – for instance, my sister has talked about giving land titles. Who is giving these land titles? At times we talk about cancelling them, but what about the person who issued the title? You leave him in office. At times you promote him, and you say we have the moral authority? 

I think the issue of financing is good, but it is not the ultimate. The ultimate is having moral authority in Government. We have lost the moral authority. And when you go to these local areas in the districts, wherever we come from, check, the people who have destroyed the environment, especially the swamps are the rich people and people are looking on. When a local person cuts a tree, people go up in arms, but the rich people, the leaders, are the ones destroying this country. 

Therefore, if we are to do anything, let us check ourselves and say enough is enough. The President has directed, but who listens now? People are no longer listening. I beg to tell you, colleagues, that we have lost the moral authority, as a country. As leaders, let us check ourselves. The population has no problem; they are willing to listen, but the ones who should be telling them are the ones doing all these wrong things. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The point raised by Hon. Kagwera is a serious one. Because if Government pays compensation in a wetland. You find someone is compensated and in a wetland; the government valuer went there, the surveyor went there, but they compensate a wetland – 

The right honourable was not – I know I have been holding her over something. Let me first allow you to say something on this and then you can go for that meeting. I will then go into that corner because mount Wanare might come. (Laughter)

7.29
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and also inform Members that Government has put in place early warning systems in those flood-prone areas like Bududa. That is why this time round, although we had floods, we did not lose people.

Secondly, in areas of Kasese, like my brother talked about, we are looking at relocating people to safer areas –(Interjections)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, let the Prime Minister first finish. Most of the time, when someone has just started speaking, you rise on a point of procedure; that way you fail to follow. 

MS NABBANJA: I request the members of Kasese, as my brother said here – Remember some time back, I came on this Floor of Parliament and they asked for support of Shs 5 billion. Do you remember? That money has helped us to put in place infrastructure. We have built schools in Rwampanga. That school is called Mone Primary School – I do not know whether there are people from Nakasongola here and we are saying that it is for the children who were using that school that submerged some time back – that was 2019, by the way. Construction is now taking place and they are to the roofing stage. 

The district provided land and we have relocated the health centre III of Rwampanga that was submerged. Construction is still ongoing. These are permanent solutions, which we are considering with just Shs 5 billion. 

Buliisa Health Centre III is also under construction, in a place called Butyaba. They are also – I think they have roofed or they are at the roofing stage. I have not gone there recently. 

We all agreed that the people of Kayunga need to be relocated. An advert was put in the papers to have land to buy for those people. 

The people of Bulambutye and Bulambuli were relocated. The construction of these houses is still ongoing. The Bulambutye health centre is in the place. 

To the people of Kasese, I would like you to remember that you have a problem. Kirembe Hospital, where we all agreed that we should give support; we failed to get land for that hospital. Secondly, the land that they showed the army brigade on which to construct a hospital requires more than Shs 4 billion to grade. 

In our meeting, we agreed that let us now take this hospital – because the money is going to go back, Shs 2 billion – so, we are going to upgrade a health centre IV to a hospital. 

Honourable colleagues, we are coming up with long term solutions. He is aware that they have failed to get land for us to buy for their people in Kasese - the ones who have always been washed by floods. This problem is not a one-man solution. All of us must get involved. 

Then lastly, the President came up and Cabinet – you have been in Cabinet – we came up with SOPs. We want the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness to have those integrities that we need for us to respond to disasters in a shorter time and a consultant was recruited and put in place and we have a report. This will help us to –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the language of “please” does not work here. Please switch off your microphone. You cannot say, “Procedure, please”. No, that is unparliamentary. Take your seat - (Interjections) - honourable, I am the presiding officer. It is not about you being polite. It is about you being a humble Member of Parliament.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we have taken note of the recommendations of the committee and I promise that Government will implement some of them – those that can be implemented. Two – (Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is not on the Hansard.

MS NABBANJA: Let me conclude by thanking the committee and to inform colleagues that the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, under the Prime Minister’s Office, though we are not yet fully funded we are trying our best. We shall improve as time goes on. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Such interventions are very important, but the issue of buying is very important. For example, you would need to meet MPs from disaster-prone areas, as the Prime Minister, and not individually. Call a meeting and meet them in a group and list the districts. You can do regions and say, MPs from disaster-prone areas from Eastern Uganda or Northern Uganda. 

When you meet those who come individually, it becomes difficult for us here to make it formal and whatever you agree upon, you can always share here.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, study this report deeply because it has very important recommendations. We shall require an action report on it on the Floor. You can also update the House on the interventions you have done. It seems there are good things you are doing, but MPs do not know. This is because we usually do not have room for appreciation. We only have room for blaming and engaging; so, it is up to you to blow your own trumpet.

The Member from Kasese seems to be having an issue and earlier on, he had complained that River Nyamwamba has again –

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The dignified Members that you have in the House are probably future top on your list. She is my elder sister; I wouldn’t talk back to her.

Mr Speaker, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister coming in sort of distorted debate because she has the last word. The Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business and so, I thought we are duty bound to make presentations, which should be aggregated or consolidated and then the Rt Hon. Prime Minister gives a response. Basically, that was my issue.

Mr Speaker, I thank you for bringing to the attention of the Prime Minister, what you raised.

Mr Speaker, this afternoon, we have three fundamental rivers - Rt Hon. Prime Minister, thank you very much for your generosity and kindness. You have been to Kasese and you care about Kasese just like you care for the entire country.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I brought to the attention of the House this afternoon that three fundamental rivers you are familiar with, namely; Nyamwamba, Rubiriha and Nyamugasani burst their banks and people right now, as far as we are concerned, are not quite sure of their fate in terms of safety and security is - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I will allow you to remove a mask so that the Prime Minister can hear you properly. (Applause)

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I would like Hon. Sarah to come nearer and help me to translate. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are special arrangements.

MR KATUSABE: That is the reason I really appreciate and honour our Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this afternoon, three rivers namely; River Nyamwamba, River Nyamugasani and River Rubiriha burst their banks and we are not quite sure the build-up of the weather tonight.

What is going to be their fate in terms of life, specifically, safety and security? I know how much progress you are making, Rt Hon. Prime Minister and we appreciate your effort and that of Government, but we are concerned with the current situation. What is going to happen? I said the intervention should be layered into three. Kasese community needs immediate, medium and long term interventions.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, although offices have closed, you have contacts in Kasese and so, you can call the disaster office and the Office of the Chief Administrative Officer to know what they have in place to ensure - either they ask our people to leave the communities near the banks or the mountains and get into town to ensure there is harmony in the various levels.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Katusabe, colleagues also want to contribute.

MR KATUSABE: Lastly, I am asking the Prime Minister to fast-track her interventions, which are already in place, specifically de-silting and bamboo growing.

I would like to tell you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that your people in Kasese specifically Bukonzo West, Bukonzo East, Busongora North, Busongora South and Kasese Municipality, upon your encouragement, have nursery beds for bamboo. Therefore, when that project begins, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I ask that you give them first consideration and give them the seedlings before you can outsource. Much appreciated, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, as they continue with the interpretation and as Hon. Sarah prepares an invoice for the services, can we have the Member for Bungokho, Member for Kiruhura and Member for Vurra. 

7.42
MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, congratulations upon your elevation as the Deputy Speaker of the 11th Parliament. 

I appreciate the committee for the detailed report, very well researched and informative. I will go straight to the issue of early warning systems, which is their recommendation that we need to strengthen. 

Besides strengthening, we need to do the maintenance because across the nation, most of these early warning systems and weather stations are non-functional. They are set up, but they need a lot of manpower; adequate manpower to do the reading of the findings. After doing the readings, they need to record and disseminate the information. That is not adequately being done especially, if we are looking for the real time information to ensure adequate decisions are made to the people who depend on the weather for production.
  
We also need to ensure that the information that is disseminated to the users is friendly because most of the information that is disseminated, especially to the farmers, is in very hard language. That needs to be brought down to the people so that they appreciate it.  

When we talk about disaster pre-response, it is the only thing, instead of preparing the people to mitigate the effects of disasters.

The promotion of the issue of urbanisation becomes a very serious issue, especially in the mountainous areas of Bugisu subregion, where I come from. When we promote urbanisation in these areas, people will still stay within their own areas, but with alternative ways of survival so that they remove pressures on the land.

One of the greatest challenges that we need to admit is the population pressure that is being laid on the unstable areas of the mountains. As the populations continue sitting there, the land give -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, Hon. John Magolo is one of the few climate change experts we have in this country. He has even been a lecturer of climate change at Busitema University. So, he is one of the biggest resources that the Prime Minister can always use whenever they want information on such matters. 

I would like us to do it quickly so that the Prime Minister can - Yes, we are doing it quickly. (Member rose_) No, honourable, you have just come. You cannot - no, no. I have been here since 2.00 p.m. So, I know the group that has been here. I am picking people who have not spoken and have been here for long.

7.42
MS JOVANICE TWINOBUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues to thank the committee for the detailed report. Actually, it gives us direction. 

I will, first, talk about the issue of funding to the sector. We may have good laws and we may talk a lot, but if the sector is not well funded, we may not get the solution. 

I concur with my colleague that since we are in the planning and budgeting process, we need to give more funding to the sector because we appreciate that each one of us has an issue about disasters. 

My second point is on the issue of prolonged drought. I come from Kiruhura and we normally experience two prolonged droughts in a year and these claim between 1,000 and 5,000 heads of cattle. 

I thank the committee for observing this, but I did not clearly hear about the solution or the recommendation on the issue of the prolonged drought. I would suggest that we think of water supply for production and irrigation. I thank you.

7.48
MR YOVAN ADRIKO (NRM, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to congratulate you, on behalf of the people of Vurra Constituency Arua District. 

Mr Speaker, it is true that the issue of disaster preparedness has really caused a lot of problems. If we take Vurra, it is the area where a lot of destruction has taken place. As we speak, around six primary schools are roofless. 

One example is Ajono Primary School. Government promised us and we submitted the documents, but up to now, there is no response. If you go on the ground, you will see people are blaming Members of Parliament and the whole Government. 

I also congratulate the committee because they have come up with a very good plan. However, what we need is implementation. 

On the side of the ministry for disaster – what you have seen on the ground there is that the NFA has also caused a lot of disaster in my constituency. I have seven forest reserves where they always disturb my people and people are now jobless and homeless.

They have squeezed people in my area yet if we try to talk to them, the response which is given to us is that it is “orders from above”. Which order? These are people who are trying to claim the area and my people are going to suffer. This is not good. 

7.50
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Receive my congratulations from Kween and Sebei and even our brothers from across. I am aware you know them. 

I would like to thank the committee for this very good report. I am looking at it in a different way. We have created and have NFA, NEMA, the Ministry of Water and Environment and now we even have the ministry for disaster. All these bodies are looking at the environment, but they are doing nothing. 

We are spending a lot of money in salaries, management and administration, but we are not doing anything to prevent disasters. In fact, I don’t think there is any Member of Parliament here who has not presented an issue to do with disaster. You have heard people talking about iron sheets – wind came and blew the roofs from the schools. Everything is happening, but I am tired and I cannot even report that now. 

We need to talk as leaders and understand why. Every day, in the media, you will find that a roof in a school has blown away and about 100 iron sheets are down. For me, the other day about 200 iron sheets were taken down. This is because we don’t have trees around our schools and these are Government schools. 

How can a  whole primary schools be there without even 100 trees within the compound? Members, this is very bad. So –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Member from Bukomansimbi has been here since 2.00 p.m. – (Member rose_) no, you have just come. Good people, I will give you a chance. I have MPs who came here at 2.00 p.m. – who started with me. (Mr Muwuma rose_) Milton, you came about an hour ago and I have been watching; in fact in 30 minutes – Hon. Bahati has reminded me. 

7.52
MR THADEUS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): I would like to thank the committee for the good report. Mr Speaker, we have a ministry for disaster preparedness, but I think it is high time we called it the “ministry of response to disasters”. 

There is also another issue that has been coming up by saying that we should have disaster-prone districts and areas. I think that from the way the report has defined the disasters, the whole of Uganda is disaster prone. It just depends on which disaster you are talking about. This is because, among the disasters we have been talking about, there are even epidemics. 

For example, we have not talked about disasters that refugees bring to this country when there are problems across. So, there are many disasters and I think we should just talk about disaster mapping.

Now, about urban areas, our biggest problems in urban areas are floods and these are mainly because urban planning has not been done well. 

Finally, I would like to suggest that we should have a multi-sectoral approach when dealing with this issue. For example, I do not see how you cannot deal with the issue of family planning, when you are planning to avert disasters. Most of these issues we are talking about are because of the rising population, which causes deforestation, pressure on the land and so on. 

There are so many other issues - water. The most important thing is to ensure that there is a multi-sectoral approach to the issue of disaster –(Member timed out.)

The Deputy Speaker: I think Hon. Kamara has brought a very important issue, of mapping. It is very important everywhere - Let me sort out these three because they have been seated since. People are even running away from that section so that I can see them from here; so, let me handle the rare ones then I conclude with the Shadow Minister for Energy. Tomorrow, I will start with you, honourable engineer. 

7.55
Mr paul nsubuga (NUP, Busiro County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me join the very many Ugandans in congratulating you on attaining that chair. I am glad that the Prime Minister is here. 

My concern goes straight to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness. Since you are our boss, I would like to report to you that the Ministry for Disaster Preparedness is moving at the slowest pace. You should take this concern, if possible. I will give you an example that in 2017 in my constituency - that is Busiro North - we got a disaster on River Mayanja. People died, but Government took days to respond. 

Not only that, but even last year, in my constituency still, in Masuliita, heavy rains destroyed foods and even houses, but people were not helped. 

Lastly, I will talk about the landslide early detection system. The minister said the people should report. However, I am of the view that the detectors should do the job. Of course, if I am the one in Bududa, I cannot report my location so that I am taken away from where I stay. 

Therefore, the truth is that disaster is everywhere. We are just working hard to see that we get a solution as the entire House. I beg submit.

7.57
Mr abdulhu byakatonda (INDEPENDENT, Workers): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the job well done. We have analysed the list of Authorities with a combination of laws in place, but we wish to ask ourselves; are they the weak laws, which are causing the problem? We can say, “No.” However, the challenge is that the law enforcers instead tend to be lawbreakers. 

In this context, you find environmental police watching when someone is putting soil in a wetland. We need stringent laws, which can do something for the good of our country to avoid such. Instead of embarking on the solution, we should embark on limiting factors.

Still on the same, we must at least empower the Meteorology Department, which can give us a clear picture of every region in form of communication. However, when they say, “Tomorrow, we shall have rainfall in such and such a place,” people will assume that is a lie. Therefore, we need to build trust in some of our entities so that people can gain confidence in the communication they make to us. 

Last on the same, we need also to - to me the issue is not the budget because Uganda has been spending money wherever there is a problem. Now, my –(Member timed out.)

7.59
Mr geoffrey kayemba-ssolo (NUP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to give my maiden speech when you are in the chair. (Laughter)

I thank the committee for such a wonderful report -

The Deputy Speaker: But you can put on your mask properly.

Mr kayemba-ssolo: The nose is too big at times - (Laughter) - I think we should focus on preventive measures, for example, tree planting to avoid the winds and rain storms, mostly. 

We have no serious tree planting project, especially in our areas - starting with us in our constituencies - yet the basic problems we get are winds that take away crops for people. We need to use that as a preventive measure. In times of hunger, we need to have food reserves – (Interjections) – a moment. We need to get our food reserves, especially at the district level. 

Most times, especially in Buganda Region where I come from, we grow a lot of food and at times, it is unused. When we get a drought period, we lose. Therefore, it would be good if we put food reserves. 

With flooding, the NEMA teeth bite the poor, not the rich. We had an incidence on Entebbe Road in Kitubulu, where soil was brought and poured into the lake. Nothing was done to them. It is the same thing in Munyonyo, if you look at the Lake Victoria shore. Therefore, we should avoid too much corruption from NEMA and the police. At least we can – (Member timed out.)

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, I saw on the groups which you were sharing, the ED of NEMA at that same site, stopping the construction and all that - after it had come to our groups of Parliament. What we need to do is, we are in the time of budgeting. They made it very clear. How much do you give to NEMA? You are giving people salaries and allowances, but not tools to go and do the work; they are just seated. Therefore, I think it is very important that we look at the budget. 

Colleagues, today I have gone beyond by two hours. The Shadow Minister and the Prime Minister should respond and we go.

I have seen that the moment you try to satisfy everyone – tomorrow, what I would propose is, if I could have a list of people who are here today - Listen. You are not an MP for one issue. The issues are many. Tomorrow, if you are here, I will give you first priority. I did it on the previous matter. I tried to cover people who could not speak on the previous matter. Please, I will try to do that tomorrow. 

Also, the Prime Minister is going to be with us. When she is going out, you can share, for example on the issue of the wetland in Luzira being encroached on. We cannot finish. It is 8.00 p.m. These technical people have children. They have families. 

8.03
The shadow minister for water and environment (Ms Christine Kaaya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for coming up with this. It is very important that it is the Committee on Presidential Affairs that has really compiled this because we would like these issues to get an elevation of the presidential address such that it also gets attention, the way the Coronavirus and HIV/AIDS did. We hope that most of the recommendations will start off. 

However, it has been highlighted in this report that early warning is very important. Many of the Members want tangible items. When we front early warning as an important item, we are like, “No, that is not tangible. We want social services. We want this.” Members, we are calling you to embrace the contribution of early warning because this will give us the powers to decide on what to do and how to plan. 

Mr Speaker, we realised that the increasing levels in the lakes that we have is too much related to siltation. However, most of the contracts awarded to some of these companies do not clearly come up with a provision on how the investors are going to work on the de-siltation. They are over emphasising catching fish and looking at the incomes. However, this other item of environmental management on these natural resources, in most cases, is lacking in most of these contracts and agreements. 

As Uganda, we already reached our carrying capacity, but the way we are embracing refugees without minding about the rate at which they use natural resources is worrying. What population are we supposed to stop at? When you look at the way people behave - as they come to Uganda, the way they exhausted resources - they are after surviving for a day and they rarely implement any appropriate technologies. 

Mr Speaker, we appear to be realistic and feeling for the environment, but can you imagine - Mr Speaker, let me finish. I was trying to say that we need to come up with some affirmative actions. Can you imagine, we are the ones coming up with proposals on the degazettement of forests? Can you imagine, we are the ones bringing motions for degazettement of public forestland, wetlands and you say you are for the environment? It is really shameful. We have lamented, time and again, for the establishment of the disaster management Bill for years, but this Bill is stalled in the Prime Minister's Office. 

I saw that the committee met the department, but when are they promising to fast-track because this is what is going to guide us on the number of guidelines and policies. Otherwise, whatever we are promising will not take force unless we have the Act in place. 

Mr Speaker, we have avenues for feeding NEMA with money. We have provisions for the environment fund and there are proposals to get part of the environment levy to feed that fund such that NEMA now trickles down to the district environmental offices, but nothing is forwarded. The Consolidated Fund is swallowing each and everything and nothing is put in the environment fund, yet the sources are vivid and they are there. Therefore, if we say we are for this, let our actions also come up the same way -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, shadow minister. 

MS KAAYA: Thank you very much, for the opportunity. But the issue of sudden urbanisation that causes a lot of land use changes has caused problems. You find the local governments cannot really monitor and manage the changes in land use because the population is also coming in big numbers. Thank you so much for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Hon. Bahati had something small. On the issue of the environment, each district has one environmental officer. You find that Mitooma, which is very small compared to Wakiso, each have one environmental officer yet the budget for the environment for Wakiso is the same for Mitooma, which is around 7 million per year (Applause). Yet the damage being done; all factories - What is happening is that it is investors facilitating environmental officers. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need to look into the issue of environmental officers at district level deeply.

8.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): I have taken note of that issue and I will cause a meeting between the ministries and my office. 

On Kasese and River Nyamwamba, I used the services that were available. River Nyamwamba, River Nyamugasani and River Rubiriha burst their banks and this caused the overflow that affected the population. 

Like I told you, colleagues, de-silting is the answer. There is a contract that was given to a certain company - he is aware, but no sooner had they started to do the work than River Nyamwamba again bust. That is why we thought the long lasting solution is, first of all, to give way and relocate the population. 

My appeal to Hon. Katusabe is that when we put an advert in papers - you are aware nobody has come up to give us land. We want to buy land for those people and relocate them. As a leader, I would like you to take keen interest in this and ensure that this land - because this money will go back to the Consolidated Fund. 

My brother talked about urbanisation in Bududa and those other flood-prone areas. Yes, I know, people do not want these people to be relocated to faraway places because they will lose voters - (Interjections) - yes, that is why they do not want to take these people to Kiryandongo and other areas. I would like Members to note that you can only get a vote from a person who is alive. Let us allow Government to relocate them because whenever they go, for example, to Mbulamuti where we built houses, they still come back. 

Therefore, we have come up with a policy that when we have relocated you to Mbulamuti in Bulambuli from Bududa, you must go and stay there and then Government will take over your land and plant trees. We are going to plant trees and afforestate that area of Bududa, where we shall have relocated our people.

Government will not degazette forests. It is our policy. We said no to degazettement and we have always said, “No”. (Applause).

The district disaster committees are operational. This came from my sister from Kumi. They are operational and they are operating, of course, with some little money. You cannot give every district money for disaster. Suppose that district does not get any disaster, what happens to the budget? 

Districts that get disasters are the ones we handle. Therefore, the budget for the district disaster committees will be got, when they have disasters.

There are those - you know, nature reclaimed its territory. I would like you to remember the floods that happened last year and the other year. Cabinet has come up with a policy; we are going to demarcate and say, this is where these floods stopped and we shall not allow people to go back. We shall gazette those areas as No-Go Zone areas because you know how much our communities lost and how much Government lost. 

Therefore, I would like you to inform your communities that they will not be allowed to settle back in those areas that suffered with floods. We are looking at only one solution: buying land for those people of Kayunga, Buliisa, Ntoroko and many other areas. 

Government will continue to educate our population to make sure that they respect wetlands. We are coming up with a strategy, under the Parish Development Model, of helping our people – instead of growing rice in these wetlands, we are giving them advice to do fish farming. First of all, fish farming is lucrative and it is environmentally friendly. So, we want colleagues to take note of that policy. 

Lastly, my office is open and I request Members that whenever you have issues, please, let us have them settled in the office. I would like Hon. Bahati to help us and talk about funding because he has been in that ministry –(Members rose_)-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, I will not allow that. Please, I am on time and I would like us to keep that.

8.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Prime Minister and colleagues for their contributions. 

I just want to make one comment on the issue of the Contingency Fund. As you know, we established the Contingency Fund under the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and it has been growing – in the last two years, it was Shs 62 billion and I think this financial year, we put in Shs 140 billion. As you have seen in the estimates, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has now put in Shs 246 billion.

In addition, we all know that we should be focusing on preventive measures, but in the event that it happens, we need to have something to mitigate that. 

The procedures to access this is very simple: the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees makes an application to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to Cabinet and Cabinet approves it. 

I would also like to make a quick comment on the one Hon. Silwany made on protecting the environment, especially the issue of tree planting. 

Mr Speaker, we have a duty to protect our environment and to be able to hand over this earth, in very good shape, to the future generations. To do that, in addition to what the Prime Minister has talked about of protecting the wetlands and all that, we also have some practical things that we can do as Members of Parliament. For example, if each one of us was given tree seedlings and sent to go and mobilise our constituencies to plant trees in schools, at places of worship and in the road reserves, it could make a difference, practically, with our own initiative as Members of Parliament. 

Lastly, on a lighter note – and I think this is for you, Mr Speaker – over the weekend, I was in Kabale to promote the Parish Development Model. I met one of your treasured relatives, the Speaker of Kabale District Council, Madam Flavia Kanagizi, who is your mother-in-law. She said she was very appreciative to the Members of Parliament for electing her son-in-law as Deputy Speaker. (Applause) She is happy that you are sharing in that anointing of speakership in the family. (Laughter) I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, colleagues. One thing I have identified, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, is that if the issue of the Contingency Fund is coming from the chairperson of a committee that supervises Office of the Prime Minister, it means the connection with the committee on such a matter is not good. 

I have seen the Office of the Prime Minister – because when you say money is available and the Prime Minister applies, yet issues raised by the Members here are pending because of lack of funding for the Prime Minister, then it is like we are pushing it to the Prime Minister. In reality, the Prime Minister has been begging for supplementary funding. Even the other day, we gave her a supplementary here to get money to address disaster-related issues and responses requested by Members. 

Honourable chairperson of the committee, we are in budgeting. Please, go and look at that issue deeply. They have told you that there is money. Let us address concerns of people if money is available. If it is not available, you can also tell us. 

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the Contingency Fund, we need honesty and commitment. I request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and our ministry to sit together to ease their work. We picked this information from the ministry and they are crying foul. It is also stressing the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, but I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should really ease this process. 

I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister because she initiated a lot of strategies in relation to preparedness and she has briefed us on this matter. However, we need to budget what she has been doing in a sustainable way. 

We really want to thank you, Mr Speaker, as a committee. We also thank our colleagues for the support. Our prayer has been that this report be approved before we finalise with the budget process so that some of the issues can be handled. 

In a special way, I thank my committee members. Mr Speaker, I have very committed members and that is why we were able to do this work. 

Special appreciation to you, Mr Speaker, once again. Thank you very much, for this opportunity. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, colleagues, for your patience. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you had a way of giving medals, you would give Hon. Bahati a medal. Ministers come here and spend just 30 minutes or one hour and run away –(Applause)– but he has been here consistently, not once or twice. So, this needs to be recorded. 

I also want to appreciate you, colleagues, who are here. (Applause) I know some of you are not happy that I have not given you the opportunity to speak. Kindly, bear with me. If I had a shop where I could buy more time, I would have bought time and given each one of you 20 minutes to speak. 

So, tomorrow, for the MPs who are here and have not spoken – apart from Hon. Milton Muwuma who is comfortable in the first-class cabin – I will give you priority. (Member rose_) I know you very well. You have few DP Members who are in. So, I will ensure it is done. 

Thank you, colleagues. 	

House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 8.22 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 April 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 