Thursday, 14 April 2005

Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward K. Ssekandi, in the Chair)

The House was called to Order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I take this opportunity to welcome you, but more especially on your behalf, to welcome women leaders from Wakiso District who have visited us to see what is going on. (Applause) You are most welcome and feel comfortable!

2.35
MR JOHN ARUMADRI (Madi-Okolo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, the issue is cotton. This matter has been with us here for more than six months now, and I have been prompting government to take a position. The Right hon. Prime Minister promised that this complex issue would be tackled in due course, but the cotton season is almost with us and as I indicated to government, my people of Madi-Okolo will not grow cotton at the current prices.  

This Parliament currently is involved in the budget circle. If there is anything government is coming up with, this is the opportune time to indicate to the cotton growers of this country what is in the pipeline. Otherwise, after the budget has been concluded, we do not see any other arrangement outside the budget. Can I once again, very humbly, ask government to listen to the cry of the people and come up with a statement as soon as possible?  I thank you. 

2.36
MS SARAH KIYINGI NAMUSOKE	(Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr Speaker. A select committee was formed to investigate the matter of pornography in this country, we finished our work and we submitted the report at least to your Office and the Clerk’s Office early March. The report was put on the Order Paper for about two weeks and then it disappeared. Copies have up to now not been made for Members and the public is asking and wondering what happened to that report. Having been the chairperson of that select committee, I am seeking your guidance, what do I do, because the public would want to know what happened, the problem of pornography is still going on in our country and I think we need to do something. So, could I know what is going on? Thank you.

2.37
MR PETER MUTULUUZA (Mawokota County North, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to raise a very serious matter of national concern and this appeared in the New Vision of 12 April this year. It states: “Otafiire raps Sudhir, Basajjabalaba over wetlands.” Yesterday in the same paper there was a cartoon depicting huge elephants, one white, I think a Ugandan of Asian origin and then a black one. I think this was depicting Sudhir and Basajjabalaba.  Then these two huge elephants were charging against a small lion whose photo appears to be the minister whom I have mentioned, and a huge tree whereby NEMA was hiding behind it, maybe escaping or hiding from the huge elephants that are charging towards the minister and NEMA as well.

Mr Speaker, I am raising this because in my constituency, there are people who innocently or ignorantly cultivated on forest reserves. They planted their food, these boundaries had long been neglected, they unknowingly developed these places but their food is being uprooted by the National Forest Authority. You can see the problem; there is hunger, there is drought but their food is being uprooted, because they encroached on a forest reserve.

Mr Speaker, in your district at a place called Nyendo, NEMA evicted people on Monday from about three villages. Houses were destroyed; schools I understand have been given only one month to shift to other places, just because they had encroached on wetlands. There is an impending eviction and destruction of property in and around Kampala wetlands. All these are being done by NEMA, but my concern –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Is it that the government or ministry should explain the criteria they use to act on invaders of the forest?

MR MUTULUUZA: Mr Speaker, what I am saying is that there is double standards in handling these wetland encroachers. Why do our poor peasants get victimized when other big shots like Basajjabalaba and Sudhir are encroaching on wetlands without being also evicted? So, I just wanted an explanation from the –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: So, what you are saying is that, the minister should explain the policy they use to deal with these two people, the big elephants and the –(Interruption)

MR MUTULUUZA: Not only that, Mr Speaker, because –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: It is understood. So, I think really Members did not contact me.

2.40
MR BEN WACHA (Oyam County North, Apac): Just one matter, Mr Speaker. I crave your indulgence that I should go back on the matter of cotton. I had expected that when hon. Arumadri raised this issue, which to some of us is a very important matter, at least the Rt hon. Prime Minister would have stood up and given us some indication –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER:  I am going to allow him to.

MR WACHA: Thank you.

2.41
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disability, Eastern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The disability fraternity is greatly concerned that there is no government policy on disability and in 2000, the African Union heads of state adopted a declaration to declare the year 2000 and 2009 to be the African decade for disabled people. Because of the absence of the disability policy, up to now, so many years after 2000, there is absolutely nothing being done on this matter by the Government of Uganda on matters of disability in relation to the Africa Disability Decade.  

I would like to ask the minister responsible, to come to this House and tell us when Government will have a formal policy so that everybody has a policy document on disability, and what measures are they taking to implement the African decade for disabled persons. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: That should be the end because you should have contacted me really.

2.43
MR CHARLES ANGIRO GUTOMOI (Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to the cotton issue. I am requesting for an explanation to why some stores in Lira have been locked since the last cotton season. Those who sold the cotton to the ginners have their stores locked by CDO up to date. Maybe the Rt hon. Prime Minister can give clarification to that.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, let me start with hon. Kiyingi about her report. I must say that I was proud when these students of Makerere demonstrated and came here asking us what we had done on this particular issue of Bimansulo - something like that. I was proud to report to them that hon. Sarah Kiyingi had produced a report on the issue, and Parliament was going to debate it. It is bad that up to now we have not, but I will make sure that in the very near future we shall be debating this report so that your work is appreciated and utilised.

Honourable members, as I indicated before, if you want to make an impromptu remark, you have to see me first but –(Ms Namaggwa rose_)- now this is Masaka -(Laughter) 

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I should have contacted you but I thought it would be automatic as a follow up of what transpired yesterday, because yesterday Government promised to give a reaction to what I had requested about the position of the Registrar General’s statement that actually Government – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Why do you not give benefit of doubt to those who were supposed to answer to see whether they are answering because it was only yesterday that you raised it, and I said that the Attorney General was in charge and should make - and we have just started, maybe he has an answer; why do we not wait.

MS NAMAGGWA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I looked at the Order Paper, that is what guided me.

THE SPEAKER: No, something like that does not come really but let us I think balance up.

2.46
MR PATRICK APUUN (Bokora County, Moroto): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising up on an issue, which is of national concern. This is in respect to someone called Ecweru, a Resident District Commissioner, Soroti. It is in the New Vision of 5th April. It says, “Ecweru warns all Karimojong” and he goes on to say, “Iteso may soon be forced to storm Karamoja if the cattle raids go on unabated.”  This is what Ecweru says and he continues to say, “I want to make it clear that some of us may be compelled to enter Karamoja with or without permission.”  

Mr Speaker, currently disarmament is going on in Karamoja and it was as a result of a resolution of the Sixth Parliament here that Karamoja should be disarmed.  Now the issue Mr Ecweru is raising is actually a very big concern for the people of Karamoja. It is raising up civil strife; we are seeing it and everybody is Karamoja is viewing it as an issue, which can cause problem in this country.  

Mr Speaker, I would like an explanation or Mr Ecweru to be immediately taken to Karamoja as a Resident District Commissioner so that he can see for himself what is going on in Karamoja rather than him trying to raise up issues, which are very dangerous in Soroti. I would like the Minister of the Presidency to take note of this so that Ecweru should be transferred immediately to Karamoja to assist us in this matter.

THE SPEAKER: No, I think the best way to handle such a bulky report should have been in a form of question to the relevant minister, whether he is aware of what has been reported in the New Vision paper of that day, and what does he have to say about it rather than asserting that Mr Ecweru said what is reported to have been said, maybe he did not. I am saying it should have been in the form of seeking the reaction of the minister of what was reported in the papers. But anyway, the point has been made and I hope you would get an explanation.

2.49
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the Registrar General, hon. Adolf Mwesige is here to answer the question.  

On the question of the Resident District Commissioner, it will be the Minister in charge of the Presidency to answer. But you rightly said that if this question had been drawn to her attention, she should have of course replied and as I have said several times, you cannot always depend on mass media because sometimes they distort, sometimes they are correct, so you have to be careful.

Now, on the issue of cotton, let me state that I am very disappointed – (Interruption)  

MR OMARA ATUBO: Excuse me, Mr Speaker. I thought the way the Prime Minister is going to have the question answered by the hon. Patrick Apuun on the statement of the RDC of Soroti, Ecweru, he is rather to approach it from a narrow point of view; I think the issue is deeper. 

You see, what the RDC Ecweru and people like us who are bordering Karamoja say is the issue of cattle rustling as a whole - and the 6th Parliament had a very strong motion on this. Now, rather than the Minister for the Presidency just coming on a narrow aspect of a statement written in the papers, you would I think have two approaches on this: One, is the motion which has been pending for a month now, which I intend to move on the issue of security in the North and North-east. It is going to be broad and tackle all these issues, which is going to force the government to come with a statement on what they have done on cattle rustling as a whole.  

The situation is worsening; both on the front of cattle rustling and on rebel activities. Those of you who read the papers know what is going on in Gulu, in Kitgum, the rebels are pushing in and things are worsening. So, if are going to answer only what is written in the papers because Ecweru said it, I think it is not going to answer the point. So, I think the Prime Minister really should be broad, as I know he is, let this motion of mine be debated and let the minister come out with a broad statement on the issue of cattle rustling in the region. 

Mr Eresu: Supplementary.

THE SPEAKER: There is no supplementary. If you have a major statement to make, I will give you an opportunity to do that.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think if Mr Ecweru, the RDC, made that statement, it has very serious implications. So, it is important that that statement be handled in its own right, as far as I am concerned. But, whenever you handle a question there are always many other related issues and the problem has always been that we do not have enough time to debate all these issues. But should my colleague wish to raise that matter under a resolution, and he is famous for making many resolutions, he is free to do so and Government will be more than ready to articulate what measures we have taken to handle the issue of rustling.

Now, on the issue of cotton, I was hesitant to speak because I was angry. I was angry with the Minister of Agriculture because I did ask her to ensure that they answer this question and I am disgusted because I do not see her here, I do not see any minister of state –(Applause)- so I am really disgusted!  So, when I am – (Interruption)

MR WACHA: I want to inform the Rt hon. Prime Minister that we share in his disgust. (Laughter)

PROF. NSIBAMBI: You see, whenever I am angry, I normally do not talk. I keep quiet that is why I had kept quiet lest I regret what I say. So, it was deliberate; that is why I kept quiet but the Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs has been noting all these issues and I require her or any other minister of state to answer this question by next Thursday because, it is a very urgent matter.

On the issue of those who are encroaching on the wetlands, it is not enough for the minister to show disgust as I read in the papers, assuming he was quoted correctly. But it is up to the minister to come here and explain by next Thursday and to show that Government and agents of government do not use double standards in handling the issue of wetlands, because it is a very grave matter, as you know. (Applause)

Now, on the issue of disabled people and I feel very strongly this is a very important issue, again I will ask the Minister of Gender to come out with a policy. It is a very urgent matter because sometimes we have buildings where people who have disabilities cannot even access them, and I get very annoyed when we do not take serious steps to handle them.

Hon. Angiro raised an issue, which happened in Lira. Again, it will be the Minister of Agriculture to find out and I suppose you are going to assist her to answer these questions. I want to thank you and reiterate your advice, hon. Speaker, that if honourable members raise these questions in the –(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the Rt hon. Prime Minister, for giving way. The Rt hon. Prime Minister has repeated twice on this Floor that the Minister of Agriculture has defied him because, he has asked her twice to make statements to this House and the minister has not responded.  To us such a statement, which is reflected in the Hansard, means a lot on the effectiveness of the Executive. And because this Parliament has an oversight function on the performance of the Executive, I want to seek clarification from him whether the failure of the minister is a demonstration of ineffectiveness, and whether the Executive is going to take action about it and if they are not, whether the House should evoke our rules and Constitution procedures for us to call the Executive and the particular minister to order?  I thank you.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: First of all, as you know, the Executive appoints and disciplines and sacks these ministers so, we do not need the assistance of Parliament –(Laughter)– and I do not think that the minister has defied me -(Dr Kibirige Sebunya entered the Chamber) –(Laughter)- on the issue of cotton because I know that the senior minister I think has travelled. But I always urge the ministers, when they are travelling to ensure that their ministers of state take charge. I now see the Minister of State for Agriculture and with your permission, Mr Speaker, I would like to ask him to answer the question of cotton, cotton, cotton. (Laughter) I thank you. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE (AGRICULTURE) (Dr Kibirige Sebunya): Mr Speaker – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: But if I may ask, it is true you have asked him to answer, but is he prepared to answer the question? (Laughter). He has just entered the House, what we want is a helpful answer. So, for you to say let him answer when he was not in the House, I think it might not be fair to us who want the information. I direct that the minister will give a comprehensive answer to us on Tuesday. (Applause)  

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

(The Minister of Education and Sports.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you appreciate last week the minister gave us a statement but we were not able to - was it last Tuesday or this week - to debate it because we wanted you to internalise the contents so that you are in position to have meaningful debate on the issue. So, the Floor is now open.

3.01
MS ROSEMARY NAMAYANJA (Youth Representative, Central): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I first of all want to thank the minister and government for putting particular emphasis on Science subjects or Science courses per se, because it is true that the education that is being provided today is de-linked from our social economic realities. 

The courses that are taught in the universities and other tertiary institutions are not geared towards the manpower needs of this country. So, I believe it is very important that we actually emphasize Science subjects, and the National Planning Authority together with the National Council of Higher Education and the National Centre for Curriculum Development all these bodies, I believe must come together and ensure that what is produced in terms of manpower is in line with our requirements as a country.  

Mr Speaker, whereas I agree that the policy is too good and that it was long overdue, but doing the right thing at a wrong time is very disastrous. It is true that we need these subjects or the Science courses but I think the ministry should do it in a phased manner. Bringing this issue with immediate effect is affecting the students that went to school and chose subjects in senior three, to take these particular subjects at ‘A’ level and, therefore, pursue a course in Arts being sponsored by government. So, I believe whereas we need the science courses, the ministry must bring it in a phased way.  Otherwise, the students who sat their senior six should not be victimized.  

Mr Speaker, there is already a policy in the Ministry of Education that by 2006, Sciences will be compulsory at ‘O’ level; that is fine. But for these students who innocently took Arts combinations to be subjected to this kind of situation is not good.  

Again, government has not put a foundation for Science subjects at secondary level. Out of the 751 government-aided schools, it is only 271 with laboratories. Now, if government-aided schools do not have laboratories at secondary level, why should we think of prioritising Sciences at higher level, where shall we get these? In some schools a student sits senior four and sits Chemistry in senior four -(Interruption)

MS TIPERU: I just wanted to give my colleague hon. Namayanja information that in Yumbe District, which I represent, there is no single school with a good laboratory. I thank you.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to disagree with the Member who has given wrong information to the House. I visited Yumbe in March last year and I visited Yumbe Senior Secondary School with a modern laboratory. Is she in order to confuse the House that there is no single school with a laboratory in Yumbe? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, she did not say, “no laboratory” I think it was a grading of a laboratory. In her assessment it was not good enough.

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleagues for that information. The other issue is that even at tertiary level, the facilities that we are looking at are not the best. I was reading in the Monday Vision and the National Council of Higher Education reluctantly allowed Gulu University to undertake practicals and Gulu University is a public university but they also lack the facilities, even for Arts subjects. 

Mr Speaker, at Makerere University we are admitting students every now and then but what is the optimum capacity of the university because, the facilities that were there that could accommodate few students are accommodating ten times the number of students.  You find students in windows; a colleague here raised an issue that some students study by rumours. So, I believe we must know the optimum capacity of these institutions.

Going back to the issue of these students for their academic year 2005/06, they are facing a double jeopardy, Mr Speaker. One, they are saying they are not going to access government sponsorship and in the minister’s statement she said 84.7 per cent were doing Arts subjects, that means there is a big number of them who are going to lose out on that.  

Secondly, even when they could not access government sponsorship, government also brought a policy whereby the tuition at Makerere University was actually 80 per cent increased. So, that means these students even if they could afford to go for private sponsorship, still government or the university has increased the fees and most of our students come from poverty-stricken backgrounds, the parents cannot access better schools. According to our census 1.4 million children are orphans. So, if you do not allow them to access Arts subjects, secondly, you make the fees very prohibitive, it raises a number of questions. I was reading through the government White Paper -(Interruption)

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much, for giving way. I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that, the report by the minister does not in any way reduce the number of government-sponsored students in the university. When you calculate very well, the number sponsored by the government from Arts is 47 per cent and those doing Sciences are 53 per cent. There is that margin, but it is marginal and the sponsorship from the report of the minister shows that the 75 per cent are students who will be admitted on merit, Arts, Sciences. Mr Speaker, it is the mass media that confused us Members of Parliament and the population we represent, because instead of the media interpreting –(Interruption)

MS KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I have tried to restrain myself from giving this order. On Tuesday, we were given a report and honourable members are debating basing on this report. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to say that Members are debating basing on media reports and being misled and so on?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what we are debating is not what has been obtaining in the university, the 45, the 53 per cent as hon. Tibarimbasa is saying. We are debating a new policy that is going to have a drastic change in the sponsorship, giving I think 80 or 78 per cent to Science. We are not talking about what has been obtaining. 

I think what the honourable Member for the Youth Central has been saying is that, because there are no labs, there are no what, people tend to go the schools which can provide only Art subjects, what do you do with them? I think that is his thrust of the debate. For you, you might be right in that currently that is the position, but if we implement the policy here, it will be drastically changed. So, we are discussing the new policy rather than the old policy. I think to answer your query, we are debating different scenarios.

MR TIBARIMBASA: Thank you very much. So, I can finish my sentence. What I was saying was, the press by saying –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can we really continue with her debate?

MS NAMAYANJA: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I just want to thank the former university secretary for this information, though it was a little bit misguiding.

Mr Speaker, I was reading through the government White Paper on Education, and government had agreed to a recommendation that they should standardize tuition fees especially for government-aided secondary schools to make them affordable, such that a student from Kapelebyong can access Kings College Buddo or Nabisunsa or any other school. So, I think government should also continue looking at this aspect of standardizing tuition fees especially at secondary level.

Still in that White Paper, Mr Speaker, there was a recommendation of the study loan scheme. This is an issue that was raised then. I just want to seek clarification from the minister, what set backs they got in implementing this policy, because if the fees at the universities are very prohibitive, it will be very difficult for our students to access the university education.  

Lastly, I think government should also look at an aspect of reducing brain drain. Even the little manpower we have in Science, many of them go out of the country for greener pastures. I think government should also look at that aspect. Otherwise, Mr Speaker, I once again say that doing the right thing at a wrong time makes resistance inevitable and whereas we agree on what should be done, our major concern is when and how it should be done. So, the students who sat senior six last year should not be victimized, should not be ambushed. Let us carry out this exercise in a phased manner. Mr Speaker, I thank you so much.

3.15
MR ALEX ONZIMA (Maracha County, Arua):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. When the minister presented her statement here early this week, I realized there was a lot of enthusiasm. There was support for this policy in the offing especially on the quota system. But, to me, I think the quota system is one way of treating the symptoms, but not the root cause of the poor performance of our young ones, in mostly the upcountry schools.  

According to the minister, each district is going to get a quota, which translates into 16 vacancies in the university. But, the main duty of the ministry or government in general should be, how to address or how to increase the performance of our students in the upcountry schools. To me, it is this government, which has run down the performance of schools upcountry in all these exams.

I still remember vividly that even during Idi Amin’s time, the man who never went to school, our own sons and daughters were able to go to a rural school in Maracha, go for A’ level in St Charles Lwanga Koboko or Nvara or St Joseph’s College Ombach, where I schooled, and were able to compete with the sons and daughters of ministers, presidents and what have you to come to Makerere on government sponsorship. The schools like Teso College, Aloyet –(Interruption).

MR AWONGO: Mr Speaker, I want to thank the previous speaker for giving way. It is true that during those days, schools upcountry used to do well and this was as a result of these schools not being destroyed. You remember very well that during these wars, which have been there for all this time, most of the schools in the rural areas were destroyed.  

When you go to Arua especially, Koboko which was built in 10 years was only destroyed in five minutes; the same with Ombachi, the same with Nvara. How do you expect these schools to perform well if they have been destroyed and up to now very little rehabilitation has been done? So, the issue is the destruction during the wars and I think government should come forward to improve on these schools in order to make them perform better. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But, honourable members, when you talk about Amin’s time, every student who was able to go to Makerere or Dar es salaam or Nairobi was sponsored by Government, the question of competing for Government sponsorship did not arise then.

MR ONZIMA: But, you see, Mr Speaker, it will not help us if we are going to stand up on the Floor of this House and try to raise issues just on the basis of political differences. If I stand here, for instance, I am a product of St Joseph Ombachi, Ombachi was never affected; there was no single structure in Ombachi that was destroyed by the war. (Applause). The same with Nvara. How about Nabumali, how about St Peters Tororo, how about Aloyet, many other schools? That is the truth. We must face the truth squarely; please, we should stop this kind of short sightedness really –(Mr Awongo rose_)-(Laughter).
 
MR AWONGO: Mr Speaker, is the honourable member of Parliament from Maracha in order to say that this is being short sightedness, when actually Ombachi Secondary School was turned into a camp where all the refugees in West Nile were staying? This is where the 200 people killed in West Nile were buried in a mass grave. Is he in order to call me short sighted when actually what I have said is the truth? Is he not the one who is short sighted? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is not short sightedness that you have a different assessment of a situation. So, it was out of order to imply that the Member was short sighted simply because you have differences of assessment.

MR ONZIMA:  Mr Speaker, well, let me withdraw that for the sake of my brother. I am proud to report from here that Ugandans are intellectuals from all parts of this country. If you talk of Dr Isaac Ezati, who hails from Maracha, a respected surgeon in the whole of the Eastern Africa, who up to now should be I think the president of the association of the surgeons in Eastern African, he is a product of Koboko St Charles where my brother comes from. We have Dr William who is also a respected surgeon; he was the best when he graduated during the masters, he hails from Nvara, he is a product of St Joseph Ombach. That is the sort of thing we want.  

Until recently, Amanya Mushega, was the Minister of Education; he hold a Masters in Law, he was succeeded by the sitting Prime Minister, a Professor in Political Science as Minister of Education. Then, he was succeeded by Dr Makubuya also a PHD holder, a doctor in that field and then now our sister here. 

What is the problem, have you critically looked at why schools were performing almost uniformly across the country that time including Amin’s regime and why has the position changed now? What have you found out? Not only that when we have a president who is the only person who has a vision in this country, what is the vision about the performance of schools? What is the vision in education, where is the problem? 

Personally, if you ask me as an individual, I would not support the idea of quota system; I would not need a quota system. I want government to create a situation where the son or the daughter of a peasant in Maracha can be able to access university entrance right from within the local schools from there. That will be the ideal position. 

Now we are talking of 16 students per district today, but I know by the end of this year, President Museveni will have created about 30 or 40 districts. So, in the next academic year 16 students per district might come down to five because the admission, the quota you are saying, what is allocated to districts is going to remain constant. It is an independent valuable. So, the more districts you create, the lower the number per district is going to be; that is a reality. So, for the time being, yes, 16 small as it is may be of some help, but in the future it will just phase out. So Government should come up with ways to ensure that performance in up country schools is increased because surely –(Interruption)   

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when you are dealing with this sponsorship, it is not only a question of people not qualifying, you have to take into account the increased number of students who qualify to go in these universities. 

At my time when I was in the higher school I got everything free. They were paying for us school fees and we had some money to use in higher school. This was because of the numbers, in 60s after independence. So, 100 or 200 students from East Africa were joining Makerere and everybody was sponsored. 

This time the number has increased; it is not that those who do not get sponsorship do not qualify. They have good grades, but the question is how do you share that token sponsorship by Government?  I am saying token because you get 3000 students as opposed to 30,000 who are private sponsored. So, you have to take into account the increase in the number of students who really qualify.

MR ONZIMA: Yes, you are right, Mr Speaker, but also in a way there is still a problem. You will recall that when we went into Presidential elections in the year 2001, my Presidential candidate, the Rtd Col. Kiiza Besigye, in his Manifesto said one of the first things he would do in the Presidency would be to table the universal intake. So, if the numbers are going up and the Government is either maintaining the same number of admission 10 year ago or he is even cutting it down, who is to blame? It is still the same Government to blame because it is not responding to the changes in society. So, Government is responsible. That is how I look at it.

Mr Speaker, last year – you can see what is happening, old boys and girls of various schools are now coming in to do what I will call subsidizing Government: This where you gather yourselves as old boys and girls to support the school. This should be the responsibility of Government. 

You will recall recently, last year, when the President visited his former school, Ntare, the Minister of Education was reported in the papers, Dr Makubuya, not our current Minister, to have released Ugshs 400 million to rehabilitate Ntare High School. Government funded them because the President studied in that school. It was easy for Ministry of Education to release Ugshs 400 million to rehabilitate that school.

Now must St Josephs College Ombachi wait for Onzima to become the President of this country in order to benefit Ugshs 400 million? – (Laughter)- This is very unfair; it is very unrealistic. This is one of the inadequacies that must be addressed by Government, Ministry of Education and others.  I did not expect the Minister to thank the President to have brought him in prominence from the jungles of Luweero. A professor, a man who was already in Makerere thanking President Museveni for having brought him out of the jungles of Luweero –(Laughter)- Yes, it is very unfortunate, very disturbing. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, why should a district like Arua with a population of over 800,000 people also benefit a mere 16 slots like Kalangala with 35,000 people; Kaberamaido with 132,000; Sembabule 180; Nakasongola 127? Surely something must be done. 

Mr Minister, I will report to the people of Maracha that on their behalf I support this as a temporary measure. However, you must do some constructive work so that you come up with a practical, comprehensive and sustainable solution to reinstate the previous status quo where any child of any family background will access university education from any corner of this country. I thank you.

3.33 
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I happen to come from a county Buhweju which is one of the most disadvantaged as far as education is concerned.  In fact, up to this year, I have been having two sub-counties which have not been accessing secondary school at all because it has not been there. But I would like to thank the honourable Minister of Education and the entire ministry for giving us one secondary school for one sub-county, but one is still pending. 

In addition, Mr Speaker, I have high respect for the current Minister of Education –(Applause)- she has taken trouble to come to Buhweju mountains and addressed the issue of education. I thank her for the labour she is doing. But, Mr Speaker, she will forgive me if in debating this policy I take another negative look. 

Mr Speaker, as my Colleague from Maracha has indicated, policies of this nature address symptoms but not real issues and causes. For example, this case of sciences, when we were in secondary school at that time it was compulsory for all school to offer science subjects; there was no option. Even to grant a secondary school, there was a requirement that it must have minimum laboratory standards.  

Mr Speaker, if I recall my school time, one of the issues that made me proud to have been in a school was studying science.  But, Sir, at some stage- I was surprised of late, I met students and ask them- they are in H.S.C- I ask them, what are you doing, what is your combination?  They said, “DEG.” When I inquired why they are doing DEG. They said, “It is very easy.” I asked, is it easier than other combinations?  This country is in trouble because we did not address that issue; we have had inconsistent policies.  I do not know at what time a decision was made that students in a secondary school should have the option of dropping science subjects?  We need to have consistent policies so that we lay a foundation of this nature.

DR NKUUHE:  I would like to inform my colleague that the rumour around students doing ‘A’ level is that if you want to go to Makerere you do a combination called HAIL – History, Arabic studies, Islamic studies, Luganda and you are sure of a place in Makerere to do law.  (Laughter).

MR BIKWASIZEHI:  So, that is the direction the country has been taking.  I thank you hon. Nkuuhe for that information.  So, Mr Speaker, in that connection you realize that there has not been a level ground.  In fact honourable Minister of Education I am on record for having written to you in 2002 requesting for laboratory materials for my school.  Unfortunately, I have never been answered and I have never been given any.

Mr Speaker, with this quota system, as my colleague from Maracha has said, of late there has been struggle for new districts in the name of taking services nearer to the people. I am seeing a situation whereby more and more districts will be on demand if it is going to be a basis for admitting students in the University. I will also ask for a district for Buwenju so that I get 16 students going on Government sponsorship.  

At the same time as he has pointed out on the population, I imagine now you want to depict a picture of showing that you are giving equal distribution.  How will it be, to get a district, for example as he has mentioned Arua, it has got over 35 sub counties. Now how are they going to share the sixteen positions?  You have got a district like Mbarara –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way.  Busoga has got five districts, and the population is about 1.5 million.  Mbarara has got –(Interruption)- I said about.

MR WAMBUZI:  Mr Speaker, it is wrong for somebody to stand on the floor of Parliament and give wrong information about Busoga.  In fact the people of Busoga are complaining about being counted wrongly -(Laughter) - that they are 2.5 million instead of being 3.5 million.  Is the honourable Member of Parliament in order to stand in this Parliament and suggest that the people of Busoga are only 1.5 million?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, the member is using official records which have not been corrected. So, he is right.

MR BYABAGAMBI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. They have got five districts and they are going to get 90 slots. Mbarara District has almost the same population. It is one district, but it is going to get 16 slots.  Where is the fairness in this?

MR BIKWASIZEHI:  I thank you honourable colleague for that information.  Honourable Minister, you have taken note of this. The picture is that this will not give equity.  In fact, if I could advice, for example the case of sponsorship of students in secondary schools, it would be better that we target maybe sub counties, maybe that is where the element of equity can come.  

Mr Speaker, the good thing the Leader of Government Business in this House happens to be the Chancellor of our University.  But as a nation we would need to move a step further and stop over emphasizing and glorifying university education as if it is the only level that can lead to success. 

Mr Speaker, if you look around in this country. For example look at the most successful people in this country in terms of development. How many university degrees do they hold?  So, we need to address that issue so that we do not over glorify university education as if it is the only solution.  In fact, on the contrary, we need to establish and equip the tertiary technical institutions.  You would want to know that personally because of that I have had to take my son to train as a Chef. I am sure after that course he will get a job.

Mr Speaker, we need to address the practical aspect of our University.  It is a shame in this country when we have got one of the oldest Universities in this country, but at this material time we go out to look for experts to design policies for our country.  

I will give an example of agricultural sector.  The University has got a whole Faculty of Agriculture, we have got a whole course on agriculture extension, but up to now we must go abroad to shop for technical people to come and design policies for us and we pay through our nose with borrowed money, Mr Speaker -(Applause).

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  Mr Speaker, I thank my colleague for having given way.  We go abroad to look for experts because we have got a colonial mentality.  Let me assure you that we have got many students who have dealt with policy, including Prof. Byarugaba whom I supervised for his Doctorate -(Laughter)

MS MUGERWA:  Mr Speaker, is the Prime Minister, the Head of Government Business, in order to tell us that Government gets experts from abroad because of colonial mentality. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER:  Well, you see, it is a virtue to be modest. I think the Prime Minister was confessing that there is a colonial mentality- (Laughter)- there is nothing wrong with that.

PROF. NSIBAMBI:  I thank you, Mr Speaker.  I remember even supervising a colleague who has a doctorate concerning policy matters, but we intend to ignore these people. Your point is very well taken.  I want to assure you that in many Public Universities we have talent and skills.  May we use them and also pay them well.  I thank you.

MR BIKWASIZEHI:  I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Rt. Hon. Minister for seeing the light.  Can I take it that right from now- because the major shopper for that technical expertise is the Government- now as a Leader of Government Business, can I take it that this is the end?

Lastly, the fact is, with the trend of events, the economic situation, the population growth, the Government of Uganda can never and will never afford University education for everybody.  The challenge is to work out economic policies that will empower our people to be able to access education be it university, be it tertiary in Uganda and without.  If we do that, this crave of quota system, this crave of balancing when it is obvious that the questions that are being put will never be balanced, will end. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.48
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the honourable Minister for the good work she is doing in the Ministry of Education.  

I also thank the Minister for the good report she presented to this House. Nevertheless, I do appreciate the observation that science enrolment ration in Uganda has been very low.  I would like to ask the honourable Minister. We know that many of our students have been failing science subjects; everybody knows this. My honourable colleagues have also pointed it out that most of the schools especially the Government schools lack the equipments, laboratories and that is why they fail.  

Mr Speaker, the students that are going to be enrolled in the university this year according to the Minister’s report mostly are those who passed the science subjects.  I want to ask her that we should not forget that there are some districts the best student in science subjects got O, O, O and that was the best in science subjects in the whole district.  

Now I would like to ask the honourable Minister, how are they going to deal with this kind of problem? Are they going to take on this student who got O, O, O as the best student in science subjects?  I do understand that many students have been taken on merit but we should not forget that the students because of those problems couldn’t make it.  The Minister of Education should realize that unless they put science equipments in place, it may still be difficult to implement this kind of policy.  

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much Mr Speaker and hon. Colleague for giving way.  We are saying failure of performance of science subjects in secondary schools and reduced enrolment on science students in the university begins at primary level.  I have taken an initiative in my constituency and whenever I am in the field I go to primary schools. 

One time I moved to about ten primary schools when they were planning for Primary Leaving Examination. I would go to a primary 7 class and draw a circle adjusted and then I would ask the children to find out the perimeter or circumference and the area. Unfortunately most of the schools that I went not even the teachers of mathematics of primary 7 knew the formula of computing the circumference of the circle.  

Mr Speaker, the honourable member is asking what is the formula. He wants to find out whether the Member of Parliament himself knew. To put the record right, if you wanted the area of the square, the issue would be –(Laughter)

MR BESISIRA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a point of order.  I am a professional teacher and a teacher educator and a professional teacher of mathematics.  When students are being admitted into Primary Teachers Colleges they must have passed mathematics and English and two science subjects. They are trained by well-qualified people like myself and are examined by a National Institution, Kyambogo University; they are passed as people who qualify to teach in primary schools.  Is the honourable member in order to say that the teachers in Bunyole do not know mathematics when they have all passed and his own formula is wrong? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Well, whereas we may not dispute what you have stated honourable member but it will depend as to when the teachers he is talking about were trained. It could have been that the policy you are talking about was not in place.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, it is true that when I was making a submission, I was talking about the students I asked in classes. I was talking about a circle and when I gave the formula, I specifically was talking about a circle but inadvertently I talked about a square, Mr Speaker

MR ERESU: Mr Speaker I would like to seek the following procedurally progress. I thought hon. Seninde was submitting and hon. Dombo was giving information but it has turned into a substantive contribution.  Can I be guided?

THE SPEAKER: I think hon. Dombo stood to give information and hon. Seninde yielded the Floor. She will resume.  We did not measure the kind of information he was passing.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I am concluding on the information.  The major information I wanted to give is that there is a big problem with the teaching of science subjects starting at primary level and throughout university or secondary level. The teaching of mathematics is very key to the teaching of science subjects.  If we must address it above, we must also make enough efforts to recruit competent teachers who are well grilled and who have interest in the teaching of mathematics so that they can stimulate the interest of the children at primary level. I thank you.

MRS SENINDE: I thank you honorable member for giving that information. I would also like to make my observation that although the selection system under Government sponsorship is here to reflect the diversity of the economic and social composition, Mr Speaker, I would like to request the hon. Minister that in my own view I do not think this is the right time to implement this kind of policy, much as it is important. We should realize that many of our students who have qualified this year or last year probably did not know that this kind of policy was going to be implemented now, we should be realistic.  

Hon. Members, I do support the policy, but I do not think this is the very right time for these students. Mr Speaker had there been time given to them that during such a year or this time this is when we shall implement this policy, maybe many of our students would not have dropped the science subjects at senior three.  So I think the hon. Minister should also take note of that.

I would also like to inform the honorable Minister, my hon. Brother has pointed it out.  Recently, I went to apply for places for students from Wakiso District who had performed very well from Ordinary Level. They performed very well but because they had not done science subjects, they could not be taken on in the Teacher Training College.  It is important we have to encourage our students to take on the science subjects because we have an objective or an intention for the future.  But I think it should be taken on slowly by slowly, it can be gradual, so that in future we can achieve our objective.  

Mr Speaker, about the quota system. I do appreciate the quota system because there has been an outcry that there has been lack of equity in access to University education. I, therefore, do support the quota system, but I wonder how this is going to be implemented.

One, many of the students that have been taking on the Government sponsorship are those who have been going through very good schools from Kampala, Wakiso and probably other districts and from rich parents.  But we should not forget that the very students will now go to register in their districts and come on as the best 16, now how is this going to help the poor?  

I know the quota system is intended to help the poor and on the other side to also bring in equity amongst the districts, but I still wonder how this is going to be implemented.  Anyway I know the Minister will try her best but I sense a very big lacuna in this kind of policy. There is need for review or improve on this policy as time goes on.  

Mr Speaker, I do support both policies of the science subjects and the quota system but I still emphasis that the Minister should put more emphasis in supporting science subjects right from primary and secondary so that by the time we implement this at least there is something done.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.38
MR DAN KIDEGA (Youth Representative, North): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister so much for this policy and the Ministry.  Fundamentally, I support this policy of giving science more admission in Public Universities compared to Arts subjects or Art combination or Art courses. I also support a provision for quota admission. 

Much as I support this policy, there are issues that must accompany this policy to make sure it is a success.  First let me start with the science versus Arts in a ratio of 53 to 47.  Mr Speaker, there are children out there who take decision to study Arts or Sciences from senior 3 and these children are at school.  The students are very demoralized, they are not reading, we run a risk of having very bad performance for the next four years of students who are doing Arts.  

The message that has reached the students is not clear; some of them who do not have access to the newspaper or to the information that we do have, do not know what is going on. They just know that Arts courses are not going to be supported by Government in the university.  So, primarily the Ministry must take it upon itself to send a very clear signal to the secondary schools to make sure the head teachers communicate to the students that the matter is not necessarily abolishing totally sponsorship of Art courses at the university.

Secondly, it must put clear to the entire country that this matter is not going to be implemented right away. I personally think that this policy should take minimum of four years before it comes into force.  

My basis of four years is, for you to choose to do Science or Arts in secondary starts mainly at senior 3. So when you are in senior 3, you choose knowing fairly that the ratio is very clear in terms of Government sponsorship and that will be fair to the students and the students who have already sat.  

Then, there are issues of why should students choose to study Art subjects or Arts combination rather than science?  Mr Speaker, it is very clear the atmosphere for a student to make choice is very unfair, even to those who are willing to study sciences.  It took Newton who is the basic persons in science a very long time to lie under a tree and see a fruit falling to develop the first law of motion.  These students need environment, which is friendly to them to take choice of which kind of combination to run.  

My hon. colleague has stated to you that most of the schools do not have laboratories. It is true!  I am a proprietor of a secondary school, Mr Speaker; it is very difficult to raise science equipments to support a school.  So, before the Minister or the Ministry goes ahead to make sure that this policy is implemented, they must address the aspect of science equipments in secondary school and even there must be deliberate provision by Government. 

 How do private schools make sure they are not giving half baked science students, they must be having well equipped laboratories.  All these must accompany this policy in order for us to have a very good country.  

It also raises the issue, which I think pertains Ministry of Finance.  National Council of Science and Technology which is an autonomous body responsible for developing science and technology in this country. Where is this body, and what is it doing? If you are talking of science or technology, what kind of technology are we talking about? Is it a homemade technology or we are still talking about this science and technology we have imported.  

If really the Ministry is interested in promoting science and technology they should not look only at secondary schools and Universities.  Let us look at our boys who are in Katwe.  These are people developing homemade technology.  What is the ministry doing to support such kind of people?  So the policy is good but the ministry need to do a little more of study to make sure that the policy really gets to the goal that they want to achieve. 

My colleague raised the issue of Gulu University.  The students of Gulu University suffer a lot. They do not have laboratories; they have to leave Gulu to come and do practicals in Makerere and it is a public University.  These are cardinal issues that must be addressed first if you are looking at science as a priority matter.  

On the question of quota admission: Honourable Colleagues, this is a bitter reality; there is a very serious imbalance in this country.  I implore you to visit some of these Public Universities. I often go to visit my tribal Association of Makerere University called ANSA. Some of us still form students’ associations based on tribes.  But some of you have students Associations based on parishes and constituencies.  You hear with due respect to the various constituencies I will mention. You will hear like Igara West Students Association. But if you went to put, for example Nebbi or Pader Makerere Students Association, you may not have membership- (Laughter)  

So the issue of quota admission is addressing this kind of imbalances and it should not be – personally I look at it as affirmative kind of move to support those districts where human resources are not well developed.  So, I implore Members that when you are looking at this, while we might argue on the basis of statistics, let us look at the realities on the ground.  

Mr Speaker, this brings me to the matter of students coming out of this University.  My honourable Colleague told you that some of these students are getting lectures by rumours.  I still again implore you, go even to private Universities and see how students are being accommodated in lecture theatres. 

I would like to recommend so strongly and appreciate the sentiments of the Chancellor of Makerere University on the graduation day when he talked about quality of graduates or the output of the University.  We are talking about the East African Community, our students, our human resource will not compete.  The quality of students coming out of universities and tertiary institutions is so poor.  

In Acholi we have a proverb that when a hyena is eating a piece of bone – “Lalu ka camo cogo nwongngo geno ngurug cete”. This means when the hyena is eating the bone, it trusts that its rear part is comfortable at the level at which it will come out, the size of the back part is given.  

DR MATOVU BYATIKE: Thank you very much hon. Colleague. I just wanted to give the information that you will be surprised at the figures of our neighbours who are studying at our universities here.  I do not think anybody would run away from a good high standard to something lower.  But you will be surprised how many Kenyans or Tanzanians or people from Rwanda who are studying in Uganda.  So, if you talk of Ugandan standards being low, there is something wrong somewhere.  

MR KIDEGA:  I thank you for that information. I do not dispute the information but the world is a global village. You may be comparing us to this arrangement here of East Africa, which may be wrong. The point I am driving at is, if you compare the standards of education particularly University ten years ago and today, there is a lot to be desired which I think should be a concern of everybody- (Applause)- it is a knowledge intense world. You just go and look at what is happening. Today, we do not look for jobs physically; we can get jobs through the Internet.  But most of our people here cannot qualify because of the kind of training they get.

Finally, Mr Speaker, still on quota admission. Now looking at more of a bigger picture. I think the ministry should look at what is happening in the world generally.  Is this move to support or to sponsor students in University sustainable according to the global trend?   What is happening in the world? I think they should revisit the White Paper, add very good provisions on how Government should deal with sponsorship of students in higher institutions of universities.  What has happened to the loan scheme that was supposed to take care of students who could not raise money to go to University?

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much my hon. Colleague for giving way.  I just wanted to read this recommendation the honourable colleague is talking about. I will read it verbatim for Members to appreciate it.  This is a recommendation that was made by the Education Policy Review Commission and it was a recommendation that was adopted by Government.  “The students who are unable to raise the necessary finances the Government should establish a system of study loans to be paid when a student gets gainful employment.”

Mr Speaker, if this is put in place Government will also be encouraged to develop a policy on employment. Today, they are not looking at it as a priority but when we commit Government they will ensure there is a policy on employment to enable these students to access funding.

MR KIDEGA: Thank you, hon. colleague.  What I am driving at is that as the world grows and as we advance, it is not sustainable to continue sponsoring number of students in the University. The population of Uganda is not static, we are talking about 27 million people today, ten years to come we may be talking about 40, what will 4000 be?  It may not be useful.  

I would rather suggest that the ministry comes out with a more elaborate programme of developing infrastructure in Universities, improving the payment of lecturers and subsidizing and reducing the cost of paying for students in the University that is more sustainable and that is the direction of the world today.  It is know world wide that you cannot act in isolation. So we should look at what is happening with the rest of the world and go along with that.  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.
        
4.15
MR AHMED ALONGA (Aringa County, Yumbe):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Minister for coming with this statement, which is elaborate enough.  We also thank the Government for taking very drastic and deliberate decisions to support the science best courses.  That does not mean in anyway that we demean the arts subjects or humanities. 

I am glad Government is aware that humanities or what we call Social Sciences and Arts are very necessary for our development.  We cannot do without sciences. I am not a scientist, but I do support Government on this particular direction.   

But what is the problem really?  Is it that we are against supporting the Sciences, or is it because of the abrupt or an ad hoc decision to introduce this now?  Perhaps the problem is just the drastic nature of introduction of this preferred care for Science students.  But this is to address our imbalances in our academic history, which we cannot entirely be blamed for because those who brought education to our countries here were from Europe. I do not know how they did passive us that we can manage to handle science subjects or not. Do we have the confidence to handle these science subjects? 

This brings in the question, why do people opt for Arts rather than Sciences?  There is that psychological problem, that you see this Science things are very difficult.  When my colleague there said he was a teacher for mathematics, every body wanted to know his area of specialisation, and if he said he was a teacher for Arabic, what would happen?  May be people would laugh at him.  But when he said he was a teacher for mathematics, we were all quiet and that is how we look at sciences.  This is a psychological problem within ourselves that we must overcome if we were to do well in Science based courses.

I am recommending Government’s effort for taking this drastic decision.  There are people who will criticize this and they may not want it.  But somewhere someone must take a political decision that let this thing be.  When UPE was introduced, many of us were even against the UPE!  But today we are appreciating; we are seeing some infrastructure although there are still some problems in terms of performance.  I think the decision Government has taken is the right one.  

Perhaps what I should advise is that, that is a very drastic jump from maybe 15 per cent to 53 per cent.  This number should be lowered to accommodate some Arts and humanity students so that, as my colleagues say, we move gradually. Put in place the necessary infrastructure for sciences so that people can compete favourably.

Mr Speaker, on admission in public universities: I admit that charity must begin at home. Government sponsors students to public Universities, but can’t Government think of a way of sponsoring some few students in these private Universities?  They have contributed a lot in education sector. 

 I am happy that two of them were sighted here, that they are offering Science based courses.  I think Government should also look into possibility of sponsoring few students in private university. I do not know, the hon. Minister will tell us, but I think Islamic University in Uganda may be one of them.  

So I want to thank Government for recently guaranteeing a loan for one of the private universities. This is the way we can help some of these universities to build capacity so that they can absorb some of these students.  So this was very good. I urge Government to continue with this spirit and to extend it further to other private universities so that they can supplement Government efforts in this direction.

Mr Speaker, on quota allocation.  I am extremely glad that Government has finally tabled this and is ready to implement this decision.  You read in Newspapers that Yumbe does not have A level centre. I want to inform you that now we have one and our performance last year was really good.  Now I think this is a right decision not only to treat the symptoms, but a right decision, which is a temporary decision as we try to treat the symptoms. So I support it.  

I know some people may object it; they may not like it.  I respect their views.  But why do you want to sentence those students from Yumbe, Kisoro, to permanent semi illiteracy or semi illiteracy as you may choose to call it?  It is unfair. I think this is a major problem to address. 

It may take even ten years to introduce it and correct it, but it is quite good that we take this decision.  Some of these students may have two principal passes of EE or DD or CC and you bring them here in Kampala. Some of them really perform wonders better than those with the flying BBs.  This is a fact because we have seen some of them at Makerere; we have seen some of them at Mbale University.  So, if they are exposed to the facilities that are in so-called first world schools, these students can really do better.  

But my only caution is, when we select them, many other factors should also be looked into.  Their performances in O level, even you can go further and see their performances in PLE and social economic background to determine their capabilities and the capacity to handle University work.  

So, I support this quota system and I think it is good as a temporary measure to solve an immediate problem and the rest we can handle later on.  I am not saying that we should learn through trial and error, but this is what is supposed to be.  Let us try and see if it can work.  We have tried UPE and we are now adjusting some few areas here and there.  

On this issue of the sports persons:  I do not know how we are going to handle it in the absence of National Sports Policy.  There is no National Sports Policy, how are we going to select these students to come and join University yet we know what is happening in FUFA and we are selecting people within here.  So, Mr Speaker, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  

THE SPEAKER: Let us agree –(Interjection)- let us agree on the time. What do you think of five minutes? 

HON. MEMBERS: Three.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, three minutes, because many are interested in contributing.

4.20
MS HARRIET KAGABA (Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the ministry and the minister in particular for having come up with such a policy. I think it has been long overdue. 

I do support that the science subjects must be really promoted in this country but what perturbs me is that the ministry has not been consistent. Some time back science subjects used to be compulsory. During the time when we went to school you could find every school had the science subjects as compulsory subjects. But then along the way – where the ministry knows - it lost track. The student could tell you, “Look here, those sciences of yours are no longer in the schools. We can take on any subject we now want”. This is where the ministry lost track. So, I am so happy to see that they are now trying to correct this problem that they created themselves. 

Much as they are trying to encourage and promote the science subjects, how is the ministry prepared to help these upcountry schools, which have lost track completely? We do not have the science laboratories and we do not have the science equipment. I do not know really how the ministry is prepared to correct this imbalance within the country. 

Mr Speaker, the ministry has a policy that every sub-county is supposed to have a secondary school first then later on, a secondary school equipped to do sciences. But there are so many sub-counties in this country, which do not have secondary schools. How are we going to handle this matter as a country? When we talk of the new districts, which have been created, these are the districts, which have suffered a lot. I talk of Kyenjojo District; it has only two schools, which took sciences last year. Those who passed, the best one got 13 points in sciences and when you come to the minister here, he is stating that whoever will be taken will be admitted on merit. I imagine how Kyenjojo is going to benefit. 

All the same, we must have a starting point. I do agree with the ministry that we must really start so that with time we shall improve. Mr Speaker, I do support the quota system –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, we agreed that –(Interruption)

MS KAGABA: We really need the quota system because if we have to distribute education equitably in this country we must have a measure of making sure that every district benefits. My worry is, as I have already mentioned that some of the districts really do not have higher schools. These 16 students who are supposed to come from every district, supposing even that district has not got the 16, what will happen to this district? How is it going to benefit? There are certain districts, which have not even got these students, in other areas. So, I really do not know how the ministry is going to handle such districts, which are so disadvantaged like that.  

When I come to the sports students, the standards have been set so high. You will find that there is a district, which does not have any of these international students. I really do not know how the other districts will benefit –(Interruption)

MR KUBEKETERYA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am giving the honourable colleague from Kyenjojo information. In as far as sports is concerned, it is something to do with talent. I am very sure that you may find that in Kyenjojo there are so many people who are talented in sports. So, it is not a question of saying, “How are they going to benefit?” But rather the talents are the ones, which can represent our country.

MS KAGABA: Thank you for that information. But according to this report there is a percentage put up for every district. Supposing my district has not got any sports lady or sportsman, can we not have these others added to the 16? I just want to get this clarification from the ministry. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to wind up by saying that the ministry –(Interruption)

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, there are so many people who want to speak in this House and you have said that we should speak for three minutes. I have been timing my colleague and she has spoken for over ten minutes now. Is she in order to go on? 

THE SPEAKER: Honorable members, let us stick on what we agreed; three minutes. As she has said that Kyenjojo is a new district, she can wind up. (Laughter)

MS KAGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to wind up by saying that the ministry should make sure that they put in place the structures, which will promote the science subjects in this country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honestly, let us use three minutes then I will cover many of you. 

4.31
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. You remember I had a motion to move on this issue seeking to suspend it but after consultation, we have to support this policy while the Government takes into consideration the views of Members of Parliament. In the coming academic years the policy should be refined and improved to become more concrete. That will propel this country to greater heights.

I want to appeal to the Members of Parliament and the Minister of Education to ensure that State House scholarships are budgeted for again this financial year. According to the information we have, which hon. James Mwandha put here in form of a question and hon. Kirunda Kivejinja failed to answer up to this day, the majority of students benefiting from State House scholarships are children of the very well to do people in this country. And most of them, with all the due respect, are coming from only two regions: Western and Buganda, and we find this very unfair. I want to be on record. If anybody is challenging me, I will produce your names here.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Mr Speaker, is hon. Ekanya in order to make such a serious allegation without substantiation as regards the origin of the people he alleges get scholarship support from the place he is alleging? Is he in order to make such grave allegations without substantiating? 

THE SPEAKER: Apparently he did not have the information. That is why he is seeking the information and in an attempt to get information that is why he is making the statement. 

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. My appeal to the Minister of Education is that this matter should be sorted out because it takes 1,500 students that government is paying for in tertiary institutions and universities, and yet in the whole country the Government is paying for 4,000 students. So, if you add this 1,500 we would have better equity for the whole country. If you give the people of Tororo County the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture and we do not have agricultural extension officers who have degrees and who can speak the local language, whether you give us this programme it will not be implemented. We shall have a problem of human resource. 

I also want to appeal to government that the quota system is good, but make it at a ratio so that we have equity. I am concerned about quality and equity. It is unfair to consider Mbarara with a population of over one million, to a district that has 200,000 people. Let us look at the quota system and link it to the population percentage so that there is equity for the whole country. 

Mr Speaker, I would also like to appeal to the minister that for technical schools the Government should budget more money so that our technical schools are financed with capital. I have a technical school in my constituency, Mukuju. It is like a classroom. They do not have the necessary financing and equipment they need. In the whole of my constituency there is no secondary school. First of all there is no A’ Level secondary school and there is no school with science labs. How shall I benefit from this policy reform? So, I concede on condition that in the coming financial year you will address these imbalances. At least every constituency should have an A’ Level school with a science lab fully furnished and equipped.

Finally, I also want to appeal to the minister that the salary of teachers should be increased. This is the only way you will have people to get interested to go to teachers education. I want to end here and I hope I have taken three minutes. Thank you.

4.36
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In this paper there are good aspects and some aspects I am not comfortable with. Let me start with the good features. One is the spirit of equity with which it was designed. The second one is to realize that we need to shape our education based on our manpower requirement that is skewed to address the challenges we are facing.   

Let me start with the areas, which I am not comfortable with. Let me start with the quota system. My colleagues have already indicated the unfairness in the quota system. First of all, it is supposed to cure and address the areas of equity but if you look at the population of a district, which has 2.5 million people and you take an example of Sembabule versus Mbarara, you have four Sembabules in Mbarara and they are going to get 58 pupils sponsored and Mbarara will only get 16. This is very unfair.

It is supposed to address the pupils of the poor. If you look at page 3, let me quote: “The current system favours students from rich families who go to higher fees paying schools staffed with competent and better-supervised teachers and endowed with better facilities”. Then you go on to say that you get the best 16 in a district, this will again be of the rich people in that district. You should incorporate a variable of other considerations, like being an orphan and being in a geographically disadvantaged area. 

I also want to look at the other unwanted element. On page 8, this policy is actually discouraging the spirit of nationalism. If you look at page 8, they are actually buying students who go to study in other districts. That is on page 8, point 6.4; “The districts must be a candidate’s district of origin and the candidate should have studied and completed A’ Level in one of the schools in that district”. 

If you look at some of us who studied with so many people from different parts of the country, our approach to issues is very broad. So the fact that my son studies in Busoga does not erase the fact that he is born in Mbarara; he remains a Munyankore.

Finally, Mr Speaker in the interest of time, I would like to see the consideration for gender and disabilities. Some of those variables should be incorporated. The basis for this is that we want to make sure that we actually target the totally disadvantaged. My son may be disabled but I may be able to pay school fees. But there will be somebody who is disabled with the same marks and will not be able to access this facility. It is against this background that this quota system would be referred and be re-examined so that all the necessary weaknesses are addressed. I thank you very much. 

4.40
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (Persons with Disabilities, Northern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the minister’s statement on the new policy of giving affirmative action to sciences. I have been in this House right from the Sixth Parliament and now this Seventh Parliament, and this very House has been demanding for a human resource development plan. Today our able minister sat together with the technocrats and discovered that there are a lot of imbalances between students who study sciences and those who study arts. As indicated very clearly, the ratio is 13:83. That means all these years we have been producing arts biased personnel, which actually is not meeting the current demands of our country. 

If we are to move from peasant farming to an industrialized country like Uganda and people are saying we should wait for four years; we want to develop now! When shall we begin implementing the modernisation of agriculture, engineering and so on? Therefore, it is very important that this policy has come in time. The only problem with it is that I wish the minister had come to us first before they leaked it to the press. Actually it should be the idea to get the grace from Parliament before you start using it. That is the only problem I have with the policy.

People are asking, “Where will these science students who are to study science in the university, to come from”? If you take today when you do the selections you will find that there are students who are qualified to do sciences but because there is no space to absorb them, they end up studying privately; which is very expensive. A good example is medicine. You find that there are very many students who are self-sponsored in medicine and you know how expensive it is. So the issue of asking, “Where do we get the students from”, is not there. The students are already here. 

If we compare our arts to sciences ratio to that of the neighbouring countries you find that those who are trained and are qualified are 1:3 in Kenya, and in Tanzania it is 2:3. That means we are backward. So we need to start the policy now so that we increase our population of the personnel for people who can save us by providing the necessary manpower or womanpower we need. Actually this incentive enables children from primary and from secondary schools to study sciences. Quite often people believe that science subjects are very difficult because they are not given a good foundation and are not given incentives. So by this affirmative action students will be able to put emphasis on sciences. Mr Speaker, I have got the idea.

I think this issue of the quota system has been debated and we had agreed on it. The minister is just bringing the implementation here. And if you look at the 16 places, they are not too many to be given to a poor district like Adjumani, a poor district like Moyo and a poor district like Karamoja. So, let us support the affirmative action.

Then on the issue of persons with disabilities, I appreciate the 64 places given but this does not mean that these are the only places the persons with disabilities should benefit from. Persons with disabilities should work very hard so that they compete for the science places.

And persons with disabilities should be considered in the quota system so that when you are not taken among the 64 you should be able to be given a place from the quota system. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

4.45
MR TOMSON ANANG-ODUR (Kwania County, Apac): Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you for affording me this opportunity to contribute to this important debate. I thank the minister for at last coming to answer our pleas that this policy be introduced. You recall for a long time we have debated on the Floor of Parliament; we have raised many issues and arguments and today I am happy that at least the minister has responded.  

I think that this policy is being introduced in the spirit of the national objectives and directive principles of the state. Policy No. 12 is balanced and equitable development. From that perspective, whereas I also accept this as a measurable temporary solution to our serious problem, this quota system, on close analysis, I have a fear that indeed this is not being realised. If you compute the figures for each district and you add sub-regional figures, you will find that in fact those areas, which are disadvantaged, have not been assisted much. 

We have talked about numbers of districts in comparison to one another and I am not going to go into that now. But I want to request the minister to do a thorough analysis and come out with what should be done. I have a belief that if you are going to solve this problem on a fair basis, the best formula should be based on the population quota. We have got figures, we have got data and this can be computed and the relevant proportions reached. This will solve the problems of complications and arguments for small districts and bigger districts. I think that must be done.

We have very little time but I want to suggest that whereas 75 for a national list of scholarships has been proposed, I believe that this is far too high. I request the ministry to consider reducing this figure to 60 and then the quota figure to 40 percent. This will increase the number of figures you are talking about for the districts, which you are talking about. If the first suggestion I have made is accepted and this one is also accepted, this will reduce this complexity you are talking about and in fact the regional balance will be achieved.

Lastly, I want to comment on the issue of quality of education. I have argued on the Floor of Parliament before that lectures at Makerere are public rallies and I do not believe this can give us good quality education. I think government should really consider strict policies on universities. If you are going to have rallies for lectures at Makerere, we cannot except to have good products. I wish to urge my sister, the Minister of Education, to look at this seriously. If this has to be done then we should have gone a long way in achieving the objectives. I wish to thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.50
MR IGNATIUS BESISIRA (Buyaga County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for giving this statement. When my aunt took over this ministry I was one of the people who were very pleased because I thought after a long time with people who were not professionals in the ministry - I am not saying that non-professionals do not do well, but I think there was need for a professional to have their hands on and possibly guide the technical people in the ministry to plan better for it.

THE SPEAKER: You mean a professor is not a professional?

MR BESISIRA: I mean professionals in teaching in particular. The professor is just a professional. So, you have possibly heard from every member that the problem in the ministry has been that the policies themselves are possibly reacting to pressure from Parliament. It is necessary to plan accordingly to ensure that the country is moving towards a particular direction. 

There have been many inquiries, there is the Kajubi Report but the question is, have the outcomes of these reports been implemented, have they been followed and if they have been followed, what has gone wrong? Have we been carrying out evaluations at particular stages to ensure that something is being done to see what has gone wrong?

We should not just have a policy in place. Because it now seems the quota system is reacting to pressures from the majority of us, marginalized districts like Kibaale. So, I appeal to the minister that I am grateful that it has come up and I know that there must be a starting point. When Universal Primary Education started people thought it was not going to succeed but now it is a success. In the same way, I believe that the quota system has got to have a starting point but all these other things the Minister will take them into consideration and ensure that they are taken care of.  

The minister has given us - there is an impression that has been created in this House that there is a shift of policy as if government has not been sponsoring science students. This is the thing that is being created. I would like to appeal to the minister to possibly inform this House as to what the percentages were before and what they are today. The picture that is painted in the whole country is that there is a complete change: there was no science sponsorship and so people are bringing in sciences all of a sudden. But I believe that sciences students were sponsored by Government before and this is a re-direction into specific subjects. That, to me, is very good.

There is also something about sciences, the polytechnics in sub-counties, I have not seen them yet they have been talked about in the manifestos. The timing of policy changes is also a problem and now people are asking, “Why does this science thing come around in 2005?” And that is why you find that it has got a lot of resentment. It could have been a good policy because it is aimed at changing this country from a pre-industry but because of the timing some people think that there is some politics behind it. So I would like to appeal to the Government that in future we should look at policies that will not make the people believe that we are up to something else. 

The teachers’ salaries have been talked about, they are really lowly paid. Otherwise, as I rose here and put a colleague to order, all the teachers in our primary schools have really got very good science background. They should be giving us a good job but the fact is they are not well remunerated, hence, they do not give us to their full capacity. I would like to appeal to the minister and government in general that they promised Shs 200,000 - which is even little - but it has not come! So it should come so that at least these people can deliver better than they are doing. 

I was given three minutes and they are really very few. I would have said more but I would like to thank the minister for the statement and I support the quota system as an entry point. From there we can start to look at how we shall keep changing, whether to look at population quotas and the rest but at least there must be a beginning.

4.55
MR MIKE SEBALU (Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I do thank the minister for the statement and I believe it is timely. For those that have handled it from a viewpoint that it is wrong timing, I do not think you can have better timing. You must begin somewhere and the rest is an implementation aspect. 

The issue we are handling is quite important. If we are to make our own enhancement, sciences do answer our transformation needs and the earlier we adopt them the better. Many countries that have been able to develop, definitely, they have done a lot in the area of innovativeness and other ideas of enhancing society but I think we need to do the following:

One, early exposure and emphasis on science subjects in the UPE programs; that must be immediate.

Two, enhancing of science subjects in secondary schools through building laboratories in all government schools and incentives to science teachers especially those posted to rural areas. You find that most of the good sciences teachers are in these schools around: King’s College Buddo, Nabbingo but we need to give incentives so that if one went to Kaberamaido and is paid better it will even decongest these schools. And some of the good teachers can go upcountry, if they are given special incentives in their packages, to be able to spread out the whole approach of sciences.

Three, we also need to have subsidies on laboratory equipment and laboratory chemicals for private schools. (Applause) Many people have invested in the private schools but they cannot afford to run laboratories because they cannot afford it. We should either give them a tax waiver, a tax holiday or we give subsidies so that we encourage the private investors in the education sub-sector to be able to undertake science subjects and help government in this big policy shift of ensuring that emphasis is put on that area. 

However, a clear identification of manpower needs must be made for a clear rationalization of university courses relevant to the economy. Not every science subject is relevant to our economy. Even in that area we need to be careful when we are sponsoring because not everything science is necessarily very relevant at this point in time.

Mr Speaker, my final intervention in this area would be, I do appreciate the issue of quota but it should be interim in my view so that we build capacity up to a given time. When you look at countries that have developed, emphasis is on fast brains and innovative or creative minds. Those are the two major areas and here we risk emphasising universities at the expense of other areas.

There are very many bright young men in Katwe and some of these places, who have got innovation and whose innovations must be supported financially in order to enhance themselves. They do it in all the economies. Not all people who have invented and have created new things on the market have been graduates. So we need to spread out. Let us look at those because to me a first class psychiatrist can be better than a doctor who got a pass degree when it comes to delivery somewhere in terms of real value addition. These things happen.

Someone may take a very good course but he does it very badly and someone takes one, which you take to be - but he turns out to be first brain there. So, we need to look at those areas if we are to –(Interruption)

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable member for giving way. The information I want to give is that in medicine there is no pass degree; they all pass. I want to make the record very clear because when you talk of a doctor obtaining a pass degree actually people will be suspicious. When you look at the qualifications of doctors, all doctors actually pass. So there is no pass degree.

MR SEBALU: Thank you for the information but there are areas where those details can be found, showing how one passed. You cannot tell me that they all pass at the same level because that is not possible. One may do much better than the other. But I can take it to an engineer, if you really feel strongly about the doctor. An engineer with a pass degree - someone else could be more useful – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: When you say “first degree”, do you mean “first class degree” or you mean their first degree?

MR SEBALU: I am talking of a first class degree or a first class brain as opposed to an average brain but in a very competitive area. 

4.59
DR SAM LYOMOKI (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the move by the Minister of Education and I really need to hail government for having undertaken this paradigm shift. As to how sciences are very important for social economic development, is no longer a point of debate. What is important is for the minister to come up with an analysis from various research that shows clearly that for all the economies that have developed they have put an emphasis on sciences and technology.

In fact, if you look at the development stages from Stone Age up to now, all these stages have been punctuated by an era of a science nature. There has been a revolution because of something in sciences. Mr Speaker, countries like Japan developed by trying to use sciences. And other economies were able to develop as well. But what is important is, are these science subjects worthy to be called sciences? Because if you qualify as an engineer at Makerere University, those engineers have been trained to service things manufactured from somewhere else. 

So, there should be an overhaul of the curriculum of our sciences. That is why you find in places like Katwe people can be able to claim to manufacture something more than people who are being trained in our universities. 

We should be able to teach sciences that are for development not to service other economies. We should not be here and we are called scientists but when you go to another economy you are just actually someone to repair other things and you are not worthy to be called a scientist.  

We should also be able to emphasise sciences not only at Makerere University or universities but also to the elderly people who have qualified and they are doing other things. We should be able to give science refresher courses to assist all of us to conceptualize and be able to assist our economy in development.

Mr Speaker, the statement is saying the ministry is going to emphasis sciences. I think it is not only sciences. We have even seen professional subjects under the groups of subjects that are going to be emphasized. Therefore, it would be wrong for us to think that what is being catered for here is only for sciences and not for other professional courses that have been captured and that are important for social economic development.

I will end on the point of the quota system. The quota system is very important for our country because if you look at analysis, I was looking at figures from somewhere and it shows that in 1997/1998 for instance, Bugiri as a district only managed to take one person to Makerere University. Bundibugyo, one person; Katakwi, two; while Mpigi took 211. I think this trend really should be stopped. We should not allow such a situation. 

In a district like Pallisa, for a school there to take someone to Makerere’s Medical School, I had to personally go and teach someone in Butebo Secondary School until examination time, then that person was able to go to Makerere University for medicine. But that district had never sent anyone from their schools to go to medicine. Some of us who went for medicine came from other places.

I am not satisfied with the question of saying that when you are capturing district quotas we are going to pick people who sat for exams from those districts. We should be able to take students who studied the whole of senior 5 and senior 6 from those districts. If I want my child to go to Makerere, what I would do is the child will study from Mpigi here and then I will take him to do exams from Pallisa and then you will capture that person as having been from Pallisa when actually that person studied from schools in Kampala. 

We should be able to analyse and show that these students who are going to be taken are students who have not only sat exams in those districts but who have studied the whole of their ordinary level in those districts. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.06
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the Minister of Education and I would like to appreciate her commitment to the education of this country. This is a very good submission from the ministry since it attempts to bring some kind of equity into the education system and also to do strategic planning in this country. 

I would like to start with a number of merits of the policy statement. First of all I would like to appreciate that among the critical courses some effort will be directed at courses, which lead to social transformation such as guidance, counseling, and community, industrial and organizational psychology. I think this country more than ever before needs such courses since half the country is traumatized and we need this kind of counseling.

I would also like to appreciate paragraph 6.4 and paragraph 6.5, on page 8, on the issues of the quota system. Like my colleagues have stated, it is very important that we have these quotas for the different districts and I would like to submit that we stick to students who have sat and done their advanced level in those particular districts. 

I would also like to submit that the flat rate of 15 per district is very good because even the smaller districts tend to be the most remote. Therefore, I would not like to support that the quota system goes by population size but rather we should have it flat. For a district like Kaberamaido if we do not have that double affirmative action we may fail to get manpower for the decentralized governance organs in the district. We need to support it.

My other critical observation is about policy direction. Like everybody has said, we need to have affirmative action on the issue of promoting sciences in schools. Mr Speaker, in schools in Kaberamaido there are no laboratories and I would like to appreciate that when the Minister of Education went there early this month, she appreciated this and she is taking some action.

I would also like to recommend that while we attend to this policy, also the affirmative action, especially relating to girls, must be accompanied. For example, we have already recommended somewhere that it should be compulsory for the girl child to stay in school throughout primary school. I think this is another affirmative action, which can accompany this.  

Mr Speaker, I concur with hon. Rose Namayanja who said that it is a good strategy; it is something good but the timing is wrong because it should be done in a phased manner and address the root causes starting from primary schools.  

Finally, I would like to say that when I read this submission it immediately reminded me of the critical need for the Equal Opportunities Commission, which we hope will be set up soon, and also the central role of the National Planning Authority in this country. This is a major decision. It is manpower planning and manpower planning is practically everything in this country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

5.11
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and the Government for the move. Quite a number of us have been saying, especially on the emphasis on sciences, that quite a number of us have been saying the timing is bad. We have heard so many quarrels over timing. It is very difficult to move and there is one thing called inertia. And the fact that government has got this inertia out of themselves and actually moved to emphasise sciences, I think that is very commendable. 

There was a very big quarrel over private sponsorship. As it came up everybody was asking, “Why at this time, why should it be us?”. Now everybody is running for the private sponsorship. There is always difficulty at the beginning. Mr Speaker, I do not know whether the minister has actually tried to address – and quite a number of us have said this - our children who have chosen arts. 

What about those head teachers where the science equipment is actually there in the schools, the indisciplined head teachers, and they discourage the students from taking sciences? I visited several of those and I know they exist. They just discourage them. The equipment is there but because they want to be amongst those who have 8 points out of eight, nine out of nine, and ten out of ten; they discourage the students from taking sciences. 

I think the minister needs to look at this because I feel it is a great need. Some people of my age have children who have taken arts subjects at the university, they were the best but they are really floating. It is very difficult to get them jobs but scientists get jobs almost immediately. We need to look at this almost immediately. There are many students floating with sciences, but there are more with arts.

We have broken down the arts courses that will be sponsored by government but the sciences courses have not been broken down. I just hope that in the breakdown of the science courses emphasis will be put on science education. We are all saying, “There is no equipment”, but there are no teachers as well. A move needs to be made - affirmative action - towards producing the science teachers and I think that will help a lot. 

When we get to the quota system, what worries me is that we are looking at the human resource that we need, but Kalangala has no science students produced. Is that the human resource we need in Kalangala, or the 16? We need to look at which particular courses are going to be offered to who. Even when we complain that so and so, we will find ourselves as we complain that in the public universities everybody comes from Buganda and the West. As we move on all those who are doing sciences will come from those areas as well. I do not know whether we would have solved the problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.15
MR ISSA KIKUNGWE (Kyadondo County South, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened and it looks like there is a problem. Some time back government proposed vocational institutes at sub-county level. I do not know how far this programme has gone or whether plans are complete to have it implemented throughout the country. 

When you look at the performance of our economy, the economic growth is one of the best in Africa at 7 percent per annum. It was very low 1986. Revenue collection has increased 40 times, from Shs 44 billion to over 1.8 trillion. Population growth has not been as fast as the revenue collection; it has only increased by 1.5 percent ever since the coming into power of this government. GDP has moved from two billion dollars to 25 billion dollars today. 

Government used to sponsor about 6,000 students at the university in 1986, today despite the improvement in the economy’s performance the number has reduced to 4,000.  

THE SPEAKER: 6,000 which year?

MR KIKUNGWE: 1986, everybody was studying free. Mr Minister, get me right; everybody was studying. If you have contrary information to that, you can bring it up.

DR MATOVU: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  He is talking of 6,000 total number of students at the university but they are talking of 4,000 every year. So if you add all the numbers, it is not only 4,000 people. (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: So you are saying if you get the average duration of the courses, average four years –(Interruptions)

DR MATOVU: They are over 20,000 students being sponsored.  

MR KIKUNGWE: I will take the information, but considering the figures I have given it still does not match. Mr Speaker, I am wondering whether the Minister of Labour has an input in this kind of policy, whether after we have had scientists graduating from Makerere or other universities, the Labour Ministry is capable of taking them on.  

Mr Speaker, it seems there was a survey, which called for this kind of policy. I would like to know from the Minister, how many science graduates do we produce every year, and how many do we have in stock as we talk ever since they started graduating?

What impact do we expect on our economy from these graduates of Science?  What plans in place to engage them in productive activity?  Have you had plans to improve their pay as well to prevent them from moving because we are talking about a liberalised economy where forces of supply and demand are at play?

Mr Speaker, I am of the view that Science or no Science, this economy needs everybody and we should maintain what has been in place.  I thank you.

5.21
MR NANDALA MAFABI (Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think we are running away from the problem. First of all, the Ministry of Education should have carried out a cost per unit per student in the university and see how we can fund them. Because, even the science we are talking about, there has not been any manpower surveyor to prove that we need scientists now.  Unless we have a survey, we cannot do much.  This business of talking of science, science, science for the sake of it, is not right.

Even the 2,120 places are going to be taken by children of the rich.  You have seen they are saying, 2,120 is for Science and Technology, and they are going to be got from schools, like Buddo because they will be the best. I will take mine to Kampala Parents, they will end up in Buddo to do PCM, he will go for engineering. What about the other Mugisu who is in the mountains who was taken to Masaba? Mr Speaker, there is need to go back and look at this issue. 

Even under the quota system, a person who should be sponsored should have studied in that district.  At the end you are creating tribalism. We used to move from district to district to learn other cultures, to understand other issues so that we can interact within, we can move in the country free. But you make me get stuck in the village because I want to be sponsored in Makerere or any other institution; it is not right.  Mr Speaker, we should not punish intelligence for the sake. People who are intelligent must be remunerated.  

In my view, I suggest that all this money should be put in a basket. When you put the money in the basket, allocate every Ugandan who has qualified. The difference should be funded by each parent. In fact in Makerere University for example, it is private students who are supporting government sponsored students, and this is quite wrong. A man has sold his wife, has sold his children to educate one and he comes to help the rich.  

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr Speaker, I have listened to my colleague here, I just seek clarification. Is he saying that some people in this country are putting their women and children on sale in order to get an education?  The honourable member has got this information and kept quiet when he knows very well that, that is illegal selling of human beings? Can he clarify?  Thank you.

MR MAFABI: Mr Speaker, yes, I will clarify because a woman wakes up very early in the morning to go and work on somebody’s shamba so as to pay fees. That one is selling. So you can see for yourself. Even others will sell their daughters so that you are able to pay school fees for the other one, may be a brother.  So that is the selling I am meaning.

Mr Speaker, I suggest that the Ministry of Education carries out what we call, costing.  We know it is true there are fixed costs, those are common, but there are valuable costs, which matter. If we stop government sponsorship as far as accommodation in universities is concerned and we remain with only the education part, I believe the cost will be so low that every parent will be able to afford and everybody will go to the university, so that every parent who wants his child to stay in the university should be the one to pay for accommodation.  

Mr Speaker, economic growth is a serious issue. We are talking of seven percent economic growth; it is a serious that if there is economic growth, then I do not see any reason why we should not invest more in the Education Sector. There is no need for us to say, 75, 10 percent. I do not know the logic. Why not 50, 50? Why not that?  

So Mr Speaker, there is need for money and labour survey first. In fact the National Planning Authority should tell us how many factories are there which need these scientists so that we produce for them. Because we are going to do massive production of scientists in mathematics, then they will end up on the streets with nothing to do. Yes, they were going to have massive engineers and they will do nothing. What is the purpose? Why don’t we produce for the market? In fact we must know the market before we produce.

In conclusion, currently we already have unemployed scientists. The Ministry of Labour does not have an employment policy for graduates at all levels. In fact, every year there are 10,000 graduates at all levels; there is no employment policy on how to absorb them. Are you going to come again with more, what are we going to do with them? First, let us have the employment policy in place and we shall deal with the gaps. 

In Malaysia, they had factories they wanted scientist to do specific work like chemical engineers, road engineers and they invested in that sector because they had seen already the market. We should not start from production without knowing where we are selling; the market is quite important.  Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us hear from the honourable member for Mukono. I think the committee chairperson will come at the end because having listened to the views of the Back Benchers you can come together with the Minister to summarise. 

5.27
MS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the Minister for bringing this report on this policy. Mr Speaker, I have known our Minister for quite some time as a very motherly person who handles her things very delicately and takes time to make her decision. But this time I was very surprised to see that our motherly Minister took the whole country by surprise by bringing this policy without preparing our children for it.  

Mr Speaker, I am saying this because very many children as we talk now are over-stressed; very many have gone into depression. The ministry, being the mother care of all our students, should have prepared them for the psychological disorders that some of them are going through right now. Much as we are talking like this, so many students and parents are just wondering where the country is taking them. They really feel that we, their legislators, have sold them because many times we go back to consult them on policies that are going to be made, but this time I think all of us were taken by surprise because the thing came out too abruptly.  

Mr speaker, I believe the ministry and my minister are aware that the girls have been performing quite well and we were proud of bridging the gap between the boys and girls at higher institutions. But most of these girls were taking Art subjects and even the last results reflected that the majority of the students who managed to pass well to join universities were mainly girls. I would have expected our Minister to put them into more consideration as they think of putting more emphasis on science –(Interruption)

MRS HYUHA: Thank you very much for giving way. I wonder whether, my colleague, Lydia Balemezi, has read Annex D, which the honourable minister attached. It has a long list of the arts subjects, which they are considering for admission. The Faculty of Economics and Management, Bachelor of Arts and Economics 50 students, Bachelor of Arts in Development Economics available. Bachelor of Commerce, Faculty of Law, Faculty of Arts in Music, Faculty of Arts in Drama, Institute of psychology, Bachelor of Community psychology, Bachelor of Industrial and Organizational psychology. 

In Makerere Business School, Bachelor of Commerce, Bachelor of Business Administration, Bachelor of International Business, Bachelor of Leisure and Hospitality Management, Bachelor of Entrepreneur and Small – the list is long and it includes Kyambogo.  

Kyambogo University, BA Education –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: I think what you can do is just to draw our attention to it.

MRS HYUHA: I am just drawing your attention and wondering which girl does not offer these sciences. She was also saying out of 100 admissions 53 sciences, 47 sciences; what is the problem in the admission?

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you very much for that information. I also went through this list very much and I took my time and then I consulted some of these universities. At Makerere, you find most of the girls in Social Sciences and pure arts. When I looked at the list you have been reading, the Social Sciences Department is not on, yet this is where you find the majority of girls. 

You talked of music, dance and drama, these five students in the entire country, you talk of 15 students in arts and these 15 will be definitely boys. So, this is why I am pleading, much as the Chairperson for the Committee Social Services must have consulted with the Minister and they concurred. I think the girls taking Social Sciences, pure arts, Music, Dance and Drama are being left out. That is why I am requesting that the Minister and our committee should look into this matter further and maybe come up with some affirmative action.  

Furthermore, regarding the girls doing arts, those who can afford to pass are girls who come from poor families and can concentrate on their studies, and these are the girls who are going to be left out.  Look at schools like Namagunga and Namilyango; these are the schools where the ministry is going to get the 16 students for the quota Mukono district was given. 

Since 2001 we have been offering the best students in the country but there is not a single student originating from Mukono.  This is why I was happy when the Minister mentioned the 25 students quota on special interest like sportsmen and sportswomen, because if they consider that, at least to look at our children who are born within our district shall also somehow come up. But when they talk of these first class schools all these students come from other districts.

Finally, Mr Speaker, as we look at this policy, I wonder whether the Minister has also looked into the policy governing universities and tertiary institutions, the policy on their graduation.  As I talk now I understand in Makerere University, many of the students who graduated in 2003 have not even got their transcripts. Maybe that is why they are still on the street looking for jobs because they have no supportive documents. Likewise, even the degree certificate itself, we are told they can only acquire it after three or four years, sometimes five years.  

PROF. NSIBAMBI: That is a very serious statement about transcripts. I would appreciate getting the concrete names of those who have not got their transcripts and I want figures and names, and then we shall take action right away. 

THE SPEAKER: Maybe Rt. hon. Prime Minister and Chancellor, would you help us to indicate as the duration it takes from graduation to receiving the transcripts. Can you indicate as a policy matter?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Mr Speaker, we have been handling this problem and what I do not accept are statements without figures and names –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Rt. honourable, you are in charge as the Chancellor, at least you would be in the know of the policy like the minimum period it takes from graduation to requisition of certificates; how long do you think it should take? 

PROF. NSIBAMBI: When students graduate, it may take about say six months but I request for are details because we have had problems. I am not saying the problem does not exist, but we have been working on it and it can only be solved when we get figures and facts so that we can eliminate the problem. 

Last time, for example, we had over 6000 students graduating and it took me over 6 hours. What was the point? The point was to ensure that people graduate, of course they must have their transcripts. There was a possibility of 400 students, I gathered, who were not going to graduate because there were a few problems within MUBS and Makerere, and we solved them. So, we are addressing the problem, but we need facts on names and figures so that we may eliminate –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members since the matter has been raised, I think our committee in charge of this sector can look into it and give us feedback as to whether there is improvement. But there has been an outcry in newspapers and other media about this problem. May be it has been solved, but we need to investigate and then brief the Members. 

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you, Mr Speaker and I am very happy about this; since our Prime Minister is the head of the other institution, this will be handled. But as I had feared also to say that because of that delay of giving students the transcripts and even before graduation some of the faculties take too long to put up the names of the students who have to graduate. 

In fact, this is the first graduation where the Chancellor presided over and had to see 6000 students graduate. Some of them died because of stress. They were not sure whether their names were going to come up, and in the process because of over stress and depression, two girls died, only to find out a day before the graduation that their names were among those to graduate. But when the Prime Minister gives us an assurance like this, I believe Makerere and the other institutions will look into this matter and come up with a clear policy to follow to the letter. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Please just make your contribution in three minutes so that I cover these honourable members and then we get a statement from committee chairperson and the Prime Minister, who also chancellor. Thank you.

5.40
DR ARAPKISSA YEKKO (Kween County, Kapchorwa):  Thank you very much, hon. Speaker. I also thank the minister for giving this policy. While I support the policy to sponsor more of science students and arts students, I have the following remarks. I agree with those who have spoken that the exercise should be phased out. It should not be implemented now. In other words, Sir, warnings should have been given to the students so that they prepare, so that by the time they reach senior six they know what they are going to take, whether to do arts or to do sciences. 

I also accept what the hon. Member from Kalangala said, that in some schools students are actually forced to do arts. I took a student to one of the schools and the head teacher or whoever was concerned said if you are going to do science, then leave this school, and that student did arts not that he did not do well in the sciences, but they were both average. So, she was forced to do arts. Such an exercise as this should have been given earlier warning so that people prepare for it. In my view this thing should not be implemented now but given time so that people prepare for what to do next. 

On page 7 –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Could you be helpful to indicate to us what time that is required to fully implement it?

DR ARAPKISSA: Three to six years. On page 7, under “selection guidelines and criteria for the 75 percent”, it says a candidate must be eligible for university admission and must have applied for admission to pursue a course in the identified critical area. I think this is unfair to those who sat senior six examinations last year, unless there is going to be room for re-application. I would therefore urge that those who have applied for other courses, which are not of critical area should be given a chance to re-apply. Because there are students who have passed but had put a different course, which they did not know was not going to be government sponsored. In other words, they had indicated the courses, which are going to be government sponsored; these candidates should be given a change to reapply. 

On page 8, the issue that you must have done “A” Level in that particular district to be able to access the quota system, I think there are also problems here. There are some districts where there is no “A” Level like in Nakapiripirit. I do not know what will happen to them. Then in some districts like in Kapchorwa, there is only one effective “A” Level School. So, you cannot expect all the students from Kapchorwa to sit in that Sebei College, Tegeresi. There are other schools which are also offering “A” Level but they are not as effective as that one. So, I think it is not proper to have everybody go to Sebei College Tegeresi, if you have –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, I thought the 16 are only for the special interest quota, the others can participate in the science and arts quotas as they have been allocated. The 16 are in case they have not been able to share in the other categories. I think that must have been the policy.

DR ARAPKISSA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, but there is also the other issue that many people take their children to schools, which do better, because these home district schools are not doing well. So the ministry should maybe first improve the quality of education in those particular districts, because parents take their children to schools, which perform well.

Lastly, is the employment policy. Does the Government really have the capacity to absorb all these science graduates? Right now, there are a lot of nurses, midwives and doctors who are floating. In fact, since the medical school started, I think it has produced over 5,000 doctors, but currently we do not have more 2,000 who are working in government. So the majority is doing something else and if they are in Uganda, the majority is again in urban areas like Kampala, Mbarara and Mbale. The rural population is not benefiting from these nurses and doctors who have been trained. 

So, do we have the capacity to absorb them? For example, most health units in the country are under-staffed in terms of doctors and other health staff and it is not because the trained staff are not available, they are there, but the Government cannot employ them.  The Government puts a ceiling that in this health unit, there will only be one medical officer, one nurse, one medical assistant, one nursing aid, period. 

So, do we have the capacity to employ all these people after we have trained them? Otherwise, eventually there will be brain drain; you will be training people for other countries, or they will work within the country but only in urban areas. So, there is need to have an employment policy before you drastically take on this exercise.  Thank you.

5.46
MRS SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula County South, Kamuli):  I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: But take three minutes.

MRS MUSUMBA: I will keep time as usual. Mr Speaker, my concern about the policy shift comes from my understanding that when you present a policy as a government, you are providing a stimulus to catalyse a certain response. In this respect, the catalyst is science so that we get into a science based development economy. I am looking at it from the point of the Ministry of Education, which is in charge of the education of the entire population, making a choice to educate just a few Ugandans or make it possible just for a few Ugandans to get educated, because there is nothing wrong with arts. 

I give an example of the epidemic of HIV/AIDS, a health problem, the people who put down this epidemic were not doctors, it was us social workers. If we had been subjected to this bias, the entire population would have been razed to the ground, because the doctors did not have prevention measures and a cure.  So, it was us social workers who kept -(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  I try to restrain myself not to give this information, but it is very important, because the honourable member is making a very fundamental statement. Mr Speaker, it is on record that all disciplines participated in trying to put down the HIV/AIDS; it was not only social scientists, it was not only doctors but everyone; it was  team work and this is very clearly documented. That is the information I wanted to give, Mr Speaker.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you for that information. I think the public will judge that when there was neither a cure nor a vaccine – I am not talking about today, I am talking about 1986.

THE SPEAKER: She is talking about the NGOs that moved around and so forth.

MRS MUSUMBA: They were not NGOs of doctors or of lawyers; they were NGOs of us social workers.

MR DOMBO: Mr Speaker, I do not want to create any specific biases against other disciplines that contributed to the slowing of HIV prevalence in the country, but the information I wanted to give is that the discovery that actually the HIV virus exists was a work of a scientist doctor, which could have been a problem if actually the virus was never discovered at all. So we shall compliment them for their contribution.

MRS MUSUMBA: I think the best my colleagues should do is to appreciate that we as a community need each other. The point I am making is that, if any of us was not there, the situation would have been very, very grave for this country, and so, this is the example I am giving, that really we need a balanced society where all disciplines come together to create a healthy social, economic, political environment.

Mr Speaker, what I see this policy doing, because I am a policy expert too, is that it is recycling poverty. The crux of the matter is poverty recycling, maybe let me do this, maybe the scientists, maybe the artists, then the lawyers will come in another year. Can we be assured that ways and means are being innovated to make it possible that whoever wants to go to school can go to school and do what they want, because we are all entitled to education, unless that has changed. And I do not want you to take my entitlement to be entitlement of a specific thing. Let me be what I want to be.

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR KIKUNGWE: Mr Speaker, I just wanted to inform my colleague that in this very House, we have scientists who have come out with chemistry degrees and they are selling moringa around here.

THE SPEAKER:  But moringa may need a chemist.

MR WAMBUZI: Mr Speaker, if we want to trigger an avalanche of development, we need approximately 100 scientists per gombolola of various assortments. This is how America was developed. When you emigrated from Europe to America, you had to go with your package, there was no experiment; nobody would help you. 

The African continent, at the rate at which it is losing its scientists and technocrats – in my family alone, I have lost eight engineers with two to three degrees; they have died.  We have to replace these people quickly. In a situation where we have got replacements, we have to replace these people quickly, and in a situation whereby we are looking for a critical mass to trigger development and rejuvenate it, we should focus on 100 scientists for each gombolola. This means for 1000 Gombolalas, 100,000 people need to be produced in a short period. Even these 4000 people, it require 25 years to produce them; this is the scenario we are in. 

So, if we start playing around and we think it is okay to keep the status quo, we are selling this country to Indians and Europeans. They are going to over run it and take it for free if we do not act in time and create the necessary critical mass of skilled manpower in the skills which are critical to look over these orphans. I beg to inform hon. Salaamu Musumba.

MRS MUSUMBA: I thank you very much for that information. That loss, which is not limited to scientists, concerns all of us. I think it is in light of that that the policy should try to address all these capacity gaps that we must plug as a nation.

Mr Speaker, I think the effect of this policy is to compound poverty for some sections of the population. An example is my constituency where the Government has not invested anything in secondary school education. Mr Speaker, if I was in Karamoja, far away from Kampala, maybe I would say, yes, it is because of the distance that Government is not able to provide even a single Government aided school. It is a shame! So you want to compound poverty for the people of Bugabula South, which is just in Kamuli! 

MRS BALEMEZI: I thank you Mr Speaker and my colleague Salaamu for giving way. Mr Speaker, I want to remind my colleague Salaamu that Government requested all districts, with the assistance of Members of Parliament, to identify a secondary school per sub county so that it could aid some of those secondary schools. Up to now, in Mukono, we are still forwarding our schools for secondment to Government and Government is doing so. So I think my colleague is the one who is just delaying or did not read that circular which was sent to all Members of Parliament.

MRS MUSUMBA: I thank you very much for that information. I do believe that the ministry knows how many sub-counties are in this nation and that if they use their computers, they would know which sub-county are not serviced. That has never been my responsibility because we do employ a District Education Officer and other people whose responsibility it is on a daily basis to ensure - There are planners in the Ministry of Education, who are they planning for if not for the people of Bugabula South? There is an inspectorate; what does it inspect anyway? So, you cannot pass the blame to me; I am not the Minister of Education, and it is the responsibility of the Minister of Education to ensure that all Ugandan children are educated. 

Mr Speaker, my concern is how this policy is going to compound poverty for sections of the people. Actually the matter is for the whole of Kamuli district, which is in a resource shadow, where we have not been properly resourced in spite of being ministers of planning. It is just a shame – (Laughter)- and I find this difficult to explain to the people of Kamuli, how they can have the Minister of Planning and there is no plan for Kamuli on the table. 

I am wondering for sure. Other things being equal, I would like to know, how would this policy help my people, because they vote and they always vote properly. My people pay taxes but when it comes to the goodies, you say, “No, we want 16”. Do you know what 16 children in a district means? It means that in a sub-county like mine, with 25 parishes, with a quota of 16 for Kamuli, only 16 sub-counties are going to send anybody, and that is the beginning of Kamuli Town Council. How will they choose the 16, because I will insist that my four sub-counties each present a person. 

So, please, these policies are creating further anxiety at all levels of administration; you are causing anxiety in the administrators. And as I said in the beginning, it is an issue of recycling poverty. If we are growing at the said 7 percent, can we see that growth even in the education sector? Thank you very much.

6.02
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Mr Speaker, I thank you. I also thank the Minister for the statement and I assure her that she can bank on my support. This is a very, very nice policy and at the right time. What is the problem in the country, what is the common song as we move to the countryside? It is either poverty or unemployment. Why unemployment? Because Government cannot employ all our people, and we have been banking on a private sector, which means, “what did you study, what does this man, say, Mr Sudri, who is employing you, want?” 

Mr Speaker, if you look at page 3 of the report, I have been comforted by the statement that Ugandans from different walks of life have observed that sponsoring students to pursue courses in any field - You can imagine the word “any” without taking into account the country’s human resource and economic needs in critical areas for national development and social transformation, was inappropriate. Honourable members, I think this statement should really bring us on board to support Government that what they are doing is for the good of the country.  

The other day I saw a very elaborate article by the Chairman, National Council of Higher Education, Mr Kasozi. He gave us figures, researched not sentimental, why don’t we accept as leaders to get guided and advised? My prayer would be, over and above this new policy, what do we ask Government to look into? 

For example, the issue of having “A” levels in most of this districts, laboratories, equipment, books may be even appealing to Government to waive tax on laboratory equipment, books, so that the private schools can also access them. Taxes may be on books MTEF, there is this word called MTEF (Medium Term Expenditure Framework), that ceiling so that this ministry can get reasonably good funding even from donors so that they can now have a lot of infrastructure in the countryside, remunerate our teachers, handle all these small concerns. 

I am really comfortable; today I am going to sleep a very happy man. Look at this quota, sincerely people from Rakai, you know what happened to us in 1982, we have not been competing nationally, but with this now, we think we have been catered for, and we are going to also share on this national resource.  

I have heard colleagues talking about population; that is a very dangerous argument because they will be conflicting even with family planning. If, for example, the ministry and Government took it that we go to population quota we shall go back to Rakai and tell them to produce daily. I thank you.

6.06
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First of all, I support the policy that one, we  need to enhance scientists so that they can lead to the transformation of this economy. Secondly, I support the affirmative action of the quota system because many Members are debating as if this system did not originate from a comprehensive debate that we undertook on the Floor of this House.  

Mr Speaker, unless there are changes that have occurred ever since we debated that policy where we had directed the then Minister that they should undertake to admit on quota system, the time we passed that policy here on the Floor of this House.  Mr Speaker, my only problem is that the way this policy has been introduced is likely to cause psychological torture to the people who were not prepared when the policy was introduced for them to believe or to perceive that they are taking low, degraded courses that the nation does not consider very important.  

Secondly, what is going to be the policy of this one, on career development? I would like the Minister to find out; how do we prevent people from doing what they want to do, but they do what the Government wants to promote? We could end up with doctors who will qualify as doctors and then end up playing guitars as musicians. We have very many in the field who have graduated as doctors and they end up in art, painting, just because they took their fathers’ fields but not areas that they naturally would have loved to do. Are we doing enough to promote careers, especially careers where people have specific interest and are likely to develop and excel for them to produce what we want in the economy?

Mr Speaker, this country got independence a long time ago. Why is it that up to now all the chemicals and apparatus that we use in our secondary and primary schools are imported?  Haven’t we developed enough capacity with all the industrial chemists that we have trained? Can’t we turn Busitema College or the Industrial School of Art in Nakawa into a university where we can manufacture the materials that we require so that we can specifically fund these areas and enhance the scientists to create jobs?  

Finally, there is one problem we shall meet in the integrated approach. We are producing scientists but do we enable them? Many times the Chancellor has talked of job creation, but are we enabling the people who are graduating to be able to make the jobs? This is something that we must address as a nation to enhance the scientists to contribute to the transformation of the country. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, don’t you think we should really wind up? Our views have been expressed and I think Government takes into account views expressed and then they make adjustments.  

MRS SENINDE: I thank you very much, Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. Mr Speaker, I believe the issues the chairperson and the Minister are going to present are really very important and I would assume that every Member of Parliament would really appreciate to listen to them. Mr Speaker, I beg that we adjourn such that we can have these presentations probably next time, Mr Speaker, in accordance to your will.

THE SPEAKER: So that when we resume we give them just exactly one hour to wind up without further interruption from Members, is that the consensus?  Maybe to be fair, we shall take care of hon. Sebaggala, hon. Ochieng and Gagawala. These will be the only people to conclude so that we are fair to them; they have been here. It will be the chairperson of the Social Services Committee and the Prime Minister, as the Chancellor of one of the prominent universities we have here and the Minister then, the owner of the statement, that will the case, I think on Tuesday.  Maybe we shall start with them, it should be the first Business to consider and then we handle other business.

Honourable members, I thank you very much for holding on and for the views you have expressed. I hope they will be able to assist the Government, the Executive to see how to adjust; maybe it requires how to adjust it. On the other issue of transcripts, we have said the committee will study this, the Chancellor is ready to help us so that people do not take years before they get what they are supposed to get.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: There is Mr Obela over there, he is the Assistant Academic Registrar; he has told me that the operation is computerized and that within a week they give transcripts. Those students who do not get transcripts are those who have encumbrances like debts, lost books. But I am assured by Mr Obela and this can be verified that within a week the students can get their transcripts.

THE SPEAKER: Very good, we shall follow it up. So, with this – (Interruption)

MRS. HYUHA: Mr Speaker, today we had a meeting with the Minister of Education, we did not complete our business of the budget framework but we set aside Monday to meet universities. I think the universities, especially Makerere; we will put it on record. But I also wanted to inform this august House that the situation has been gradually improving. We have taken in all these complaints and are sharing them with the university, but I think let us get a concrete position on Monday so that we report.

THE SPEAKER: Very good.  So, with this we come to the end of today’s business. The House is adjourned until Tuesday 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.13 p.m. at adjourned until Tuesday, 19 April 2005 at 2.00 p.m.)


