
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 21 April 2022

Parliament met at 2.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wish to welcome you to today’s sitting. On a special note, I want to welcome the Rt Hon. Speaker Emeritus. You are most welcome. (Applause) 

I would also like to commend the chairpersons and members of the sectoral committees that managed to make reports of the ministerial policy statements within the prescribed time, as per rule 149(1) of our Rules of Procedure. Thank you so much and congratulations. 

I would like to remind the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to ensure that they process the tax bills to provide for us a way of implementing the budget and Government programmes. We need those tax bills as soon as possible. I would like to thank you, again, for coming to the House after a long sitting last evening. 

In a special way, I would like to thank Hon. Justine Kasule-Lumumba, for the work she did yesterday, mobilising for signatures. You became the chairperson of chairpersons. 

2.04
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise on a matter of national importance, and that is, the poor implementation of a programme called the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID), especially in refugee-hosting communities. 

This project started in 2019, and it is a five-year project ending next year, but the designs for the road components have never been done, yet the project is ending next financial year. Government kept sending monies to local governments hosting refugees and at the end of each financial year, these monies were returned because we do not have approved designs; for three years. 

    1. I request the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to come to this House and explain to the country why a design has taken three years without being completed. 

    2. Why should our monies be sent to local governments without having approved designs? It taints the image of our local governments in terms of absorption capacities.

    3. We want assurance that we shall not lose our monies.

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Mr Samuel Mayanja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech – 

THE SPEAKER: We are seeing you here for the first time. 

MR SAMUEL MAYANJA: I wish to congratulate you on your appointment to the highest office of this august House –(Interjections)– I am the Minister of State for Lands.

On the issue of -  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mayanja, the Members are saying that you should first remove the mask so that they can see your face because they have never seen you. 

MR SAMUEL MAYANJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to request for about 10 days to enable the ministry prepare the programme and a full statement on this USMID issue. I will then come back to this august House to give a full statement. 

THE SPEAKER: Have you just learnt of this issue or you have been getting complaints from different districts? 

MR SAMUEL MAYANJA: Madam Speaker, the matter falls under urban development. That is why I am asking for time and then I will sit with – but I own it, as the ministry. We shall come and give a full statement.  

THE SPEAKER: Give us a statement on Tuesday next week. We will not give you 10 days. We need a response on Tuesday.

MR SAMUEL MAYANJA: Thank you. 

2.08
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga North County, Isingiro): I wish to advise the honourable minister, who has appeared here for the first time, that if the problem is very big - USMID started with 14 municipalities and took on more; quite a good chunk of money has been sunk into it. Roads have been constructed, but every municipality is complaining of shoddy work. The designs have already been made, but the workmanship is all poor; talk of Masaka, Mbale, Arua, Gulu and everywhere - unless you have a very competent chairperson or technical person within the municipalities. 

Otherwise, the situation is alarming. Let him not lie that he is coming here next week. The problem is very big and Members here, coming from municipalities, know it. I thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Prime Minister? 

2.09
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have heard from the honourable Members of Parliament, but it is not all the municipalities – because we have moved to those municipalities. At least, we have some municipalities which have good work – 

THE SPEAKER: Like Kamuli. 

MS NAKADAMA: Yes, of course, Kamuli is one of them – 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I have seen it. 

MS NAKADAMA: And other municipalities. I have been to Gulu, Lira and Arua. Some of those places are good, but for those which have shoddy work – even Mbale. I was recently in Mbale. For those that have shoddy work, we shall take it up and see to it that work is improved. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Where the works are not being done well, Government should follow it up. You may find that maybe it is because of the contractors and that kind of thing; that should be rectified. However, the ministry should also report to this House on that matter. 

2.10
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The “absentee minister” may want to listen to this first before he accepts the ruling of the Speaker.

Part of the challenge to which the Prime Minister is pledging a follow-up relates to the way Parliament has been, over the last couple of months, disabled from functioning.

Key committees of Parliament are supposed to inspect some of these works - the Local Government Accounts Committee, for the bigger part of the financial year, have been disabled and unable to go and follow up some of these civil works all over the country. 

Madam Speaker, this House needs to resolve that where there is no follow-up for accountability, there should be no expenditure. As long as Government wants to spend, they must accept that there should be a follow-up for oversight; where there is no oversight, there should be no expenditure. Otherwise, we shall be coming here to lament. 

I want to believe that now that we are in the budget cycle, there will be no excuse whatsoever, denying committees of Parliament to go and do their oversight work. For us to be here and expect the Executive to come and report on its failures to Parliament, is asking too much of them.

Therefore, it should be upon Parliament to demand space and its resources to go and undertake oversight and hold the Executive accountable; that is what we should be doing. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I want to thank the Prime Minister for the –(Interjection)- Madam Speaker, I ask for your protection from Hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba.

Madam Speaker, the clarification I want to seek from the Prime Minister - you have told us that there are good roads in some municipalities and you have counted the different municipalities. The clarification I seek is, we are not talking about municipalities with roads that have been done well; we are talking about worst-case scenarios. Uganda is the same and there should be equality in everything -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany, I made an order; let Government go and assess all the works that are being done in municipalities and report back to this House. Where there is a problem, they must take action.

MR SILWANY: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. 

2.14
MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. As of now, over 4,000 pieces of timber are lying in Zoka Central Forest Reserve, and over 10 machines are working day and night in this forest reserve; this has caused alarm in my constituency. I have been receiving calls daily on the same matter. 

Our prayer is that the line minister visits the forest and give us information as far as the illegal deforestation that is taking place in Zoka Central Forest Reserve. 

THE SPEAKER: Please adjust your microphone.

MR MAMAWI: Most obliged. Our second prayer is -

THE SPEAKER: First tell us the first one because we did not hear it well.

MR MAMAWI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our first prayer is that the Minister should visit the forest and give information to this Parliament, as far as the deforestation in Zoka Forest is concerned. 

Secondly, as I mentioned, there are many machines operating in this forest; let the culprits be brought to book and appropriate action taken against the persons who are involved in these activities. 

Thirdly, Zoka Central Forest Reserve needs massive reforestation because of the destruction caused. Therefore, our appeal to Government is to take this matter very seriously. We shall be very grateful when these actions are taken. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Government?

2.16
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): I thank the Member for the concern. I am going to take it up with the minister, and then we shall come here and give a report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: The minister will come back and report to this House on your matter.

MR MAMAWI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Government Assurances. The statement that the honourable minister has mentioned is an assurance. So, I wish that it is taken very seriously and where possible, a timeframe be given. Thank you.

2.17
MR DENES SEKABIRA (NUP, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on behalf of the people of Katikamu County North whom I represent here in Parliament.

Yesterday, we had bad rains in my constituency and at least two people lost lives, 151 houses were demolished and 21 people are in a bad state - they are admitted in hospital. 

My prayer to the line minister is to come in and swiftly save these people that were badly affected by the heavy downpour. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

2.18
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Sorry for what happened to our people. However, I request that you get in touch with the District Disaster Committee so that they can forward to us that complaint in writing. Government will then take it up from there. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: So, as you wait for the team to come over, let the disaster committee make a report that you should forward to the Prime Minister’s office for action to be taken. Next item.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE PARISH DEVELOPMENT MODEL

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister for Local Government, we had asked you to come and lay the policy framework paper and then the regulations.

2.19
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the Parish Development Model Policy Framework, March 2022. 

THE SPEAKER: Please lay.

MR MAGYEZI: I beg to inform Members that we have prepared enough copies for all of you. They are right now being delivered into your pigeonholes. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. The policy framework paper has been laid on the Table. I encourage you to read it before we start any debate on it; conceptualise it then we shall come back here and discuss it.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ADMISSION OF THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO (DRC) INTO THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY (EAC)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the East African Community regional bloc has an ever growing advantage to the citizens of the East African Community. Since its inception, we have seen the admission of Rwanda, Burundi, South Sudan and now the Democratic Repubic of Congo (DRC).

The coming on board of the DRC comes with a big market for the region and various opportunities for the Community. I wish to congratulate the DRC for joining the mighty East African Community.

In a special way, I also want to thank the Council of Ministers and the Summit who have worked hard to ensure that the DRC joins the Community. We congratulate our brothers in the DRC. Let us listen to the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of East African Community Affairs.

2.21
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Ms Rebecca Kadaga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by congratulating you and Hon. Tayebwa on your elevation to these offices. I wish you well.

Proceeding under Rule 52(1) of the Rules of Procedure, I am here to brief the country about the latest developments in the East African Community. 

As you are aware, the East African Community (EAC), a regional intergovernmental organisation, comprises the Republic of Burundi, the Republic of Kenya, the Republic of Rwanda, the Republic of South Sudan, the United Republic of Tanzania, and the Republic of Uganda, with its headquarters in Arusha, Tanzania.

The mission of the EAC is to widen and deepen economic, political, social and cultural integration, improve the quality of life of the people of East Africa through increased competitiveness, value-added production, trade and investments.    

In line with the above mission, the EAC has been processing the application of the DRC to become a member of the EAC. This is within the powers of the Treaty. Article 3 of the Treaty provides that certain matters should be taken into account, when considering the application by a foreign country to become a member of the Community. These are:

    a) Acceptance of the Community as set out in the Treaty; 

    b) Adherence to universally acceptable principles of good governance, democracy, the rule of law, observance of human rights and social justice;

    c) Potential contribution to the strengthening of integration within the East African region;

    d) Geographical proximity to and the interdependence between it and the partner states. For your information, the Democratic Republic of Congo shares a border with all the countries of East Africa except Kenya.

    e) Establishment and maintenance of a market driven economy;

    f) Social and economic policies, being compatible with those of the Community.

Madam Speaker, the Democratic Republic of Congo applied to join the Community and before admission, they were evaluated against the above criteria, and the following steps were taken:
 
    a) Through a Note Verbale on 4 June 2019, the DRC submitted an application to join the East African Community.

    b) The 21st Ordinary Summit of the Heads of State held on 27 February 2021, considered the application and directed the Council of Ministers to expeditiously undertake a verification mission.

    c) The 31st Meeting of the Sectoral Council of Ministers responsible for EAC Affairs and Planning, held on 1l June 2021, appointed the verification team comprising officials from the EAC partner states and supported by a team from the EAC Secretariat.

    d) The verification mission to the DRC was conducted both in Goma and Kinshasa from 26 June to 4 July 2021. The verification team comprehensively interacted with the various Ministries, Departments and Agencies in the DRC with the view to fully appreciating the structural and institutional setup, as well as their policies and procedures vis-a-vis the EAC policy and legal framework. In their report, the team established that the DRC is considerably conforming to the EAC statutory requirements for admission of foreign countries as new members.

    e) The 45th Extraordinary Meeting of the Council of Ministers, held on 20 December 2021, received, considered and forwarded to the Summit of Heads of State the report of the verification team.

    f) In the 18th Extraordinary Summit of the East African Community Heads of State held virtually on 22 December 2021, the Summit received and considered the report of the Council on the verification mission on the admission of the DRC and directed the Council to expeditiously commence and conclude negotiations with the DRC for admission to the East African Community, and report to the next Summit.

    g) Between the 15th and the 24th of January 2022, negotiations were carried out between the East African Community and DRC. The DRC accepted to be bound by the current legal framework of the EAC.

    h) At the 46th Extraordinary Meeting of the Council held on 8 February 2022, the report of the negotiation was considered and adopted and the Council recommended to the Summit to consider admitting the Democratic Republic of Congo into the Community. 

    i) During the 19th Extraordinary Summit of the East African Community Heads of State held via video conference, on 29 March 2022, DRC was admitted as a full member of the East African Community, and the Council of Ministers were directed to develop a road map of integrating with the DRC into the Community.

In light of all the above, the final admission was concluded under Article 3(3). As part of the procedure, the 19th Extraordinary Summit designated H.E. President Uhuru Kenyatta, the Chairperson of the Summit, to sign the Treaty of Accession between the EAC and the Democratic Republic of Congo by 14 April 2022. 

I am delighted to inform you that this process was concluded extremely fast, by the signing of the Treaty of Accession by the Democratic Republic of Congo, on 8 April 2022. President Uhuru Kenyatta signed on behalf of the Summit and President Félix Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, President of the Democratic Republic of Congo, signed on behalf of his country. 

The Treaty of Accession commits the Democratic Republic of Congo to the EAC Treaty and all its protocols, the Tripartite Agreement between the EAC-COMESA-SADC, and various other memoranda of cooperation subsisting. 

Among the areas of cooperation in the Treaty of Accession are the following:

    a) Cooperation in legal and political matters; 

    b) Cooperation in trade, finance, investment, monetary and fiscal matters;

    c) Cooperation in infrastructure matters;

    d) Cooperation in productive sectors;

    e) Cooperation in social sectors; 

    f) Participation in EAC institutions, projects and programmes;

    g) Financial obligations; and

    h) Registration of the Treaty with the African Union, United Nations and any other organisations as the Council of Ministers shall determine.

Now that the Treaty of Accession has been signed, the DRC will commence internal processes beginning with the domestication of the Treaty into the municipal law of the DRC, and ratification of all the existing protocols, and thereafter, the instruments of ratification will be deposited with the Secretary-General of the EAC.  Thereafter, the Secretary-General will transmit the instruments to the African Union, the United Nations and any other body where we shall direct. 

During that period, the East African Community will facilitate sensitisation within the structures of the EAC of the DRC. The major pillars of discussion will be the Customs Union, the Common Market, the Monetary Union and, later, the issue of the confederation.

In joining the Community, during these six months, they will indicate which parts of the Customs Union they would like to start with, which pillars of the Common Market they are considering handling first, and whether they will be ready for the Monetary Union in 2024. 

By 1 October 2022, if all the above are handled, the officials of the Democratic Republic of Congo will commence participation in our meetings and other activities. 

Honourable members, the map of the East African Community has, drastically, been amended. 

The addition of Congo has a number of benefits. We now have a population of over 300 million people. This is an expanded market, with big opportunities for produce and other services. This will enhance prosperity of our people. 

The EAC will have a global connectivity from the Indian Ocean to the Atlantic Ocean. For a landlocked country like Uganda, I think it is really good if we have a route to the sea, one to the Indian Ocean and the second one to the Atlantic Ocean, through the Port of Matadi. So, this will support the existing trade corridors and the movement of goods and people into the hinterland of the African continent. 

There is need for quick and targeted investment in roads and related infrastructure to tap into this opportunity. I am aware that the Republic of Rwanda and the Republic of Uganda are working on joint infrastructure with the DRC to ease the movement of goods and people. 

Secondly, the DRC is a predominately French speaking country. This will now require the use of French in the community. Indeed, for the first time, on the 8th of April, the summit was addressed in French. This relates to the decision of the EAC’s 21st Summit of the Heads of State held on 27 February 2021, which adopted French and Kiswahili as the other official languages of the Community, in addition to English. The non-French speaking partner states like Uganda must now put in place modalities of learning and using French as well as Kiswahili, as these are now official languages. 

I will be tabling, in Cabinet, a memorandum on how Uganda will implement this directive on these two languages. There will also be need for additional resources to enable the Ministry of East African Community Affairs to actually participate in all activities related to the integration of the DRC into the community and, particularly, bilateral arrangements that will enable Uganda to leverage and competitively tap into the DRC market. I will also be presenting to Cabinet a paper on that issue. 

Just to assure the Members, I am not going to look at the opportunities being taken by other countries, but I will be sure that Ugandans are visible and vibrant in the Community, and in trade with the DRC. 

Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister. I will now allow debate for 10 minutes. 

2.34
MR DICKSONS KATESHUMBWA (NRM, Sheema Municipality, Sheema): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister, for the statement, and congratulate the Government of Uganda on this achievement of ensuring that the DRC joins the East African Community.

Madam Speaker, this is a very big achievement. However, I think that we need to do a lot when these opportunities come so that we stop celebrating potential opportunities, but actually, celebrate the benefits. I am glad that the minister - the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister - has indicated that she will be presenting a Cabinet memorandum on Uganda’s strategy to competitively tap into the DRC. 

The DRC is one of the biggest opportunities that we have, not only in the area of trade. I would like to propose to the First Deputy Prime Minister that we should look at other sectors like education. I know that there is a lot of opportunity in education. If we are able to accommodate, now that we are promoting the languages, we will have a lot of students from DRC coming here to study. That is untapped opportunity. In other areas like, in tourism, we have very many international organisations in DRC and there is a lot that can be done. I urge the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister to do that. 

Secondly, Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister, we have been in the Community and we have got members in the Community who are dragging the progress of the EAC. For example, this House appropriates our contributions to the EAC. However, we know there are members in the Community who have not been paying, but they have to sit at the decision-making table. 

When they do not sit, because decisions are made by consensus, we are not able to move. I do not know what solutions you have. Are we thinking of amending the Treaty so that we remove the issue of consensus now that we are many, so that we can move with the majority? This is so that we are able to make progress. 

Finally, I want to raise the issue of trade. I raised it before this House, that we have the common external tariff that we have been implementing since 2005. At that time, our stage of industrialisation was not like it is now. Now that we are promoting import substitution, I think the review has taken long. I request Government to speed up that process so that we promote our industries and make sure that we create jobs for our people. Thank you very much. I beg to submit.

2.37
MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua City): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleague to thank  the First Deputy Prime Minister for the presentation. West Nile became part of this country in 1914 and we have been looking forward to how this country would benefit if the DRC was part of East African Community. We have been facing challenges where you would find there is a Kakwa in Uganda and a Kakwa in Congo, as well as a Lugbara in Uganda and a Lugbara in Congo, but you need a visa to visit your brother. 

Therefore, I want to thank Government and the East African Community for accepting that Congo should be part of the East African Community. 

However, there are two key issues, and one is the opportunities of trade. Congo comes with a very huge potential. It is our mandate to ensure that we tap into these opportunities very well. There is timber and all sorts of opportunities in Congo. Uganda would benefit much more than the rest of the countries because we seem to be more prepared and strategically positioned. I want to appeal that we take advantage of this. 

Most importantly is the issue of security. The whole of Congo is not stable in terms of security. We have had the citizens of this country go to as far as Durba and they get problems along the way. As Parliament, I think we need to support Government in helping our brothers in Congo to stabilise in terms of security. I thank you very much.

2.39
MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity, and I thank the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister, for the statement. Concentrating on the Democratic Republic of Congo, I had the opportunity to travel to the DRC to look for possible market to support my constituency. However, in the process, I met the customs in-charge and he told me that he was worried because based on what he was clearing, using the roads we are trying to work on, the Kenyan items were more than ours. 

As we take this opportunity, the ministry responsible for Trade needs to do something to encourage our people to take advantage of this market. Some of the key elements, which I was told and saw was construction related items, which we have a lot. There was also sugar and oil. We need to start working seriously to ensure our production - and Parish Development Model for us to take advantage of this market, which is about $55 billion. If we can only tap into 10 per cent of that, it will be a great success. Let us target, use this potential and increase our production to take advantage of that. Thank you.

2.42
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the First Deputy Prime Minister for the statement presented and take this chance to congratulate the DR Congo, for having joined the East African Community.

There is no doubt that DRC’s joining the East African Community expands the membership, and in a way, expands our market. As Members have said, I do not want to repeat those issues, but while this gives us a big opportunity in terms of the market and other aspects, I would like to make some few observations in terms of our interaction with other countries that are already members of the East African Community.

Of late, there are a lot of restrictions. Whereas we are celebrating the DRC’s joining the EAC and, therefore, our membership has expanded, and in a way the market has also expanded, I have seen cases of restriction of movement of products within the East African market.

There are member states that have been exporting milk to other East African countries - which I will not mention - but which have come under restrictions. There are also those who have been trading in eggs. While sometimes we come as a cooperation, but we do not adhere to the protocols, meaningful engagement and interaction we are supposed to enjoy. We do not experience those.

Recently, some borders were closed and these are borders of member states in the EAC. When we come together as a body, it must be meaningful interaction on all grounds.

However, it will be very absurd, at the end of the day, to see a lot of restrictions. At some stage, our sugar was not expected in other countries within East Africa. So, you wonder what the cooperation is all about. We have admitted the DRC, but it will take a lot of effort to move on the same page. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Of course it is upon us to make sure we move on the same page. Once we agree that we need a people-centred market driven by cooperation, we will do it and be at the same page. We must look at this as an opportunity to the country because all this is provided for under Article 7 of the East African Community Act.

2.45
MR PAUL OMARA (Independent, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to congratulate the First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for East African Community Affairs, for the presentation. 

This Parliament should welcome the Democratic Republic of Congo into the East African Community. It is one of the largest countries in Africa with so much potential.

Before COVID-19 and the closure of the Katuna border, Uganda had a very positive balance of trade with the DRC, getting in at almost $70 yet currently, we are not taking advantage of that market. 

I would like to thank the President and the UPDF for maintaining the strategic security in the DRC to allow us do trade because without peace and security, it is not possible to trade.

As already mentioned by our colleague, the Government of Uganda is planning a road from Uganda into the DRC. Last time, the Minister of State for Trade said that we should take full advantage of that opportunity to push Ugandan goods into the DRC so that we can grow our market. The President is always talking about us having a bigger market and I think the DRC provides that opportunity for us.

Minister for East African Affairs, we have made progress towards our integration, by dealing with matters of a common external tariff. 

Recently, we were working on non-tariff barriers because there were so many delays in our transport system between Kenya and Uganda because the Kenyan policemen would put road blocks everywhere along the way; I think that is being sorted.

We would then move towards a monetary union and then finally a political federation. I hope that with the consequent meetings that you will be having, we shall make progress towards those areas so that in the not so distant future, Uganda will be able to go towards a monetary union and then finally political integration. Thank you. 

2.48
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Hon. Minister for East African Affairs for the wonderful statement presented.

I only want to make three statements: We had our border with Rwanda closed, yet we are in the East African Community, and have a very close working relationship. What plans do we have with the admission of the DRC to the East African Community to avoid such happenings?

When these borders are closed, in all the East African Community, it is the local population that suffers; businesses end up collapsing. Now that we are expanding the East African Community, what diplomatic strategy are we going to use to avoid such. 

At that time, the Ministry of East African Community Affairs ought to have come out to support the two countries to ensure the borders are openned. I thank God that now, the Uganda-Rwanda border is open.

What trade, economic achievements and benefits is Uganda going to get from the admission of the Democratic Republic of Congo into the East African community?  

As you may know, in my language, they say everyone is selfish. I always look at Uganda first. What are we going to benefit from supporting and promoting the admission of the Democratic Republic of Congo to the East African Community? The most important thing that we should be looking at is the potential and the opportunities for trade, and how we can improve our country’s income and the GDP of the Republic of Uganda. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much. Members, the admission of the DRC is going to enable the export-oriented economy for the partner states, which will enable free movement of goods, persons, services, labour, capital, information and technology. Those are some of the things that we expect to benefit from this admission. 

And of course, there are so many opportunities that we can get out of this admission. As you heard, the DRC’s infrastructure was discussed yesterday, and if we had a road connecting Uganda to Congo, it would ease our business. That is one of the reasons. 

2.51
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Of course, Hon. Silwany copied from me, but he did not bring out that point very well. 

However, I would like to thank the minister for the statement. In addition to what Hon. Silwany said that the other day, we had issues with Rwanda and none of the member states of the East African Community could come up to mediate between the two countries, it was Angola that had to take the initiative to mediate between the two countries.

THE SPEAKER: Who did the mediation? 

MR DAVID KABANDA: Angola; during the conflict, none of the member states intervened. I would like to know from the minister the benefits of this integration. Apart from sending ministers and Members of Parliament, we did not see any sitting at the East African Legislative Assembly, talking about these issues. 

We have had issues with Kenya; every day, you hear the minister and the Members of Parliament quarrelling with Kenya over our eggs, maize and other products. What is the importance of this Community? We understand that this Community was revived in 2000, but we have not had any tangible benefits from it as a country, apart from sending ministers and Members of Parliament into the Legislative Assembly of this Community.

2.53
MR ABDI FADHIL CHEMASWET (NRM, Soi County, Kween): Madam Speaker, thank you so much. Allow me to congratulate you on your election as Speaker. You know, we have been addressing you as the Speaker, but let me address you now as the real Speaker because you have been elected as the Speaker of this Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I am a bit saddened because the other day, I did not pay tribute to my friend, the late Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah. Let me pay tribute to him first. And, I think he is safe in Heaven, and he is a leader there as well. He has been my friend. 

Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chemaswet was not in the country, and he did not have time to pay tribute; and he is still mourning.

MR CHEMASWET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yes, we are still mourning. I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Kadaga, the Minister for East African Community Affairs, for the elaborate report on the admission of the DRC. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the Members to understand that Hon. Chemaswet is the Deputy Chairperson for the Committee on East African Community Affairs. For us, especially those who live at the borders, ours is about our feet; we only have to walk towards the other side of the border. Ours is not about the formalities. Mine is about crossing to Kenya and meeting my relatives there; we leave the Rt Hon. Kadaga to do the formalities. However, before you even do the formalities, we are already on the other side of Kenya. Therefore, it is a blessing that we have admitted that big country. 

However, I would like to request that Government should let us handle this baby carefully; the DRC is now a new baby. The issue of having non-tariff barriers within the EAC is the biggest challenge. I cross the border through Malaba most of the time, but the question of temporal exploitation of vehicles, especially when using a personal car, is a challenge. You take almost four to five hours on the Malaba or Busia border. This is a big challenge for us. 

You have the Kenya Revenue Authority first, you have national intelligence services, you have administration police, you have the regular police, and you have all those others. Why don’t we do away with this and have only the Kenya Revenue Authority and the Uganda Revenue Authority, to handle the issues other than talking of a one-stop border, and here it is not there? 

Madam Speaker, I know the Rt Hon. Kadaga has challenges in terms of movement within the EAC, and I know you now have more challenges because we have now admitted the big country. Now that we were handling the annual budget -

THE SPEAKER: Can you conclude? Other people want to speak.

MR CHEMASWET: Yesterday, we handled the Ministerial Policy Statement for the EAC ministry and we will be handling the appropriation very soon. My request is that the ministry or the minister for the EAC should be given a helicopter, not a vehicle. That is my request, by the way; because how else can we handle these challenges when she will be using a vehicle around the EAC instead of having a helicopter? And as parliamentarians, we should have that consideration; it has to be taken seriosuly; she should have a helicopter. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. 

2.58
MS STELLA APOLOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech since you ascended to that seat; so, congratulations are in order, on behalf of the people of Ngora District. I would like to appreciate the report by the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister. The admission of Congo contributes to a population of over 300 million people and this will contribute to the expansion of the regional market. 

My point is just about the investment in the infrastructure and specifically the road network. This should be the time we should be talking about the standard gauge railway so that we would all be able to contribute to the common market. Other East African Community countries have been able to work on their road network and Uganda has also started that process. 

Therefore, I submit that we need to put more attention and more investment into the Standard Gauge Railway. I beg to submit. 

2.59
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Deputy Prime Minister for the statement. I would like to address the issue of the markets. We are all excited about the new market of the DRC, but what are we taking to the DRC? When we look at the other East African countries, the trade has largely been driven by the private sector. It is being guided by market forces and protectionism of other member states. 

I implore Government to play a more active role in tangible negotiations so that we have a more structured economic relationship with the DRC market. For instance, we are only talking about products, but the DRC, being a French-speaking country, there could be market for teachers of English. Can somebody take the lead to negotiate this deal? Can Uganda export teachers of English? How many teachers of English does the DRC need? If the DRC needs 50,000 teachers, then we can go ahead and train 50,000 teachers and create jobs.

We should not only look at the human resource, but we should also look at a more structured way of dealing with the DRC. The private sector, the East African Community and the Ministry of Trade, have a central role to play in this. If this is not done on time, you will get situations where our people feel left out, and you will feel the agitations, like what happened in Brexit. Thank you,

3.01
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I appreciate you for the opportunity. I also appreciate our dear Minister for East African Community Affairs. Thank you for the report. 

I would like to congratulate the DRC. They have come at the right time. I am so happy and excited about it. If at all there is any country that I have not visited and I would love to visit, it is the DRC, particularly, Kinshasa. I would love to go there. 

This Parliament has a big role in the realistic and real integration of East Africa. If we are talking about widening and deepening the integration, this Parliament has a bigger role to play: 

We must be able to allocate enough resources to our committee on EAC.
 
The ministry needs to be supported economically. We need to give them finances. Let us give the ministry enough money so that they are able to do what they need to do. 

Madam Speaker, we have a forum in this Parliament on EAC affairs. We look forward to forming similar fora in the EAC partner states. I want to believe that this “widening and deepening” will work well if we do it on a Parliament to Parliament basis. 

Currently, we are planning to have serious orientation for that forum. I know my chairperson will be communicating that later. This is very important because we want to focus on the four pillars and build a team of champions; those who understand the customs union, the federation, and those that can handle the issues of the monetary union. 

Nonetheless, one attribute that I would like to appreciate so far, is the passports. They have already started issuing the East African Community passports. Personally, I am transforming into that. If somebody is asking about the benefits, that is one of them; they are starting to flow. 

It is our duty to widen and deepen this integration. The next East African Community games should be in Kinshasa. We are ready to go for sports there, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

3.04
MR AMERE ONEKALIT (FDC, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to begin by congratulating the DRC for joining the East Africa Community. Whereas we are welcoming the DRC into the East Africa Community, we need to be aware of how fragile it is; the insecurity in the DRC. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that the Minister for the East African Community Affairs takes our message of bolstering security in East Africa. What is happening between Uganda and South Sudan, particularly, the inhumane way in which the traders who go to South Sudan are treated, is alarming. Such kind of acts should not extend to the DRC. That is my major concern. 

Otherwise, we are grateful that we have one of the countries with a lot of resources joining the East Africa Community, and we are proud of that. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, as we talk about the free movement of goods, persons and services, when you go for that meeting, you need to talk about the issue of South Sudan. It is really alarming. 

3.06
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Going by the current trend, I expect to see Nigeria or Tunisia as part of the East African Community. As East Africa changes from a region to a club, there are many things that bring us together; Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania. We started with Rwanda and Burundi; it was agreeable. Then we picked South Sudan; now, we have picked the DRC. 

We have an association here called UWOPA which has male members. By the time the number of men in UWOPA exceeds that of the women, then UWOPA would have lost the very purpose it was formed. 

At the point we are at now, the countries that had never been part of the original East African Community outnumber the countries that had the original concept of the East African Community. You see, we now have Rwanda and Burundi, the DRC, South Sudan and very soon, Egypt; then, the East African Community would have changed into just a club. 

The unfortunate thing is that it is becoming a club for Presidents, not even Parliaments, Madam Speaker. There is no day that we sat here to discuss the application of the DRC seeking to join us in the East African Community. 

At least, we would have heard the same being discussed by the East African Legislative Assembly and the people. The East African Community is supposed to be about the people, but Madam Speaker, the people in these countries do not know anything about this Community. We were just beginning to talk about political unity even to the extent that we would make a single Government and currency. All that is now lost. 

The people from my area, who go to Tanzania as teachers, are made to process work permits and as soon as they expire, even for one day, they are brought back. Some of them are even arrested. 

I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, that if it pleases you, you set a particular day when the Minister for East African Community Affairs will come here. On that day, we should talk about the future of East Africa; how we can bring in the people. This is because at the end of the day, it should be about the people. 

I would like to know: if we choose to go for a single currency and a single government, is the DRC ready to be part of that? If they are not ready, what are we going to do with these people who came exceptionally? In fact, they are now outnumbering us to the extent that they can now connive and make decisions against us, who were in the original East African bloc. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to talk about the Karamoja issue. We were told here that the problem affecting us and frustrating our efforts in Karamoja are people who come from Turkana, yet, we are already in the Community -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, we did not say they are people from Turkana. Do not bring international disharmony. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, my words cannot cause disharmony. We are one with Kenya.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, I am from there, so we know our people.

MS NAMBOOZE: I am as good as a Kenyan, under the East African Community; so, they cannot say, “Why does somebody in a foreign country talk about us?” We are almost one country. 

Madam Speaker, what I want to say is that there is suspicion - 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, we are not one country. That is one; these are different states. We are only in an integration.

MS NAMBOOZE: Much obliged. I will not repeat it, but we are working towards that. Madam Speaker, I want to know what sister countries in East Africa think about having joint operations in issues that are cross border. 

When we had the locust problem, they said locusts were in Kenya and that they might move to Uganda. Instead of joining Kenya and attacking the locusts from Kenya, we waited for our day, until the locusts moved from Kenya to Uganda. This is one thing I think we should change; that whatever happens to us - and since we have infrastructure in the East African Community, let us work on some of these problems together. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Mukono, I want to request the people in these countries that we should fight againt the East African Community growing into a club of the “big men” in the Great Lakes region. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nambooze. One assurance I can give you is that Nigeria cannot be part of the East African Community. Article 3 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community provides that there should be geographical proximity. Nigeria is not close to this provision. 

3.13
MS BARODA KAYANGA (Independent, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, upon assuming that seat. 

Recently, my ambulance went to Kenya to pick up a corpse, but it was very hard for them to clear it at the border, yet it is very easy for those coming from Kenya to Uganda. Therefore, I would like to request the minister to at least put tight laws in Uganda because when we go to Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania, it is not easy at all yet, in Uganda, they just enter freely.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, as I said, debate was meant for 10 minutes, but it has now gone for 30 minutes. I am only having Hon. Ssenyonyi, the Leader of the Opposition, and then we close. You will debate the next item.

3.14
MR JOEL SSENYONYI (NUP, Nakawa Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in welcoming the DRC to the East African Community. There is a lot we can do with Congo. There are advantages that come with it. The DRC, by land area, is about 10 times the size of Uganda. Their population is more than twice ours, so, there is a lot that we certainly can be able to benefit from. 

Madam Speaker, there are things that we must be able to fix for us to optimise this integration. In 2010, the EAC launched the Common Market Protocol for goods, labour and capital. However, it is still a challenge today for our goods such as sugar, eggs, and so on to make it to certain markets in the East African Community. It is still a challenge for labour to cross over; for Ugandans to go and be able to operate in other countries. We need to fix these things for this integration to be able to make sense. 

We said that we would be able to travel with our national IDs, but there are countries in the East African Community for which that has not been actualised, yet it is an impediment. Can we fix these things? 

Finally, Madam Speaker, for any country to properly benefit from an integration such as this one, you have got to have quite a bit to offer. We still have a challenge with production in our country; there are local manufacturers that are struggling and this is why we are still net importers, as a country. 

Maybe time has come for us to begin to focus on these local manufacturers so that we can have a lot to export to these countries within the Community. We tend to focus quite a bit on foreign investors and it is okay; we need them. However, sometimes we focus more on the neighbour’s child and forget ours. 

These local manufacturers are saying “please enable us; the cost of production is high; help us and waive some of the taxes the way you are doing for these foreign investors”. We are waiving taxes; we are giving them money, and so on. Therefore, for us to be able to benefit from the region, we must have what to export. So, let us aid these local manufacturers. Somebody wants to give me information -

THE SPEAKER: Those are the jua kalis.

DR BATUWA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition. This Jinja man likes smuggling; you are not even near the border (Laughter).

3.17
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I suppose the smuggling language has been made alive to the border openings that are part of the –

THE SPEAKER: At least Panadol is not in the House. 

MR MPUUGA: I would like to thank the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister for the statement that clarifies to this House of Parliament the status of our neighbours. 

The 10th Parliament had a comrade, who is still part of this Parliament. As part of impeaching his confidence, a Member referred to him as a Congolese and he was indeed impeached and could not even submit. I guess now, the admission of the DRC will make him more comfortable and he will not call it an insult anymore because eventually, we are brothers and sisters. 

Madam Speaker, part of what is enduring to this cooperation is what the honourable member from Mukono submitted albeit in jest, namely; that cooperation must be of people’s, not of politicians per se. And when people embrace cooperation, then the attendant legislations become rituals. 

I was in one of the capitals a few weeks back and one of the friends I was meeting referred to Kampala as the biggest bar in East Africa because they can trot in and out of Kampala with utmost ease over the weekend and return to work in their respective countries. For me, that was a bit of warmth that, probably, we appreciate this more than our other neighbours. 

However, part of the discomfort that comes with cooperation is because the political class that engenders it does not eventually bring to bear the people. I believe the Minister for East African Community Affairs, who is a veteran of the politics of the region, needs to probably invite colleagues across – to involve, for example, the traders’ associations, Uganda Chamber of Commerce and others.
 
I have been to Kinshasa twice, but when you go there - one of the biggest markets for our people here are informal jobs. The mechanics are hardly there. It is very difficult to find a mechanic in DRC to troubleshoot a vehicle easily and we have very many of them. However, for you to be able to give opportunity to our people, we need to sensitise our people on these opportunities from all sides of the borders so that we do not end up with some of the challenges we have seen in SADC, where people, for example, in South Africa, look at their black brothers and sisters as endangering their own survival instead of looking at them as brothers and sisters with whom they can actually cooperate and change their lives. 

Madam Speaker, the political class has a duty and that is, largely, in inviting and sensitising the common person about these opportunities, and to offer a platform and make it easy for individuals and business people to go and cross over. We have many communities across borders and I hope, in the long-term, this cooperation will go a long way beyond trade and finance, and even go into deeper political cooperation; and for us to interest ourselves in democratising the East African bloc – that, for instance, not a single party in East Africa would go and organise an election, rig it and beat up its people while others cheer them up; then turn up for swearing-in. 

If in the long-term we have common values for democracy, common values for improving the lives of our people and common values on human rights, then it will make even greater sense. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker and I hope this heralds a new beginning for the common people of East Africa. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am very excited about the admission of the DRC into the East African Community because, having a population of 300 million speaks volumes as far as international trade is concerned. So, we are going to be a power to reckon with. 

However, this statement, which came under item No. 2 on page 8, says that the summit of the community has already adopted English, French and Kiswahili as the official languages in the new arrangement. 

I would like to know whether the Ministry of East African Community Affairs has put up a budget for the purpose of setting up training centres so that, in Uganda, we can now start learning French and Kiswahili because they will soon be adopted as the official languages. Uganda is disadvantaged because in the East African region, Kenya uses Kiswahili and so do Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi. Uganda does not popularly use Kiswahili. So, we are very much behind and disadvantaged. 

Therefore, I would like to know – now that we are at the tail-end of the budget process – whether the money has been included for the purpose of training the population in these languages so that we can benefit in trading within the community. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable minister?

3.30
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER FOR EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Ms Rebecca Kadaga): Thank you very much, honourable members, for your comments, inquiries and advice. 

Hon. Kateshumbwa, I thank you for supporting the forum for East Africa. I would like to say that, definitely, there are going to be new opportunities. 

To answer Hon. Ameede on the issue of education, I expect that the DRC would want to get teachers to go and teach English in their country. I expect that, if in the next six months, they set a plan for the implementation of the common market protocol, we shall see a channel of where to enter and I will be talking about the common market a little bit later. 

On the non-complying countries, I can assure you that I am one of those who are not going to tolerate countries that take advantage and have a free ride. Actually, three weeks ago, I had a rude experience. We had gone for a meeting in Arusha, but for over six hours, we were not sitting. I went to the headquarters and asked, “Why are we not meeting?” They said, “You see, two countries have not signed the report and so, we cannot call the meeting.” When I found out which two countries they were – they were South Sudan and Burundi – I said, “How can someone who has not paid subscription hold us at ransom? Let us go for the meeting. If they do not want to come, let us go and pass the budget.” However, they later came. 

So, I asked my Cabinet colleague, “What do these people speak in these meetings?” She said, “You see… You know….” I said, “At the next council meeting, the issue of sanctions must be on the agenda. I am not going to tolerate Uganda’s taxpayers paying money and others having a free ride.” I am not going to allow this. 

On the visa regime, yes, I am hoping that once they fully join, we shall be able to engage them on the issue of the visas, as we have done with the others. However, honourable members, let me just say that the issue of sovereignty is still important – the man says “I am the head of the Republic of Kenya and I was elected by Kenyans”, “I am the head of the Republic of Burundi, elected by the Burundians” Yes, we have friendship and we are in a club, but I cannot direct. So, for some of those issues, we still need to discuss. 

The other area I want to talk about is the issue of opportunities for Uganda. I am one of those – and I am on record even here complaining about the lethargy with which we, as Ugandans, take on opportunities. When South Sudan was liberated, it was really the Ugandan forces that supported South Sudan. However, within a month, Kenya Commercial Bank was in Juba. This morning I talked about – which countries share a border with the DRC? I said: “All of them, except Kenya.” Today, Equity Bank and KCB are in the DRC and we are here. 

So, what I want to pledge to this House is that I am going to lead a trade delegation – a very serious trade mission – to ensure that we get the opportunities as quickly as possible. 

Hon. Onzima asked about the restrictions in the markets on our products. We are going to continue with the discussions. I used to think that it was only them who were injuring our products, but recently, I was on the spot when Uganda interfered with the goods in transit to Congo. I had to answer questions on why Uganda had breached international law by grabbing the fish going to Lake Turkana. 

Therefore, all of us do these things, but we need to streamline them and we shall continue to speak about the non-adherence. I think we should first clean our house before we talk about the others.

Hon. Omara was giving advice. Hon. Silwany, on the border closure - and Hon. Kabanda also asked why nobody says something. How do you bring two Heads of State, as a minister, and say, “President so and so sit here, you, also sit here. Tell me why are you quarrelling?” (Laughter) Yes. I think it takes another Head of State to be able to do that. You know we have hierarchy -(Interjections)- yes, at their level. Yes, we were bothered. We even talked about it here many times, but who could actually move it? Those are some of those things that happen in that way.

Hon. Kabanda wanted to know what the benefits are. I saw you during the EALA games. You stayed in the Marriott Hotel; you paid the East African Community rate. The rate you paid was for East Africans because the Arabs were paying something different. So, that is one of the advantages. (Laughter)

Hon. Chemaswet, recently, I also learned for the first time that when a Ugandan is in Kenya, they must drive to the border every three months to renew their entry with their car. I mean, you drive four times a year to the border just to show that you have entered the country with your car, yet you work in Kenya. It is something I want to address at the Summit. I did not know. There are people who came to visit me and said, “Minister, three times a year we drive to the border, to drive out and drive in, to show that we have arrived.” I am going to handle that. 

I had an interesting one with the communities in Namayingo. The boda boda riders were being stopped from crossing the border. So, they said, “We see the cars crossing - why don’t you allow the boda boda?” They said, “For us, the boda boda is our integration. The cars are not our business. We are boda boda riders. Our integration is to cross the border with the motorcycles.” I told the Secretary-General to deal with that and he has dealt with it. Now, it is no longer a problem. If I hear of it anymore, I will handle them. 

Hon. Isodo on the infrastructure - yes, we need the infrastructure and we are going to continue working on it. What is the private sector doing? As I said, I am going to be leading a delegation to the DRC to see what opportunities we can pick up.

Hon Aogon, I really want to thank you for the support. We need more money. The ministry is one of the poorest in the country. Let us have more money so that we can do a lot more work. 

On the DRC fragility, yes, but there is nothing we can do. You know, these are our neighbours. They have been our neighbours since 1884. We cannot change them, but let us help them to organise themselves. Maybe coming in now, formally – we have been with them informally, but maybe, now that they are coming formally, we should have more space to assist them. 

Now, Hon. Nambooze, there is no way Nigeria can – where has she gone? She is not even here. (Laughter) There is no way Nigeria or Tunisia can become part of the EAC. There is a rule of proximity in the Treaty and so, we do not expect that. 

Also, how can countries come together without their leaders? A Mukiga cannot just go to the other Mukiga on the other side and say, “Let us make an agreement.” There has to be a Government. So, yes, the leaders are talking, but let us also do more for the people. They cannot do it on their own. 

Hon. Watongola, about the ambulance, I did not know that you had a problem with moving an ambulance, but you were crossing the border into another country. So, I think there are protocols there to be handled, but we shall check and see what the reciprocal arrangements are. 

Hon. Ssenyonyi, you are very interested in the common market. Let me just say that we expect that if the Congolese and the others agree to the freedom of movement of capital, of service, of goods, that will simplify our lives. But more importantly, the right to a residence and the right establishment – all those are part of the common market protocol. So, let us hope that we shall work together on that. 

The National IDs – really, it is quite annoying that, especially in Tanzania. When you travel to Kenya, you are okay with your national ID, but once you reach Tanzania, you are arrested. This morning, I was in a meeting where I was told that traders have been arrested. I have asked for their list so that we can handle it. I am going to discuss with my colleague the minister on the other side.

Leader of the Opposition, there are many Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) involved in the collaboration, for example, the East African Business Council. This morning, I was at the East African Law Society, the East African Local Government Association and the Youth Ambassadors. Yesterday, I commissioned the university games for East Africa. 

So, there are many things going on that we could build on, but we need more money. I do not have money in the budget for sensitisation. So, we need more support in that area.

Hon. Ogwal, I am due to present to Cabinet a paper on how we can now incorporate Swahili because it has been optional and I think it will now have to become both compulsory and examinable right from primary level. Equally, French has been optional. It should now become compulsory and examinable because it will be a national language. I am taking that to Cabinet in a short time. And, thereafter, we shall come back and request for support on how to move it. That is both Swahili and French.

We are going to work on the same arrangement. However, in the meantime, honourable members, I did not learn French in school, I learnt it after. So, you can get in touch with Alliance Francaise and start doing some studies. Right now, I am learning Swahili though I am not doing it in the classroom. So, it is possible. I had written to the Clerk some time back, to say that we should organise Swahili lessons. So, if you are interested, my ministry can facilitate that. (Applause) Thank you very much Speaker and Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, for the comprehensive response. Members, you have seen and you have heard the benefits that we will get out of our integration with the DRC. We want to thank you very much. Please, continue fighting for your country. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNERS’ REGISTRATION BILL, 2021

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2021,” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Is that Bill seconded? (Members rose_) The Bill is seconded by Hon. Silwany, the honourable member from Bunyoro, Hon. Aber, Hon. Kamuntu and okay, by the Whole House. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to provide for the establishment of a Physical Planners’ Registration Board; to provide for the powers and functions of the board; to provide for the registration of physical planners; and to also look at the disciplinary procedures for the physical planners and other related matters. 

As we all know, currently, there is no legal framework regulating physical planners in Uganda, unlike other professionals such as the accountants, lawyers, surveyors, engineers and doctors who have governing bodies that regulate them. So, the absence of a legal framework has compounded the practice of preparation of arbitrary physical planning and unethical planning practices, and a violation of minimum physical planning standards, rampant abuse and use of environmental sensitive areas. 

As a result, you have seen what is happening in some of these places. Therefore, the Bill is intended to provide the legal framework to regulate the practice and activities of physical planners, and separate qualified planners from quack physical planners; to set and monitor the standards for physical planners; to reorganise urban development in the country; and reap from the benefits of the urbanisation process, which are numerous. 

Madam Speaker, I commend the House to consider this Bill so that we can move forward the urbanisation process of our country. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, acting honourable minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, for moving the motion. Can I now invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to present the committee report?

3.39
MR ROBERT KASOLO (NRM, Iki-Iki County, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to lay on Table the minutes of the meetings of the committee, the report of the committee and the documents that we used to process this Bill from all stakeholders.

Report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2021. I will not go to the introduction.

Background

Methodology

We consulted many stakeholders including the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who are the owners of the Bill, Uganda Institute of Physical Planners, Association of physical planners in Uganda, Architects Registration Board, Uganda Society of Architects and Independent Physical Planners, represented by Dr Wilson Kayum, received and considered a written submission from Shelter Uganda Limited, Sanyu Rita, Mirembe Lucy and Mulabi Esther who are individual stakeholders based in Mbale; meaning the Bill was widely consulted.

Preliminaries

The Bill complied with the gender equity and sustainable development goals. Therefore, I will straight away go to the committee observations and recommendations.

Functions of the Physical Planners’ Registration Board

The Bill under clause 3 provides for the functions of the Physical Planners’ Registration Board. The committee notes that the functions of the board do not include regulation of physical planning firms in Uganda and yet, this area is currently unregulated.

It observes that this is a loophole that creates a leeway for unprofessional persons purporting to be physical planners to practice untracked.

The committee recommends that the functions of the board should include monitoring and regulating standards for the private physical planning firms in Uganda.

Powers of the Physical Planners’ Registration Board

The committee observes that the Bill does not explicitly provide for powers of the board. For purposes of clarity, the powers of the board must be provided for in the law to include the following:

    1. To register and deregister physical planners;

    2. To inspect the work premises of physical planners;

    3. To conduct and investigate or inquire about relevant performance of its function;

    4. To control, supervise and administer the assets of the board;

    5. To regulate professional fees for physical planners;

    6. To accredit institutions undertaking continued professional development programmes for registered physical planners; and

    7. To arbitrate physical planning matters that involve its members and other parties. 

The committee recommends that the Bill be amended to provide for the powers of the board.

Composition of the Physical Planners’ Registration Board

The Bill under clause 4 provides for membership of the Physical Planners’ Registration Board to comprise of a chairperson, two persons from public service, three persons from the private sector and one person from the academia; all of whom shall be physical planners.

The committee observes that physical planning is a multi-sectoral discipline that touches many facets of the natural and beautiful environment.

It includes landscape professionals, water system professionals, architects and agriculturalists among others.

The proposed composition of the board leaves no room for  -(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I am not rising up to interfere with the process, but to confirm whether we have this on our iPads because I seem not to see it. I do not know whether it is only me failing to see it and yet, this is a very important report. We need your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: It is there.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not think it is okay. On our iPads, the file is empty and yet this is an important Bill that we need to follow critically. 

THE SPEAKER: Was it uploaded?

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, we gave it to the Clerk and the Clerk assured me that the Bill had been uploaded. I have seen one Member there reading it, meaning it is uploaded.

MR OLANYA: Madam Speaker, the name of the Bill is Physical Planning Bill, but when you try to open, it is empty, meaning it was not uploaded. 

THE SPEAKER: Go to a technical person to open for you. I now understand where the problem is coming from. I can open it from here, Kumi Municipality. You know these things have just come today so, we may not know how to use them. Mr Chairperson, continue. You know Amuru is only good for sugarcanes. (Laughter)

MR KASOLO: Composition of Physical Planners’ Registration Board and - we were at the committee observations that the physical planning is a multi-sectoral discipline that touches many parts of the natural beauty of the environment. It includes landscape professionals, water system professionals, architects and agriculturalists.

The proposed composition of the board leaves no room for growth from inter-multi-disciplinary interactions. The committee proposes that the composition of the Physical Planners’ Registration Bill should be diversified to depict the multi-sectoral nature of the profession so as to ensure balanced decisions.

Qualifications of the Registrar of the Board

The Bill under clause 6 provides for the appointment of a registrar who should be the Chief Executive Officer of the board, but the committee observes that it does not provide for the personal specifications of this officer. 

The committee recommends that the Bill be amended to provide for the required qualifications of the registrar of the board. 

The conditions and qualifications for qualification for registration 

Clause 11 of the Bill provides that a person can register as a physical planner if they are holders of a bachelor’s or Postgraduate Degree in Urban and Regional Planning or other qualification by whatever name called from a university or other institution recognised by the board; two years’ practical experience; and a physical planning assistant if they are holders of a Diploma in Urban Planning, Urban and Regional Planning, Physical Planning or other qualification by whatever name called, from a university or other institution recognised by the board; and two years’ practical experience obtained under supervision of a registered physical planner. 

The committee observes that for the physical planner to be referred to as a registered physical planner, it is important that in addition to the academic qualifications, they accomplish an individual professional project under the supervision of a registered physical planner. This can best be done under the physical planners’ society where all graduate physical planners are eligible to membership and have opportunity for mentorship. 

The committee recommends that requirements for registration of a physical planner, therefore, should include the following;

    1. Degree in Physical Planning; 

    2. Completion of an individual professional project; and

    3. Two years of practical experience in physical planning under the supervision of a registered physical planner.

The committee also recommends that upon attainment of the requisite academic qualifications, physical planners and physical planning assistants should register with the society of physical planners as graduate physical planners or graduate physical planning assistants.

Inclusion of Uganda Institute of Physical Planners in the Law 

The Bill proposes that all members of the board be persons registered with the Uganda Institute of Physical Planners incorporated under the Company Act 2012, registration number 203480 of 2015 or persons nominated by it.

The committee observes that the institute is a private company whose membership does not include all physical planners. Therefore, any reference to it in the law is irregular.
 
The committee recommends that in place of this private institute, the Bill should establish a society that brings together professional physical planners for purposes of association and mentorship. 

The Disciplinary Committee

The Bill, under clause 18, establishes a disciplinary committee that comprises a chairperson and members, appointed from among members of the board. 

The committee is concerned that the proposed disciplinary committee is just a subcommittee of the board, which predisposes it to conflict of interest. 

The committee recommends that the disciplinary committee should be composed of a chairperson from the board and other persons from outside the board.

Punishments

The committee observes that under clause 43, the punishment of “a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both” for offences cited in the Bill is not punitive enough, given that some of the offending activities are actually very lucrative. Some offenders cannot be deterred from unlawful practices when the punishment is so lenient.

The committee proposes that the Bill should increase the fine payable by an offender to 100 currency points, or imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both, to deter potential offenders. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for the good report. Do we have any Member who has anything to say on that report before we get to Committee Stage? 

3.55
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Independent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to congratulate you and the women of Uganda for that big achievement that we have, in you. 

I thank the committee for the report, but also to look back and think about amending this Bill; and putting the proper board in place for physical planners is very important for this country. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament created cities, but they are just cities by name because they are not worth being called “cities”. We did not have the right board in place to give us the right people to do the physical planning of these cities. If we just leave it like that, we are soon going to have slums within these newly created cities. 

Yesterday, I was talking to the Chairperson of the Committee on Trade - because he comes from a city - and this is supposed to be my city if I go back home. I asked him why they don’t look for the right physical planner and plan Mbarara City so that we can all be proud of it - And he said it is a little bit difficult to enter these councils because they belong to the local council and some of these local councils - Well, I do not demean them, but they do not look at the future of how these cities should be; leave alone even this Kampala.

I always say that the buildings in Kampala are quarrelling with each other because one is like this while another one is like that. We do not have anything that is - you feel like it was not physically planned. 

Therefore, probably, it is now time that you came up with this amendment. Maybe, this amendment of the Bill will bring us a better board in place; and maybe, that board will help us to have good physical planners in this country in the future. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Naome. Members, we need to limit the debate because we will be going to committee stage, which is a little longer. Dr Abed, the man from the tobacco area.

3.58
DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonero Division, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Physical planning is a profession. You cannot propose to put on the board of physical planners other professions. I have heard from the report the idea of agriculturalists. I think even veterinary doctors and other professionals are going to sit on a board of another profession to regulate them. That cannot happen. 

If physical planning is a profession - and I have seen in the Bill, it is defined as a profession because you must have a degree in physical planning. Therefore, we cannot see a situation where Dr Abed, without any qualification in that area, sits on a board whose function is to regulate. You cannot be involved in what you do not know. Otherwise, that will go against the principle of the professions’ regulation. Therefore, I would like to propose that this board should be entirely left in the hands of - (Interruption)  

MR WANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to inform my honourable colleague that in such planning, you need environmentalists, social workers and many other professions. You cannot narrow it to only the category of physical planners. That is where you will make many mistakes. I think we need other professionals on the board.

DR BWANIKA: Thank you for the information, but we must be aware that in physical planning teaching, whatever you are talking about is taught –(Interruption)

MS NAMUYANGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With due respect to my brother, Dr Abed, Uganda has a planning unit. When we talk about physical planning, we are not only talking about the towns; we are also talking about land use planning. We are planning for the entire country in so many aspects. Therefore, for us to say that we eliminate others and only concentrate on physical planners will not be right. 

I have also seen many boards, where other professionals are included, and they add a lot of value. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

DR BWANIKA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I want to emphasise this point. Physical Planning is a profession. I am aware that the entire Uganda is a planning area. People go to school and graduate in this area. You cannot bring on board, in their profession - because all of you want to be involved in planning. If you want to be involved, as a physical planner, go to school and study physical planning. That is the reason why people go to school.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abed, are you putting the Physical Planners’ Board in isolation, that it is only doing physical planning for the buildings or is it in totality?

DR BWANIKA: Madam Speaker, the provision is in this Bill. I am not on the -  

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Attorney-General.

4.03
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What Dr Bwanika is speaking about will be looked at and clearly dealt with by clause 4. Clause 4 says, “The board shall consist of seven members, who shall be qualified physical planners appointed by the minister on such terms.” Therefore, it is okay. This professional body is covered. 

The committee does not want the disciplinary committee to be a subcommittee of the board; they want it to be separate. Madam Speaker, it is covered and there is no amendment proposed by the committee on that.

4.04
MR DAVID KABANDA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for the report.

The problem we find in most of these cities is that when you go to a city like Jinja, which was organised by Indians, you find a very well organised city. Most of the physical planners we have in this country - I do not want to mention names - but here in KCCA, we had a director of physical planning who studied agriculture, but because he had contested somewhere and people were negotiating for him, they took him to the President and the President decided to appoint him director of physical planning. How does a person who studied agriculture plan for a city? 

When you go to town councils, you find somebody who studied a different discipline managing a city. How would you expect such a person to organise a city? This is why you find congestion and disorganised cities in Uganda; because of employing people, not only on meritorious grounds, but because someone is a relative. For instance, the one handling the process could be my in-law so I just bring anybody. 

In my opinion, the problem in our country is appointing people who are not qualified for such positions. I beg to submit. 

4.06
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the good report. Honourable colleagues, physical planning is actually a decentralised function. When you go to these districts and cities, you will find a planning unit, including the physical planner, the surveyor, the economist, the statistician and the population officer.

I am happy that we are now getting a solution to some of the challenges we have been facing; collapsing buildings, people encroaching on road reserves, people building in wetlands, people posing in the population as planners, and they actually demand for money; and so many other things. Therefore, this Bill is a good one. It will help us to solve a number of these problems in the local governments.
 
I just have two or three questions for the committee chairperson. Honourable chairperson, you are proposing diversifying the board and you have given us the reasons and you have heard the arguments given by Hon. Abed. In your proposal, are you also looking at this board including a representative of the local governments? Because, this is where these planners are mostly. 

The second issue is on the proposal you are raising for a society of planners. My understanding is that the society is actually a members’ organisation. Then, you are talking about giving them some certificates. I think I need to be clear on who is going to certify the physical planner. Is it the Board or the society you are proposing? 

Finally, when you look at the physical planner, they do not work in isolation. There are surveyors, architects, cartographers and environment planners. How do we ensure that in certifying and registering these planners, these other professionals are not left out? Thank you. 

4.08
MS JANE AWICH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Somehow, I want to disagree with my colleagues. A colleague said that the planners are failing to plan because of poor qualifications. Another one said it is because of wrong appointments. 

I think those are not the reasons. What is affecting planning in both cities and municipalities is corruption. Much as the planner is aware that at this point you need this kind of building, as long as you have money to bribe the planner or the engineer, you are allowed to erect any kind of building in any place in the district. 

Many times, we have followed up with them, but it becomes a very big issue. I want us to stop this thing of saying it is appointment. Anyone can do any job as long as they are committed and love what they are doing. Thank you.

4.10
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. The Minister of State for Bunyoro said that Uganda is a planning unit. If you take Uganda as a planning unit, then we must look at this squarely. 

We have seen policies that work in cities and towns, but that do not work in villages. You find, in a city, wetlands being reclaimed and buildings being erected there. However, when you go to villages, people are being chased away because they are in the wetlands. Therefore, if we take Uganda as a planning unit, we must look at policies that are universal. 

Therefore, we must look at this Bill as one that is going to affect all Ugandans, either negatively or positively. We should not pass policies that affect our people negatively. We need to integrate all policies, and all ministries must be on board. 

I want to disagree with Dr Bwanika when he said that we must get only physical planners on the board. No, we need at least every profession on the board because there, we benefit a lot. We should have a combination of professions on the board. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the shadow minister and then I conclude with my ministers here?

4.11
MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In clause 2 on interpretation – on page one, we have the definition of a corporate member -

THE SPEAKER: You are now at committee level. 

MR BALIMWEZO: My general comment is that -

THE SPEAKER: Are you in agreement with the report? 

MR BALIMWEZO: No, I am not in agreement with the report and that is the reason I did not sign it. This is because at the commencement of this Act -

THE SPEAKER: If you did not sign it, did you bring a minority report? 

MR BALIMWEZO: I was not given the opportunity to make a minority report.

MR KASOLO: Madam Speaker, this report did not attract a minority report.

MR BALIMWEZO: Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: For your information, we adopted a strategy in this House that before we bring a report to the House, we harmonise between the Opposition and Government. I think this is the first Parliament, really. I am sure the Attorney-General has harmonised with the LOP. Where there is a disagreement, we will sort it out.

4.14
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Mathias Mpuuga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think my Member is forgivable. He wanted to raise the issues, but we had agreed on the side and they had a meeting with Hon. Kasule on the clause that was controversial, to which they have conceded and he is okay with it. I think we are ready to move to the next stage.

THE SPEAKER: We have forgiven you.

MR MPUUGA: Unless there is a new issue not agreed on, but on the issue he had raised with me, I made it known to the Attorney-General and the minister. We seem to agree now on his concerns and I would like to propose that we move to Committee Stage. Thank you. 

4.14
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (MS Justine Lumumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Leader of the Opposition and the shadow minister in charge of physical infrastructure, including physical planning. 

Madam Speaker, we have agreed. The Member was coming to give his side – why he had not signed the report – and to inform you that we have harmonised. 

So, in the spirit of capacity building, I suggest and pray that you give him the opportunity so that the Member airs out his view and we all build ourselves, as politicians. I thank you. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lumumba, once the Leader of the Opposition has spoken, he has spoken. He is an alternative Government. Hon. Anite wants to say something before the minister comes.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION AND INVESTMENT) (Ms Evelyn Anite): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have read the report. On page 3, the committee has done an excellent job of indicating the qualifications and role of the physical planners. However, I would like to propose that we should include penalties for physical planners in whose areas buildings collapse, because many times, when you engage in construction of a building, they give you the certification, but no supervision is done. 

Because of failure to supervise the construction works, there is usually lack of proper mason work done on those buildings, and at the end of the day, the buildings collapse. Whom do you blame for that? The physical planner who did not supervise –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, Hon. Anite is my very good friend -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, you want us, again, to leave this place at night? 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I beg that I give this information in the spirit of making sure that we have a formidable law. I was trying to give information that there may be a difference between what the physical planners do and what the structural engineers do. Therefore, I thought it would be very important that we understand it. Maybe the physical planners deal with the issue of land use, for example, where do we put the playgrounds and where do we put churches? 

THE SPEAKER: That is catered for.

MR AOGON: Thank you. We are just sharing information as comrades.

MS ANITE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Anite, please, conclude.

MS ANITE: Madam Speaker, I, therefore, would like to thank them that it has been catered for. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Privatisation and Investment. Hon. Bahati?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I just want to thank Members who have supported the Bill, and also make one clarification, as we move to committee stage. 

There is already a National Physical Planning Board that looks at the physical planning issues of the country. This Bill is about registration, controlling and penalising the physical planners themselves. For example, look at accountants, lawyers and doctors. We are now looking at the practitioners and making sure that we can control them. 

Madam Speaker, I think the House seems to be ready to move to committee stage. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2021” be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PHYSICAL PLANNERS’ REGISTRATION BILL, 2021

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill. 

Question put and agreed to.

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

4.20
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Kasolo): Madam Chairperson, in clause 2 on interpretation, we propose as follows:

a) Definition of “corporate member.”

Replace the definition of corporate member with the following: “corporate member” means a person who: 

(a) 	At the commencement of this act possesses a Degree in Physical Planning or other physical planning related qualification, with 10-years working experience as a physical planner in the public service; or

(b) 	After the commencement of this act, attains 10-years’ experience of practicing as a registered physical planner and is a holder of a certificate of recognition as such, issued by the society. 

Justification 

To ensure that a corporate member has the requisite experience and qualifications and is recognised by the society, which issues the certificate of recognition.

b) 	Definition of “institute” 

Delete the definition of “institute.” 

Justification 

The Uganda Institute of Physical Planners is a private company with individual shareholders. The law should not be enacted to take care of private interests.

c) 	Registered physical planner

Redraft the definition of the phrase “registered physical planner” as follows; “’Registered physical planner’ means a person whose name is duly entered into the register, and for the purposes of Part iv of this act, includes any person permitted to practice under section 13.” 

Justification 

The redraft makes the definition clearer in terms of who a registered physical planner is.

d) 	Definition of “Society” 

Insert a new definition of the word “society” immediately after the definition of the word “Registrar” as follows; 

“Society” means the society of professional physical planners established under this Act. 

Justification 

This is consequential to the amendment for the establishment of the Society of Professional Physical Planners of Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, Attorney-General.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, we accept much of the committee’s recommendations although with a few amendments. The amendments to “corporate member” to read: “At the commencement of this Act possesses a Degree in Physical Planning and other physical planning related qualifications with 10-years working experience as a physical planner.” to stop there and remove “in public service” so that we can take care of people in private and public service.

MR BALIMWEZO: Madam Chairperson, I propose that we delete the words “in public service” and the words “10-years” because it is such a long time for someone to be a corporate member. 

In (b), I propose that we replace the phrase “10-years” with “six years” experience of practicing as a registered physical planner for you to become a corporate member -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we have it redrafted by the Attorney- General?

MR BALIMWEZO: Madam Chairperson, 10 years can cause a lot of frustration. And therefore -  

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is understood, you are proposing years. Members, let us not behave like we are debating this. This is something that has been harmonised. By the time your Leader of the Opposition agrees on something – 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, with those amendments, we propose that it should read as follows: “‘Corporate member’ means a person who, at the commencement of this Act, possesses a Degree in Physical Planning or other physical planning related qualification, with six years working experience as a physical planner. Or after the commencement of this Act, attains six years’ experience of practising as a registered planner and is a holder of a Certificate of Recognition issued by the society.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the committee and further modified by the Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR KASOLO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 3 on the functions of the board, we peopose as follows:  

Insert, immediately after paragraph (g), the following new paragraph (h); “(h) To ensure and promote a high standard of education and training in the physical planning profession.” 

Justification 

This gives the board the function of ensuring that the physical planning profession adheres to high standards of education and training.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I agree to the proposal moved by the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 3 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR KASOLO: Madam Chairperson, in clause 4, membership of the board;

subclause 1(c); substitute the word “society” for the word, “institute”

Justification

This is consequential to the amendment on the establishment of the Society of Professional Physical Planners of Uganda.

subclause 1(d); substitute the word “society” for the word “institute.”

Justification

This is consequential to the amendment on the establishment of the Society of Professional Physical Planners of Uganda.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I do agree with the proposal of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nathan Byanyima, we are at Committee Stage. Instead of laughing, either say “aye” or “nay”. (Laughter) Your laughing can be interpreted as “nay” (Laughter)

Clause 6

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether we are reading from the same report as the chairperson. I quote from the report, “the Bill under clause 6 provides for the appointment of a registrar, who shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the board. But the committee observes that, that does not provide for the specification of the officer. The committee recommends that the Bill be amended to provide for the required qualifications for the registrar of the board.” 

However, the committee did not move to make particular recommendations or qualifications. May we hear from the chairperson whether this was an omission, or the Attorney-General has moved to make a particular proposition for the qualifications of the registrar of the board.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, we received the report with that comment, without any proposal. It was our Bill and we were happy with the way it is. So, we did not propose any specific qualification because it seemed to be more of an administrative function.  We did not provide a qualification for it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Especially after looking at the functions that are prescribed. It is an administrative position. I think that is why the committee never made any amendments. 

MR AOGON: Borrowing from what has been happening when we are legislating on other laws, even on tribunals, we have always prescribed the qualifications. For instance, we say somebody should be at the level of a high court judge. Therefore, this position particularly, is very critical. And we need to name the qualifications. We cannot leave it to space. You will find anybody there and the country will be in a mess.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam chairperson, we are happy to receive the proposals, but when I look at the functions that are here, they may not quite require a rocket scientist because you keep and maintain a register of physical planners, make necessary corrections and alterations in the register, receive the names of any person ordered to be removed, name the deceased person, incorrectly/fraudulently entered: the functions here were more clerical. 

When you go to the functions of the board, the function of the board itself further on, you will see a more technical input; that is where you require the technical person. The real surveyors in there - the real scientist. It may be a bit difficult for you to prescribe a job. It is clerical for the registrar in this case. Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition, that is why we did not propose any specific qualification.

MS ALUM: Madam Chairperson, I do not buy the argument of the Attorney-General because there are people who have studied this description that is being given to the registrar. For example, when you go to the library, there are people who register files and critically, when you look at this, this is their work. I thought at this point, maybe, we could give the qualifications for the officer who is needed to do this. 

You are saying anybody can do it, but when you look at 2(b), “make necessary alterations and corrections in the register concerning any entry as may be directed.” If somebody is not qualified, they can mess up the file which is given under the leadership of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Wouldn’t you be discriminating against other people if you said you want somebody with a BBA or some other qualification; because you can get a surveyor with managerial skills. There you would be discriminating against other people. Unless you are saying you want a qualification of a degree without specifying it.

MR AOGON: We do not want to see a situation where a senior four leaver is the one who is the registrar. So, I would buy your proposal. At least, let us say a degree holder or master’s degree level, but not to leave it open. Anybody can then take it up -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, make a proposal. 

MR AOGON: I, therefore, propose that the person to be registrar must have a minimum qualification of a degree.

MS ALUM: I think we have record officers who are trained in this country. I propose that the person in charge should have a degree in records, something like that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you should not discriminate against people like that.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, having listened to the Members, I propose that this be amended as follows -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Leader of the Opposition, what are you proposing? 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: We propose that the registrar appointed under subsection 1 shall be a person who shall hold a minimum qualification of a degree in the requisite field.

MR BWANIKA: Madam Chairperson, this is going to be a very unique law. In every profession, a registrar belongs to that profession. He is a person that runs the day-to-day work of that board.” You cannot bring someone, like a librarian, to run this board.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, make a suggestion. It is just like you saying that a Clerk to Parliament should be a Member of Parliament.

MR BWANIKA: No, it is different, Madam Chairperson. I am proposing that a registrar must be a holder of a degree in Physical Planning and must be a person at a senior level. A member of the profession.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, that cannot work.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, we need to be cognisant of the fact that the work being done here may require an MBA, a typist, stenographer - there are also professionals we have put in here who are registered assistants.

So, having a degree in the relevant field is good enough. When sending out the advert, you shall then mention the relevant field in that space. 

MR OLANYA: Madam Chairperson, maybe we add the degree and experience because it should not just be anyone who has qualified from a university who can have that job. We can talk of a minimum of a bachelor’s degree and a two years’ experience.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even if somebody is fresh from university, let him or her also go and get experience. Where is the school for experience? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6 be amended -

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, this matter is so sensitive; can we stand over it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not doing that. This is the issue of qualifications - just getting somebody with a degree; what is sensitive with it? 

I put the question that clause 6 be amended by providing for a minimum education qualification for a registrar as proposed by the Attorney-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR KASOLO: Redraft clause 11 as follows: “Conditions and qualification for registration: 

(1) 	A person is entitled to be registered and have his or her name entered in the register of registered physical planners or registered physical planning assistants, if he or she is a member of the society.

(2) 	An application under subsection (1) should be made to the board in the prescribed form and upon payment of a prescribed application fee.

(3) 	A person is qualified for registration as a registered physical planner if the board is satisfied that the applicant -

    a) is a holder of a bachelor’s or a graduate degree in either urban planning, regional planning, spatial planning, physical planning or other related qualification from a university or other institution recognised by the board;

    b) has not less than two years practical physical planning experience;

    c) has successfully undertaken a physical planning project under the supervision of a registered physical planner for not less than six months;

    d) has a certificate of recognition as a graduate physical planner issued by the society.

(4) 	A person is qualified for registration as a registered physical planning assistant if the board is satisfied with the applicant that -

(a)	is a holder of a diploma either in urban planning, regional planning, spatial planning, physical planning or other related qualification from a university or other institution recognised by the board;

(b) 	has not less than two years practical physical planning experience;

(c) 	has successfully undertaken a physical planning project under the supervision of a registered physical planner for not less than six months;

(d) 	has a certificate of recognition as a graduate physical planning assistant issued by the society.

 (5) 	Save for the requirements of certificate of recognition as a graduate physical planner issued by the society, a holder of a doctorate of philosophy in the field of either urban planning, regional planning, spatial planning, physical planning or other related qualification from a university or other institution recognised by the board, shall be qualified for registration as a registered physical planner without further need to satisfy the board as to the requirement under section 2.”

Justification: 

    i) To provide clear requirements for registration as a registered physical planner or registered physical planning assistant.

    ii) To include the professional project requirement before registration.

    iii) To exempt a PhD holder from prescribed requirements given the level of academic rigour involved in attaining a doctorate in physical planning.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we had a chat with the chairperson of the committee, and we are agreeable with the amendment that he is proposing.

MR IDDI ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, I am not comfortable with the word “experience”; we do not have a school that teaches experience. So let us remove the word “experience” and leave -

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is professional experience; you must have worked somewhere.

MR AOGON: My concern is about our presence in the East African Community as of now; you know that we are trying to look for opportunities in other countries, like the DRC. Is there anything that you have put in this law that can help us to widen our opportunities?

For instance, I do not know whether there is a law that handles registration of our physical planners in the East African Community so that they are able to –(Interjection)– yes, we are widening and deepening the market; so I need a comment on that.

MR KASOLO: Madam Chairperson, we are formalising physical planning, but already it had such structures in East Africa and Africa. We consulted some of them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR KASOLO: Insert a new clause after clause 12 as follows: “Recognition of a corporate member: A person who qualifies as a corporate member may apply in the prescribed form and upon payment of the prescribed application fee to the society, for a certificate of recognition as such.”

Justification

To cater for the involvement of the society which fraternises the professional guild or physical planners in determining who among the physical planners qualifies as a corporate member. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we agree with the new insertion in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that the new clause be inserted immediately after clause 12, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, inserted.

MR MPUUGA: I need to seek the comfort of the learned Attorney-General and the chairperson on clause 13. I think we are on the same page. Clause 13 is about temporary registration. I would like to know whether we would be comfortable with the provision in clause 13(1)(b) “…furnishing sufficient guarantee of academic knowledge and practical experience in physical planning.” How do you want to deal with this possibly apparent ambiguity on what amounts to “sufficient knowledge” and how the same can be qualified? I need to really get your -

The second issue is the silence of that clause on the duration of this temporary certificate that is issued upon such approval. Is the temporality eternal? Would you want to propose something to give it more credence? 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I wouldn’t buy into the issue of having temporary certifications. This is a serious field and I thought we would just delete that clause and allow people who are registered and qualified to work. 

This issue of temporary and the like - these are the people who will mess up the job in the field. By the time you are seeking their qualification properly, they have already messed up the whole thing. I propose that we delete that and we go with people who are known officially. Thank you.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, first of all, the answer to the Leader of the Opposition is yes. “Furnishing sufficient guarantee of academic knowledge” are normally the certification, but you should come along with a membership from your country. 

Therefore, the membership registration from your country plus your academic qualification should give us the cover that you are qualified. (Interjections) Let me finish. The period is not exceeding one year or such sufficient time and this is provided for.

On the issue of removal, I think the Member may be contradicting what we just discussed in the East African Community. It may actually be outright illegal for you to temporarily stop people from other countries within the region to work here. It is against the East African Community.

What this does, is that it allows the professionals who come from other countries to be regulated here. So, your board knows that there is a surveyor here and there, who has come from another country. Otherwise, we shall have people who are using the free movement through the community, for example, come from Tanzania, conduct work in Uganda and leave. If they build in the road you have no one to deal with. Actually, this is about getting that person while they are here and regulated by the body.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Once one has a temporary registration, you can easily revoke it if you are not satisfied with what the person does. That is really okay. It is just like giving these TVs and radios temporary licences.

MR AOGON: Much obliged, Madam Chairperson. Now the issue is the mechanism of accrediting them. It should be made clear. I do not think the board has capacity. Is it the National Council of Education? Can we provide a credible mechanism?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now that is another clause. Let us move clause by clause. The problem is that you are running very fast. I now put the question that clause 13 stands part of the Bill? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14 

MR MPUUGA: Learned Attorney-General, I want to believe we are reading the same document. Clause 14(2) is on the issuance of certificates upon registration. 

What I see only captures the physical planners. I do not see the physical planning assistants captured here. The physical planning assistants are key stakeholders and the legal regime needs to make provision for their protection as well at issuance of certificates. Can we harmonise that by way of rephrasing so that they are captured and then we move on? Thank you.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Clause 14(2) reads: “A person whose name has been entered in the register under sections 11(a), 12 or 13 shall, so long as his or her name remains in the register, and subject to section 17, be entitled to adopt and use the style and title ‘physical planner’….” 

The physical assistant is issued under section 12. If he/she has gotten that certification he/she is entitled to call himself/herself, for purposes of this Act, a physical planner. That is what we are saying. 

The rationale was to keep a space because once you enter this space of regulation, whether you are a physical planner or physical planning assistant, you will commit the same offences and you will be held to the same high standard. We do not have a separate standard for a physical planner and a physical planning assistant. The moment you get here, you are entitled to use the name “physical planner” after your registration. This is just for titles.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 14 stands part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR ROBERT KASOLO: Insertion of a new part: Insert the following new part immediately after clause 17(6) and before Part IV, and then number accordingly as follows:

“Part IV: Establishment of the Society of Professional Physical Planners of Uganda 

Establishment of the Society 

(1)	There is established a society to be known as the Society of Professional Physical Planners of Uganda.

(2)	The society shall be a body corporate with the perpetual succession and common seal and shall be capable of suing and being sued in its corporate name and, subject to this Act, may borrow money, acquire and dispose of property and do all such other things as a body corporate may lawfully do.

(3) 	The society shall be a member-led voluntary professional association of professional physical planners of Uganda.
 
(4) 	The seal of the society shall be authenticated by the signatures of the President of the Society and the Secretary to the Executive Council. 

Membership 

(1) 	A person who qualifies to be registered as a Registered Physical Planner under this Act, and who applies for membership, shall be admitted as a member of the Society of Professional Physical Planners. 

(2) 	The Commissioner Physical Planning in the ministry responsible for physical planning, and the Chairperson of the National Physical Planning Board, shall be ex-officio members of the Executive Council.

Annual member admission fees 

Members of the Society of Professional Physical Planners shall pay such annual member admission fees as may be prescribed by the society, save that the initial annual member admission to the society shall be free of charge. 

Functions of the Society

The functions of the Society are: 

(1) 	To promote and protect the interests of the physical planning profession; 

(2) 	To promote and maintain a high standard of professional ethics among members of the physical planning profession; 

(3) 	To provide programmes that support the professional interests of physical planners;

(4) 	To do all such lawful acts as may be incidental or conducive to the promotion and carrying out of the physical planning profession; 

(5) 	To nominate representatives from the society to the board; and

(6) 	To issue certificates of recognition as pursuant to the provisions of this Act.

Executive Council of the Society 

(1) 	There is established the Executive Council of the Society as the governing body responsible for the supervision of the affairs of the society. 

(2) 	The Executive Council shall consist of the following -

(a)  	the president; 
(b)  	the secretary; 
(c)  	the treasurer; and 
(d)  four council members; elected by the members of the Society at a general meeting. 

(3) 	The Commissioner Physical Planning in the Ministry responsible for Physical Planning and the Chairperson of the National Physical Planning Board shall be ex-officio members of the Executive Council.

(4) 	The minister shall, within six months of the coming into force of this Act, appoint an interim executive council, which shall organise the inaugural general meeting of the society within 12 months of its appointment at which the first executive council shall be elected. 

Tenure of office

A member of the Executive Council other than an ex-officio member shall hold office– 

(a) 	in the first instance, for a period not exceeding three years; and
 
(b) 	shall be eligible for re-election only for a subsequent period not exceeding three years. 

Certificate of recognition

The society may, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue to an applicant a certificate of recognition as a graduate physical planner or graduate physical planning assistant if the society is satisfied that the applicant is a holder of a bachelor’s or postgraduate degree or diploma in urban planning, regional planning, spatial planning, physical planning or other related qualifications respectively, from a university or other institution recognised by the board. 

Delegation of functions 

For proper management of the Society of Professional Physical Planners, the Executive Council may appoint committees and other officers to carry out delegated functions.” 

The justification:

    1. Just like is applicable in the medical, architectural, pharmacy, accountancy, engineering, surveying and legal professions, this will ensure physical planners associate in an organised manner as professionals of Uganda.

    2. The right to associate is constitutional. 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to propose a small amendment to Part IV (3), which reads: 
“The society shall be a member-led voluntary association of professionals and physical planners of Uganda.” 

I want to propose that, “The society shall be a member-led…” Delete “voluntary”. It should read, “… a member-led professional association of professional physical planners of Uganda.” That means every physical planner must be a member of this association in order for everyone to be under the control of the association. I beg to move. Thank you.

MR AOGON: I was a little worried. We have talked a lot about the physical planners’ society as though we are dealing with the Physical Planning Act. Now, if we decide to put a lot of these prescriptions – the details about the society – are we not taking away their right, as a society, to deal with their matters? 

If we go back to the objects of this Bill, I do not know whether we are not deviating from the main purpose of the Bill. I thought we should be stopping at a certain level. For instance, he is saying, “There must be a society which is member-led” and leave it at that. However, we are going into it to even prescribe who should be there. Are we ready to provide all that money? I thought there was some financial implication on that.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you very much. This Bill is not out of the ordinary in any profession. The exercise of rights is under control. You go to school, study law – like I did for four years and then I am told that for me to practise, I must have a practising certificate, I must go and become a member of the Uganda Law Society and I must go and renew it every year, I must be inspected and if I am indisciplined, that law council can dismiss me from the bar. That is what we are dealing with here; that you can practise, but let your peers check what you do.
 
It will be a bit difficult if you required the lawyer to go and check whether the physical planner acted professionally, but his peer could be able to do that. That is what we are dealing with. I think we are well within the ordinary limits. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the proposed new part be inserted immediately after clause 17, with the amendment from the Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MR KASOLO: Clause 18: Disciplinary Committee   

Subclause (1) (b) 

Redraft subclause (1) (b) as follows: 

“(b) four persons appointed by the board on recommendation of the society.” 

The justifications are: 

    1. To involve the society in the appointment of the members of the disciplinary committee. 

    2. To avoid conflict of interest by ensuring that the disciplinary committee is not entirely constituted from the board members.

MR OLANYA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, I thought the board acts on behalf of the society. I feel that what is in the old Bill is more appropriate. It should be “four persons appointed by the board from among the members” because the board acts on behalf of the society. 

Why do you want to remove the powers of the board, yet the board is there on behalf of the society? Let it be, “four persons appointed by the board from among the members”. Once the board has given their opinion, it is final because they are acting on behalf of the society.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, we concede to this position from the Government side. You have two scenarios; you have a board, which can become a god unto itself and becomes non-responsive to the members themselves. Therefore, you can have board capture. by introducing people who are appointed - because the chairperson is from the board, but the members, in their meeting, choose four people to go and discipline them. That kind of thing brings a balance between the two; you will not have board capture.

This is not out of the ordinary. I know the accountants board at least does that. The Law Society does that; the Law Society elects two people who represent it on that council for discipline. So, most of the professional bodies have representatives from amongst themselves, who sit on the committee. Thank you.

MS BETTY NAMBOOZE:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like the Attorney-General to give me clarification on why we are opting for a disciplinary committee instead of setting up a tribunal or a body with judicial functions. In my simple understanding, it sounds as if a disciplinary committee is a weaker entity than a tribunal.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: We can call it a tribunal, a court, a committee, but its functions will remain the same. In addition, here, a committee is what is commonly used in spaces of professional bodies; they use committees because it is normally a committee of their own peers. However, the word will not change anything here. They will have the same powers as what the tribunal would have, or what the court would have. I propose that we leave it as it is; it will perform the function as is expected of it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Betty Nambooze, it is like setting up a disciplinary committee for MPs without the recommendation of the Parliamentary Commission. I now put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, again, seeking the comfort of the learned Attorney-General, because clause 29 is about providing for the commencement of proceedings against a person in a court of law in similar matters, which have been or are being considered under the committee. Aren’t we dealing with a situation of double jeopardy and potentially delving into miscarriage of justice? How do you reconcile this? A matter is in court, yet still under consideration by the committee; kindly feed me with your guidance.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. This has been litigated extensively in our jurisdiction, and the courts have found, without reservations, that the function of the disciplinary committee is different from the functions of a court. For example, if you are being charged with corruption in the criminal court, you are required to prove beyond reasonable doubt. However, in the tribunal, it is on the balance; it is a much lower standard. 

Therefore, the court could find you guilty and the tribunal can also find you guilty; but could be different the other way round; they have litigated this. However, it created a great deal of paralysis, and I think the courts came out to assist us resolve that. What would happen is that once a disciplinary proceeding started, then the court was stopped from going on, and once court started, disciplinary activities stopped. 

Therefore, if a person is in an office, and a criminal trial is taking three years, and they are accused of fraud; that is complicated. Yet in our law, the committee there should deal with a matter of that nature within six months. There is no contradiction legally. This has been litigated and resolved extensively by the courts and even the highest court now has pronounced itself. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are an accountant; these are matters of the law. I put the question that clause 29 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, on these matters, even paralegals should have their say. On clause 31, I am seeking the attention of the learned Attorney-General; probably, it is a question of drafting. However, clause 31 says, “The board may, with the authority of the Accountant-General, open unlimited bank accounts...” 

Is opening an account discretionary or do we need to change the coaching of this phrase, because how do you deal with the accounts or the funds of the agency if opening a bank account is coached “discretionary”? Do you want to change the coaching of this particular clause?

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: You are correct. Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. I think we should redraft it to read, “The board shall, with the authority of...” I, therefore, propose that clause 31(1) be amended to read, “The board shall, with the authority of the Accountant-General, open and maintain bank accounts other than necessary for the performance of the functions of the board.” I beg to move. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed by the Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR MPUUGA: Again, it could be a matter of drafting. Madam Chairperson, the powers of the registrar is to alter the register. These powers seem to be wide-ranging and it might give leeway to the registrar to deal with the register as they deem it fit. Would it be pleasing to you, learned Attorney-General, to qualify these powers with the authority of the board to deal with the register? If we leave these powers to the registrar alone, then you might deal with issues later because there is no qualification to the powers of the registrar to deal with the register.

It should be the board or the disciplinary committee sitting and probably, dealing with a member whose matters have been dealt with. To qualify these powers should be upon the decision and guidance of the board or disciplinary committee that such alterations should be effected.

You may also want to deal with clause 37(2) at the same time, honourable chair and learned Attorney-General, for notices to members who are suspiciously believed to have quit the profession. There is silence about the mode of communication. I want to propose that it should be – because we are dealing with effective communication - either through the Gazette or a newspaper of wide circulation in clause 37(2). I think that the learned Attorney-General has picked it and can advise. 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, yes, we have two mixed up functions here; the ones that should be routine and the ones that would require some intellectual or actual input. 

So, I propose that we do amend clause 37(1) to read as follows: “(a)The registrar may make any correction in the register as may be necessary with the approval of the board.” 

(b) Should remain as it is: “remove from the register the name of a deceased physical planner” because that does not require any intellectual exercise. 

“(c) Remove from the register the name of a physical planner whose name has been ordered to be removed under this Act.” So, if the registrar has the order, he can remove it, he does not need anyone’s intervention.

“(d) With the consent of the physical planner concerned, remove from the register the name of a physical planner who has ceased to practice.” That also does not need any intervention. 

So, the proposal is to add to clause 37(1)(a) at the end “with the approval of the board.” Therefore, where it is not clear what exactly you are supposed to exercise, we should say, “with the approval of the board”. 

For clause 37(2) it reads, “Where the registrar has reason to believe that a registered physical planner has ceased to practice, he or she may send to the physical planner a notice seeking clarification on whether the physical planner has ceased to practice in Uganda; if no reply is received –” 

I would like to propose that “shall send a notice to the physical planner’s last known address and publish the same in the Gazette.” As professionals, when we register, you must have an address. So, if we send it to the last known address and publish it in the Gazette – So, I would propose that we redraft it to read as follows:

“Where the registrar has reason to believe that a registered physical planner has ceased to practice, he or she may send to the physical planner at the last known address a notice, and publish a notice in the Gazette, seeking clarification on whether the physical planner has ceased to practice in Uganda, and if no reply is received by the registrar within six months from the date of the notice, the registrar shall remove from the register, the name of the physical planner.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed by the Attorney-General.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR ALLAN MAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, the committee made some proposals that the Bill should increase the fine payable by an offender to one hundred currency points. 

I agree with the report; however, my concern is on the kind of punishment given to the culprits who may have slept on their duty. For instance, when a building collapses and claims lives, I would propose that the imprisonment be more than two years, and instead be 10 years such that it becomes a lesson to others not to joke around with construction and people’s lives. Otherwise, what we are experiencing in Kampala and other cities is bribery and negligence by physical planners fuelled by the rich.

THE CHAIRPERSON: These are the physical planners and not the engineers who do the real construction of the work. Attorney-General? 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, I think you have answered the question appropriately. However, we also need to be careful here; if you do something which causes the death of another person, that is manslaughter. So, you are charged under the Penal Code for manslaughter, the penalty for which is life in prison. So, if you put it here and reduce it, you may be contradicting the Penal Code. That is a different offence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I put the question that clause 43 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45 

MR KASOLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 45(2): Insert a new paragraph (b) as follows and re-number accordingly. “(b) The conduct of the affairs of the society including election guidelines for the executive council of the society, financial regulation of the society and other related matters.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we do agree with the chair of the committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 45 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to

Clause 47

MR KASOLO: Madam Chairperson, clause 47, transition: re-draft the clause as follows: “Whereupon the coming into force of this Act, a person is qualified to apply for registration as a registered physical planner or registered physical planning assistant, that person shall be entitled to continue to practise as a registered physical planner or registered physical planning assistant upon issuance of a six-months interim registration certificate issued by the minister.”

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we concur with the committee chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 47 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have noted that whereas the committee proposed an amendment to clause 2, the correct clause that was to be amended was clause 1 (on interpretation). I, therefore, invite the chairman to make a correction accordingly so that we put it on record. That was on interpretation. 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Madam Chairperson, the report reads clause 2. But what was being amended was clause 1. The amendments that were read were the amendments to “a corporate member”; “A corporate member means:

a) 	A person at the commencement of this Act possesses a degree in physical planning, or other physical planning related qualification with six years’ working experience or as a physical planner. 

b) 	After commencement of this Act, attains six years’ experience of practising as a registered planner, physical planner and is a holder of a certificate of recognition from the society.” 

It was then deleting the definition of “institute”, which was a consequential amendment as a result of renaming it “society”.

Then it was introducing “registered planner” immediately after the definition of “planning assistant”. “Registered physical planner means a person whose name is duly entered in the register and for the purposes of Part IV of this Act, includes any person permitted to practice under Section 13.” 

It was then deleting “registered physical planner” and giving that definition, and then introducing “society” immediately after “registrar” to mean “a Society of Professional Physical Planners established under this Act.” 

That was the proposal that had been made by the committee. Government wished to only introduce an amendment to the definition of “register”. “Register” means “the register of physical planners and planning assistants kept under clause 8 of this Act.” (Interjection) The shadow minister introduced six years so I have read the whole amendment as it were.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you, Attorney-General. I now put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: For avoidance of doubt, we have amended clause 1 and not clause 2.

Schedule 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that schedule 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 1, agreed to.

Schedule 2

MR MPUUGA: Maybe I am overzealous or suspicious, Madam Chairperson. But we try to legislate for posterity. Providing for board meetings: My concern is relating to the provision on the validity of proceedings that, “any defect in appointment of a board member should not affect the proceedings of the board.”

For me, this is a bit of a lacuna in the law; it is a form of  smooth way in which people who do not qualify will take up appointments. After all, the appointing authority is in a way exonerated. 

Madam Chairperson, my proposal would be that this lacuna can be bridged. There should be dire consequences for people who take up appointments by manipulating systems once detected, because it simply says that it will not affect board proceedings. 

My feeling is that the learned Attorney-General would probably, by way of amending – I am just looking at it right here. I am not coming up with a very clear amendment. But I am very uncomfortable with a plain statement that a wrong appointment will not affect board proceedings. 

So, if somebody is not qualified, they will take up an appointment comfortably until it is detected. He will get away with anything well aware that they are not qualified. Can we draw from the experience of the learned Attorney-General, so that we do not leave a lacuna in which fraudsters and their accomplices will exploit?

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. That is a conundrum, which we must continue to look at and try and find a solution to, because you are dealing with two ills. If you cancel the work of the board, then all the work they have done until the time you have made the discovery has been wasted. We are mindful of that. And this is also in the Interpretation Act. 

We will probably need to go back and deal with the principles that we dealt with, but you are right. Any person who does that fraudulently commits an offence. I can tell you about 10 offences. These are: obtaining money by false pretence, making false misrepresentation, etc. There are many offences you can get them for.

Madam Chairperson, the purpose of this clause is normally to protect the work that has been done because you may find that out of seven members, it is one person with a problem and the other six are okay. You are correct, it is a problem, but I beg that we leave it here, until such a time when we are sure on how to deal with this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is also in the Administration of Parliament Act, especially to do with the Commission. I put the question that schedule 2 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 2, agreed to.

Schedule 3

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, Schedule 3 provides for the procedure of the disciplinary committee; particularly, Schedule 3(1) and (2) provides for the timeframe of communicating to the accused person the complaint and the hearing days.

The gap I envisage is that there is no timeframe in which defence must be filed and this can be abused. You will communicate to me the nature of the complaint against me and say we are hearing from you on Monday. May we borrow from civil procedure to make a clear provision on communicating days for filing a defence by the accused? Short of that, we could be sauntering into a violation of a right to a fair hearing.

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, it is provided for. Schedule 3(2) says, “The physical planner or planning assistant against whom a complaint is made shall be given a copy of the relevant documents at least seven days before the date fixed for the hearing to enable him or her to file a reply to the complaint” and the date of hearing is 14 days. So, you have seven days within which to file. 

Madam Chairperson, the understanding is that you must give this person the complaint at least seven days before the hearing. If you make them very strict - some people do not want to use lawyers; others want to do it themselves. Also, the informality allows them to even come forward and say, “Yes, I agree I made a mistake here and there”. You may want to keep it flexible, but within the six months as possible.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, I understand the explanation. Probably, we may have to concur with the Attorney-General about the substantiality of the time. Would you want to enlarge it to 14 days?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Fourteen days is okay.

MR MPUUGA: I am trying to interpret what is written - Communication is within seven days -

THE CHAIRPERSON: …and hearing is 14 days. That is sufficient. I put the question that schedule 3 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 3, agreed to.

Schedule 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that schedule 4 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Schedule 4, agreed to.

The Title 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the title stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: There is clarification the Attorney-General would like to make.

MR KIRYOWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to make clarification and sincerely apologise to the House. When I was answering to the Leader of the Opposition’s question on clause 14(2), I did state that the use of the name “physical planner” includes a “planning assistant”. It actually excludes a “planning assistant”. Clauses 11(a), 12 and 13, deal with qualified physical planners. So, it excludes “planning assistant”. I sincerely apologise for that. Thank you very much.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking procedural guidance whether it is not proper that, that amendment comes by way of recommittal since it is already captured. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not an amendment; he has already made a correction that when he was communicating to the Leader of the Opposition’s question, he made a mistake. By the way, Hon. Silas is an accountant.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding-_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2021” and passed it with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

5.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the House adopts the Report of the Committee of the whole House.

(Question put and greed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PHYSICAL PLANNERS’ REGISTRATION BILL, 2021

5.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2021” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2021, be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PHYSICAL PLANNERS’ REGISTRATION BILL, 2022”

THE SPEAKER: Titled settled and Bill passes. Congratulations, Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. I also want to congratulate the chairperson, the committee members and the Attorney-General with his team.

I would like to thank the borrowed Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Hon. Bahati, who lent his services. I also thank our Government Chief Whip, Hon. Lumumba, for the mobilisation, the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition for being alert.
(Applause) 

Hon. Silas, thank you for being an accountant. (Laughter) All the Members of Parliament I, sincerely, would like to thank you for passing this very important Bill. 

I request all Members who still have Bills in their committees to bring them and we finalise with them before we close the financial year. We must make a record that we have enough Bills. Attorney-General, this is your time. We must make a record and have the Bills processed by this House. 

Thank you, Atat, for saying “nay” all the time. (Laughter) Hon. Betty, thank you for your contribution to the “nays”. I would like to thank the whole House and I, therefore –(Member rose_) - Prime Minister’s Time? I am tired. (Laughter) 

5.48
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Lumumba): Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of Government, to thank you because we have passed an important Bill that will help us to streamline the work of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, especially in the area of physical and urban planning. 

I would also like to thank Members, in a special way. Yesterday, the Members accorded this Parliament and country a lot of time and were able to handle all the committee reports and conclude when it was coming to 10 o’clock. On behalf of Government, I would like to say thank you to the chairpersons of the committees, members of the committees, the Speaker – in a special way – and the clerks. 

I would also like to thank, in a special way, the Leader of the Opposition and all the shadow ministers –(Applause)- for being so active, both in the committees and here. Let us continue working together and building consensus, as a team, as we serve this country. Thank you very much. 

However, honourable members, remember that we are still in the budget process. So, now that we are moving to the next stage, we will require your much attention and presence. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

5.49
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of my chairperson, we would like to thank Members for supporting us – the physical infrastructure committee – and passing this Bill.

However, as we move into the weekend, I would like to raise this matter that has been brought to my attention about a woman called Alexandria Marinos, 29 years, who has twice been kidnapped from her home in Mbuya. She was first kidnapped or arrested by some men in a drone on 30 March 2022, and kept in unknown places, beaten, gang-raped and released after three days. 

Madam Speaker, on Easter Monday, this lady was again picked from her home by the same people, taken to an unknown place – because she was blindfolded – gang-raped and beaten. I have very ugly photos of this lady. If you see them, you can’t believe them. The whole body has wounds.

She alleges that a one Erias Ssengoba and another, Ali Hassan, were her kidnappers and they are believed to be members of the security forces –(Interjection) - I said “it is alleged”.

Madam Speaker, it is extremely unfortunate that we have such incidences happening in our country. Why would you pick a woman from her house, rape and handcuff her? Ordinary people cannot handcuff – these must be people within the security circles. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I request you to ask the Minister for Internal Affairs to come and report because this lady has even gone to Kinawataka Police Station and it is alleged that the police refused to take her statement. So, the Minister for Internal Affairs would help us in stating what happened.

Otherwise, as UWOPA, we are not happy with this kind of state of affairs.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Opendi, thank you for the information. For us, what touches one woman touches all the women and, of course, when it touches the woman, it affects the men. The minister should come to this House on Tuesday and report on what happened, what action they have taken and what preventive measures they are taking to avoid such things from –(Ms Ogwal rose_)- Yes? We need to know what happened because - Let Hon. Lumumba first give us - 

5.52
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Lumumba): Madam Speaker, I am sorry that I came in before you concluded, but I did so to put the prayer to the Member who has raised this issue to cooperate with the Minister in charge of Internal Affairs. What she has given may not be enough for the minister to make a statement here. However, if she cooperates, she can lead the minister to the victim and those individuals so that we can get proper information and have a detailed report presented here. That is the prayer I wanted to make.

THE SPEAKER: Provide the information to the minister and the Attorney-General because these are things that cause him problems. They start torturing the people left, right and centre and at the end of the day, the person to respond is Attorney-General. 

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will certainly pass on the information –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are starting a debate – I left this House at 10.00 p.m. last evening. I now adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.54 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 26 April 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 

