Tuesday, 1 April 2014 
 
Parliament met at 2.32 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
  
PRAYERS 

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)
 
The House was called to order. 
 
COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this sitting. I wish to inform you that Kamuli District has had a severe rain storm on 29 March this year that ravaged six sub-counties of Bulawuli, Namasagali, Wankole, Kisozi, Bulabumbya and Nawanyago affecting 25 zones, 2,000 people, 600 households, with crops, animals and shelters destroyed. Five people died from the storm and eight schools and two churches were affected leaving UPE pupils stranded after the storm erased the school and in some cases, blew off the rooftops of those installations. The district disaster management committee is compiling a detailed cost of the loss occasioned by this disaster. 

Meanwhile, they are requesting for immediate interventions in the following way: provision of foodstuffs and household utensils, posho, beans, basins, provision of blankets and temporal shelters. Make-shift tents for the affected schools to re-roof the affected schools, hydro-form machines to help in construction and planting materials especially in maize and beans. 

The people of Kamuli are also grateful for what the government has been able to do so far but certainly, more assistance is required to help reduce the suffering of the people in Kamuli District as of now. Hon. Members, we stand with the people of Kamuli in this difficult time that they have gone through. Thank you. 

2.36
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance that touches on the life, survival and future of this country. The Forum for Democratic Change is the official opposition party in this country. They participated in the elections; it is recognised by the law of the land and equally recognised in this House as the official opposition. 

Just a few days ago, the leader of this party, Rtd Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu who all of you know is a high profile individual, a respectable person, a man of integrity, a man among many who stands tall – you cannot point at him in any form of vice unlike many other Ugandans who have served in such high positions. He served for eight and a half years as the Army Chief of this country without any dent in his record. 

Mr Speaker, I am saddened to note that to the humiliation of Ugandans, the humiliation of the leaders of the Opposition in the country and the humiliation of the party, Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu was pulled out – I call it plucked out of a radio station in Kabale –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order and I am reluctant to do this because the person I am calling to order is a senior colleague of mine. Hon. Okumu knows that this matter of brutalisation of the Opposition is not new in this House. Several times our leaders have been rounded-up, beaten and incarcerated unfairly by the police force; nothing has been done to address this behaviour of the police. 

Is he, therefore, in order to speak to people who have chosen to block their ears to the cries of the Opposition –(Laughter)– to people who chose to turn a blind eye to what is happening across the country; to a government that does not even care to come to Parliament to listen to the crying of the people; the frontbench is empty. No elected leader of the cabinet is seated in the House today to respond to the case and other cases similar to what hon. Reagan is concerned about. 

Is hon. Okumu in order to waste the valuable time of Parliament in addressing a government that has chosen to block their ears; a government that has chosen not to respond to the cries of the people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, hon. Okumu is not in order at all, I stop him from further speaking –(Laughter)– is that what you wanted? Honourable member, I thank you for making your contribution on the matter being raised by hon. Reagan Okumu. Please continue. 

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, what I am raising is a very important issue especially when this country is in transition – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you say transition?

MR OKUMU: Yes, we are transitioning; we are about to go for elections that will transit this country from one leader to another; and every Ugandan is expectant. But today, the physical brutality by men in uniforms who are paid by the taxpayers of this country; abusing the uniform, abusing the flag of this country; abusing the weapons that we bought to protect the lives and properties of all Ugandans and more importantly abusing the State – Mr Speaker, we are saddened as the side of the Opposition because when you listen to the actions of the police, they are collecting political intelligence fitting the ruling party. Where on earth would you ever find an institution of the State collecting intelligence for a political party? 

Mr Speaker, I request in the absence of the Leader of Government Business that this matter be responded to with the urgency it requires. 

Otherwise, this should also serve as a warning to Ugandans that there will be no time for you to think that you will continue beating one side without any response. This country belongs to all of us. Nobody owns it. Nobody should tell you that any individual owns this country. The country belongs to us and we are all shareholders. Therefore, this must serve as a warning to Government that we are not going to sit by. We shall stand firm and tolerate but to a limit and we will respond with the same language they are employing today. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Okumu. Hon. Members, I can see the Attorney-General walking in. Honourable leaders on the frontbench, I hope you have heard the concerns raised by the hon. Okumu on the case of the President of the Forum for Democratic Change on how he was treated in Kabale.

Since the Minister of Internal Affairs is present, would you like to say something on this subject? This relates to the issue that happened to Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu while in Kabale where he was removed from a radio station while appearing on a talk show. That is the issue that was raised as an urgent matter of public importance. Do you have something to say, minister?

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I know my senior minister was contacted about this matter. This morning, he informed me that he was making arrangements to meet all leaders in the Opposition to discuss a number of issues. I believe all these issues will be addressed in that context. This meeting is supposed to take place in the shortest time possible. That is the information I have for now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Will you have the opportunity to brief the House on the progress of that?

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, I believe so.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is promising that his boss will be meeting leaders of all political parties to address this mater. But the minister is aware that while this is going on, media houses were instructed not to host members of the Opposition without any legitimate explanation.

So, can the minister tell us whether even media house owners and managers will be part of this meeting to know why they have been stopped from hosting members of the Opposition and under what law was this done? Can he clarify on that? (Mr Amuriat rose_)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, can I just say one thing to the minister?
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. Let me take on the Member from Kumi. Please, let us process it in an orderly way.

MR AMURIAT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek some clarification from the Minister of State for Internal Affairs about what discussions will actually take place. Will the decisions be about the impunity of the police force? I am asking this because the Kasese or Kabale event is just a tip of the iceberg of what happens. 

You know that prior to the events that took place in Tororo, leaders of political parties went around the country popularising some agenda. And it was only when they got to Mbale that they were brutally beaten up and sprayed with teargas. This continued through Soroti, Kabale and most recently, in Kasese. Can’t the minister actually tell the House why this kind of brutality is taking place? 

As hon. Okumu has said, Ugandans are now running out of patience. They cannot continue being beaten and they fold their arms to run away from the police any more. They are bound to react. However, before this kind of reaction takes place, I think it is necessary for Government to put itself to order by coming to address these issues squarely.

We are not being alarmists. What we are raising is a reality that is unfolding on the ground. And if the police officers cannot respect an Army General - The Army General is pulled off a radio talk show? Actually, he was beaten and almost stripped naked by the police. This is de-humanising. Where is the respect for the rule of law in this country?

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I stand to seek your guidance on whether this, in the same way, encompasses the rights of Members of Parliament doing work in their constituencies. Last weekend, the RPC told me I was not supposed to meet my people and he said that while waving a copy of the Public Order Management Act. But I recall that in that Bill, we excluded leaders. 

So, I am wondering whether the minister could also talk about that as far as reaching out to our people as leaders is concerned. That will help us to pronounce ourselves on the execution of our mandate as leaders.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, again, I am at pain when I listen to the minister. I am wondering whether he has the capacity to - you know the issue I raised is straightforward. How can a police officer walk into a radio station, pull out – leave alone any Ugandan, but pull out a leader of a political party? Under what law; under what mandate; what have you done to such a police officer? Are you boldly coming here to say that the matter is going to be discussed? How can you discuss criminality? Police must act. Have you, for example, arrested the police officer who walked into the studio? What have you done to him? You should not continue taking Ugandans for granted. Stand warned, Mr Minister and tell your Government that they are warned. You can no longer take us for a ride.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, what hon. Amuriat raised is what hon. Osege raised last week. As I said, we are in the process of coming here to give a comprehensive response to that issue relating to what happened in Mbale and Soroti. This morning, my senior minister and I were in the Speaker’s Office and agreed that we will issue this statement on Thursday.

As to all the other issues raised here, I am informing my senior colleague. It is time we met with leaders of Opposition and discussed these issues for a way forward.

As to what the police are doing, the police are mandated under the Police Act and the Constitution to do their work. (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Order, Mr Speaker. I know the honourable minister is a minister of Government and not an elected Member of Parliament though he is a Member of Parliament. So, he does not understand the pain that elected leaders go through when damage is being inflicted on them.

Is the minister, therefore, in order to mislead this House and the country at large that the police have got a right under the Police Act to pull people out of radio station studios? Under what law? Please, lay it on Table because we shall take you by your word. What section of the Police Act did the policemen employ to enter into a radio station in Kabale to pull out the President of FDC? Under what law?

Is he, therefore, in order to mislead this House and to continue speaking when he does not have any powers? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, Article 212 of the Constitution outlines what the functions of the Uganda Police Force are; to protect life and property, to preserve law and order, to prevent and detect crime, to cooperate with civilian authority and other securityorgans established under this Constitution and with the population generally.

What I heard the hon. Minister say, the police have the right and mandate to protect law and order. As for the extension that has been articulated by the hon. Member, the minister had not reached that point. So, I do not know whether he was going to say that.

MS ALASO: Hon. Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to just inform this House that from the Opposition political leaders’ perspective and the civil society coalition for electoral reform, we have written to the Minister of Internal Affairs together with the IGP; for the last one week, we have been begging them to accord the leaders an opportunity.

When the minister comes and says that he wishes and he looks forward to our meeting - can he tell us now, given the fact that we have already written to you and you have not had the courtesy to respond to these leaders upon their written requests, can you tell this house whether you are giving us audience tomorrow morning and we all walk to your office?

The pain we are going through watching our leaders humiliated that much is too bad for this country. It is a recipe for chaos. The intolerance you are exhibiting on us, the day it will be meted on you, you cannot sustain it. Can he tell us whether we should go to him tomorrow morning, if he really means it?

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, Gen. Aronda, the Minister of Internal Affairs told me this morning that he is going to meet the leaders of the Opposition as to when that is up to him. But he has said that it is going to be in the shortest time possible, possibly even within this week.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, it is very unfortunate I heard my good friend James Baba on the Floor here that police are doing their work.

I want to inform the minister and the whole House that the situation in Mbale was very sad. We informed the police that we were having a town hall meeting and the Regional Police Commander called me at 11 on Friday and told me that; “Hon. Wamai, you can go ahead with your meeting.”

But to our surprise, when we were about to start the meeting, the Police ambushed us, beat people up, sprayed tear gas and shot live bullets.

I would like to lay on this Floor of Parliament the shells that missed the people of Mbale just by luck. Is this what the Uganda Police is mandated to do? Is this the force that they are supposed to use on innocent people, people who did not even take a stone, who could not answer?

The terror they left in Mbale, the people there have not forgotten. I want to lay on Table the live bullets that were shot at the people of Mbale and people of Mbale protest in the strongest terms that the bullets they buy have been used against them and the Government must stop harassing the people of Uganda.

We were just talking to the people about electoral reforms. Why are you very scared about the Opposition going around and talking to the people when actually, you go around dishing out money? Why are you scared about the Opposition talking to the people peacefully without even guns? These were the shells that were fired at the people of Mbale.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It would be difficult for the chair to know where the shells were from. I am sure they are not marked that is “Mbale”. It would be difficult for me to accept it as something that can be laid because we cannot ascertain the origin of those shells.

Hon. Minister, let me direct from the chair as follows; the anticipated meeting between the Minister of Internal Affairs and the political leaders must take place any time before Thursday and on Thursday at 2 O’clock, hon. Minister, you should come and inform the House about what has happened in that meeting and what matters have been resolved so that this country can move forward.

2.59
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Mr Speaker, I thank you for your ruling. However, I just want to seek clarification. Is the minister and the political leaders going to negotiate now how to conduct themselves in public? Are they going to write new rules of how we can conduct ourselves as politicians? This does not only apply to the leaders of other political parties. I think this also applies to the members of the NRM.Is the Prime Minister Amama Mbabazi or His Excellency President Museveni himself going to be there?

We now want to understand whether we are going to put aside the Constitution or even the law that we passed recently to regulate public meetings and put in place a code of conduct that will regulate activities of political parties. I think this is something that we need to understand because as far as I am concerned, as long as there is a law, the police must protect my rights and make sure that they facilitate my meetings with the people.

As a politician, that is my business, which I do all the time. One thing you have not realised is that in the last three days, I have been dropping medicine in my eyes every 15 minutes; why? Because the teargas was targeted at me directly in Soroti and the canister was thrown inside the Hotel where we were and that is how I got caught up in the mess. It just exploded in my face. What do you want us to do? Are you going to put aside time for us to renegotiate the Constitution? Renegotiate the current law in order to agree with the minister on how we can put aside the law and conduct ourselves?

Mr Speaker, I know why you are saying, “Let the minister meet the leaders” but these leaders are going to speak on my behalf and as far as I am concerned, there are laws already and I am obeying them and I respect the Constitution, which I participated in making. 

If you read the Hansard, Article 29 was very central to the parties that had played a role in the Constituency Assembly. Are we now going to set new rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The rules of this House do not allow us to anticipate. I am not part of the people who are going to draw the agenda for this meeting. This proposal was made by the minister that there should be a meeting. The date was not clear, so, the chairperson only directed that this meeting must take place earlier than Thursday so that a report to the House can be received on Thursday afternoon at 2 O’clock. That is what the chairperson directed because there have been proposals of this meeting.

Hon. Members -

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: As the shadow minister of internal affairs and as we grapple with this issue and the intended meeting of the Opposition and the minister concerned, in this country, we have no shortage of legislation on this matter. We have a very detailed Constitution on the bill of rights. 

We went ahead here and deliberately- I strongly believe we have a very bad Public Order Management Act but even that Act that places responsibility on the organisers and the Police - I can tell you on record that I sit on the Summit that organises those campaigns around the country and I know what goes on. We have taken the trouble to write to the minister and the local organisers have taken the trouble to follow the Public Order Management Act to the letter. 

To make matters worse, apart from Masaka, none of these meetings was a public rally. They were town hall meetings within four walls. Do we want to negotiate about a new law or write a new Constitution between us and the Minister of Internal Affairs? Must rights be subject to negotiation?

I am aware that the Uganda Police carried out a review of its departments and there is this detailed report, which I can lay on Table and which Gen. Kayihura, the Inspector-General of Police is keeping under lock and key but circulating in all embassies- I have been able to land on this and everything that they are trying to do is well-advised in this document.

They are refusing but I would like to lay it on Table and task the minister to formally come and own it because in this review of Police, police officers went ahead to say we must move away from generals being IGP. They are talking about doing away with AK47 because it is an offensive weapon and that is what they are using on the population. They are talking about respect for human rights and the Inspector-General of Police is putting it under lock and key. I am sure hon. Baba may not have come across this document. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to contend that we either be a Parliament that is on oath to promote and protect the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda or not. This business that every other day, we negotiate over rights must come to an end. Hon. Baba, the Minister of Internal Affairs and everybody in this government knows this. I interacted with one top official who said, “I gave you a public order management law. Why are you allowing people to go around the country abusing me?” If that is the mentality and perception of the regime we have, that is a different matter.

Therefore, I would like –(Interruption)

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, there has been a tendency in this House where Members say things without substantiating and even sometimes telling lies. That is not good for us as leaders. Is the hon. Member in order to say that somebody said something and he is quoting what the person said but he cannot even mention the name? Is that acceptable in our rules? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Our rules are clear. Matters that are brought to the House must be researched, cross-checked and their authenticity confirmed before they are brought to the House. Hearsay statements that bear no source are not permissible in the House. Hon. Member, you know that very well.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I respect your ruling but I wish to lay this document.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I would like to understand that document; who authored it, whether it is signed and whether you are privy to it because the rules of authenticity of documents before they are laid before the House should be clear. I can see you tearing pages straight from there. Please. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: This is a different form altogether. No, the document is here, let me lay it on Table. It is Uganda Police Review; Contextual and Synthesised Key Findings and Identified Review Priority Areas. It was funded by USAID and it was done by the Police of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: I think for now, let us just take that information and see if the minister can bring that document formally before the House.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Should I lay it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, not in that form really. We have got the information and the minister has got the information. It is on record that there is such a document. Now, we look for it. (Members rose_)

Hon. Members, please. The situation is this. There are factual issues raised from the left side of the House about some things that are going wrong with the implementation of existing laws and excesses that have been seen. 

On my right hand side, there have been propositions for a meeting to try and get the details of this thing. From the presiding officer, I have directed that if this meeting is going to take place, it must take place today or tomorrow but on Thursday, the minister who is the convener of this meeting should be able to report to this House on the details of the meeting and what has transpired so that this House can have a discussion on that subject. For that reason, that matter ends there. Thank you.

3.10
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national and regional importance. We have heard and read in the papers that the Speaker of EALA, hon. Margaret Zziwa, is under censure or plans are underway to censure her.

We voted the EALA members here and indeed, we are their constituents especially members of EALA representing Uganda. Madam Speaker, to my surprise and dismay, we have heard that members of EALA Uganda Chapter are the ones behind the censure of their own without consulting the voters. We are the ones who voted them here but they have not consulted us as voters as to whether they should go along with their motion to censure hon. Margaret Zziwa. Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, for the future readers of the Hansard, let it be known that the person presiding today is male and so cannot be Madam Speaker.

MR SSEBAGALA: Mr Speaker, we are the voters of our EALA representatives but they have not come back to the electorate to consult and tell us where the problem is. How can we as voters just hear what is going on like what the councillors of KCCA did to the Lord Mayor without going back to the people? They should have come here and told us, “Please, our own was elected as the Speaker and now A, B and C has happened.” (Interruption)

MR KATOTO: Mr Speaker, we as the Parliament of Uganda have our own rules and EALA is a Parliament that is independent and operates on its own. 

Is the hon. Member of Parliament of Uganda, therefore, in order to start bringing out the issues of EALA here? Is he in order? Do we have it anywhere in the rules of procedure? Is he in order to bring in an EALA issue now? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Uganda is signatory to the East African Community constituting instruments. The Rules of Procedure of this House that recognise that procedure and we have indeed, created an entire committee of this House responsible for that sector so that this Parliament is very well appraised with those issues of the East African Community. 

This House elected the nine members who sit in Arusha and so this House is actually the electoral college of the nine members that were elected. 

The point being raised by the hon. Member is that the Speaker who is elected from Uganda is facing challenges including a motion of censure which this House has not been briefed about and that is his concern. So, I think he can raise that issue and that is all he is raising.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise ruling. You have put it right that we even have the Committee on East African Affairs and indeed, given the fact that we elected the nine EALA members, one of them became the Speaker of EALA and she is not there as Rt hon. Margaret Nantongo Zziwa but she is representing our country, Uganda.

My concern, Mr Speaker, is that if the EALA members whom we elected had some problems or challenges with the Speaker of EALA, they would have come to our committee, to the Speaker or here and they tell us, “Please, this is where we are.” How can we as voters just read things in the papers without those people coming to us to brief us on what is happening?

I request that the Minister for East African Community Affairs or the Prime Minister comes and tells us what they have done in order to save our seat as Uganda and our Speaker, Rt hon. Margaret Zziwa. Otherwise, we may recall those members because they are the ones behind this impasse. (Applause)

3.16
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker and hon. Members, what the Member has raised is a very important issue at a time when it is our turn to take leadership of EALA as a country. It is also very unfortunate that none of our members has ever come to report to the Committee on East African Affairs. None of them has ever come to even report even if they are representing us as a country – to go back to the origin where the names came from, whichever side of the House.

So, it is very unfortunate and I also want to inform you that they have filed a notice with the Clerk with the intention of moving that motion and it is supposed to be within nine days. The information available is that they are planning to do it on Thursday. 

But, hon. Members, yesterday, the President of Uganda and Head of Government called a meeting with the members of Uganda representing us in the East African Legislative Assembly and he agreed with them that he is going to talk to the leaders of the other countries today and by today evening, he will tell them what to do –(Interjections)- yes, because whatever their actions are in Arusha, it is a shame to us as a country and it is the responsibility of the President to redeem us a country at that level.

Mr Speaker, I want to pledge before the whole House that on Tuesday next week, the Minister for East African Community Affairs, hon. Shem Bageine or a member of Cabinet will come and give a full brief here. But I also call upon Members of this House and the public to talk to our Members because their actions are the best for this country. I thank you.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: They are your people; you talk to them. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since we are the voters of these MPs and they have already gone ahead to move a motion, can I also propose that we as voters also move a motion calling them to be removed. We have so many who can represent us very well. Why not move a motion to censure them? I thank you. (Applause)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First and foremost - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR MWIRU: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I am aware that the nine members who are being talked about are not members of this House and therefore, have no locus to come and address this House. 

About the Government Chief Whip condemning the members, I am only wondering if it is procedurally right for us to proceed deliberating on this issue without giving those members an opportunity to be heard on the issues being raised against them. The rules of natural justice require that the other party as well must be heard and the pace we are taking that, we are about to move a motion to recall other members; I would like to seek your guidance whether it is procedurally right for this House to take that path.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, do you want to rule on the procedural point? (Laughter) Hon. Members, the issue that the hon. Member for Kawempe raised does not amount to the procedural issue that you are raising. The Member only stated that we are concerned that these matters are happening when we are not briefed as an electoral college. That is what is before the House now. 

I do not know of any other proposal that gained the status of a discussable matter before this House other than the point raised by the hon. Member for Kawempe North. The hon. Member for Ayivu would like to speak- 

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Leader of Government Business has given us information about the progress of this matter. I just want us to remind ourselves of the independence of these institutions – the Executive and Parliament. I do not think it is prudent to wait for the informal Executive efforts because as Parliament, we have the Committee on East African Community Affairs and EALA members are elected from this House. The guidance I am seeking is that: Would we, as Parliament, wait for what the President is pursuing or should we take our own approach to have this matter addressed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you propose instead? - Is that the committee chairperson? Let us hear from the chair of the Committee on the East African Community Affairs.

MS VERONICA BABIRYE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I wish to give is that the committee has tried on several occasions to invite EALA members but they have not responded. And yet, Article 50 states that EALA members are supposed to come and report to the committee. Moreover, they are supposed to consult with the committee. I am also of the view that those EALA members should be recalled because they have failed to meet their obligations. (Applause)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Ssebagala for raising this matter and I also want to thank the Government Chief Whip for adding her voice, particularly, affirming that the people we sent to EALA are not doing us any good at that level. And for me, who subscribes to the FDC party – okay, let me say Opposition – we had an axe to grind before those members were elected. 

When it comes to matters of national importance like this one - where the image of the country is portrayed negatively, I think it requires collective effort. And therefore, having heard from the chairperson of the Committee on the East African Community Affairs that these members have been summoned to appear before the committee but they have refused to respond, it indicates that they have contempt for this committee. 

Therefore, I want to strongly support the idea that through the Minister for the East African Community Affairs and the Committee on the East African Community Affairs, a formal communication be made –(Interjections)– we cannot move to the motion yet because that will be the final resolution of Parliament. But I think since it has been raised on the Floor of Parliament, it is important to let them know that as their voters, we are concerned and we have taken note. So, an immediate date should be fixed to invite these members together with the minister to appear before the committee so that a report is made for us on which we can take a decision. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MS JACQUEILINE AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. EALA members were elected by this House; we actively participate in determining who goes to the EALA. And these members are there as Uganda’s representatives. Just like four other members and I represent Uganda at the Pan African Parliament, if one of us happened to undermine the interests of the other, he or she will be undermining not only that individual but the entire nation of Uganda.

Mr Speaker, I think the motion is before the House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there is no motion before the House.

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, it is on Thursday that EALA will sit to determine the fate of hon. Zziwa, who carries, not her flag but that of Uganda. So, I think that as a Parliament, it would be prudent for us to take an action – a recall of the nine EALA members from Uganda be taken as an emergency – as early as tomorrow such that the position of the EALA Speaker for Uganda is given key attention.

Mr Speaker, I would therefore –(Interjections)– I need to be protected.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us have some order, hon. Members.

MS JAQUELINE AMONGIN: Mr Speaker, I am not sure if you heard me well when I was rising to speak but I actually stood on a point of moving a motion that the nine EALA members representing Uganda –(Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I am worried about the way we are proceeding. First of all, no Member of this House is fully aware of the reasons being advanced for the censure and the people involved. (Applause) The EALA is an assembly of, not only the nine members of Uganda. And if there is a censure motion against the Speaker of the EALA, even if the nine Ugandan members oppose it while the other countries stand by the censure motion, we shall not be able to succeed. 

I am therefore worried - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, for the record, each country must have a minimum of four people signing up. In other words, no such decision can be taken in the absence of another country.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, my concern is about the working methods; for us, we have our Rules of Procedure that we stand by. The EALA must also be having their own rules by which they work. And I do not think up to this point, they have violated them. The best this House can do is not to move a motion but to direct that the Committee on the East African Community Affairs interests itself on the issue and updates Parliament as to what is going on. Otherwise, we will be entering into something we do not understand; we will be supporting a motion out of emotions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that was raised as a point of order but it came out as some information to the House. So, we will take it in that spirit.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I see some statements but sometimes when handling unfamiliar situations, we must try to be cool-headed. When we were formulating our Rules of Procedure, we did not envisage a situation of this nature – a situation relating to what my sister, hon. Kabasharira is talking about; a situation that would warrant the motion honourable members would be eager to support. 

Our Rules of Procedure are silent when it comes to a specific matter of this nature. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, I would like to say that there is a breakthrough in the law of natural justice. There are many words we have heard. But right now, we have heard from one side and we have not heard from the other side. So, Mr Speaker, we need more time before making a decision – we give more time to the committee on Rules and Privileges –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, are you negotiating?

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me and I thank my brother hon. Ndeezi for giving me the way. The information I want to give is that the reason we are reacting this way is because of the way our constituents behaved. They should have come here first to inform us of the motive of their move. If hon. Zziwa has made any mistake – if Uganda is not performing well, they should let us know as their constituents, then we would move as a team. They are in Parliament where we are not; they are representing us there but we elected them and have a right to know what is happening there. 

So, what they are doing is against our will. They should first come and tell us so that we can know what hon. Zziwa did to necessitate such a motion of censure. They are actually censuring Uganda not only hon. Zziwa. 

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, when two of our colleagues had a problem related to this thing, we told them, “Go and defend yourselves in the rules committee.” Then the committee on rules brought a report here and we debated the report and came to a conclusion. 

So, for me, there is no problem taking this matter to the rules committee to investigate. After the committee has investigated, we bring it here and we debate it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR KWIZERA: Mr Speaker, I think the views raised by the Members should not amount to more mob justice. Since we are a Parliament, we should follow the law and the procedures. 

Secondly, we should act on information provided. However, in the event that you do not have substantive information, I would rather we seek for information instead of following press reports. Let us get information from the Minister in Charge of East Africa Affairs and we can act based on that. But if we start judging people based on information that is not substantive, then we shall not be doing well. (Applause)

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since January this year, I have been following this matter of the East African Community. I have interest because hon. Zziwa is the President of the Global Parliamentarians on Habitat. So, I have been following the matter closely. And I am part of the East African Regional Committee on Human Settlement; so, I have been following this matter keenly. 

First of all, it is a shame that Uganda is the one fighting in East Africa. We are promoting integration and unity, yet, we are fighting ourselves. From the beginning, when we were electing the Speaker of East Africa, we had no consensus. But we let it pass and we thought we would move together. It is unfortunate that members of the East African Legislative Assembly from Uganda still carry in themselves and spirit of revenge. This is revenge; it is not on principle. All the complaints being raised are invalid and cannot be a substance on this matter. 

Mr Speaker, we have talked to colleagues from the other countries, those from Rwanda and Burundi are all laughing at us; they are wondering what kind of country we are and what we are selling in East Africa. 

At this point, we may not narrate the whole story connected to this matter. But we call upon the Government of Uganda – this is a matter of the whole nation of Uganda; it is not only hon. Zziwa, it is not only the members we elected. Our stake in the region is very important to offer leadership that is acceptable in the region without conflicting. There is no merit in this matter of the petition to censure the Speaker of East Africa Legislative Assembly. It is totally revenge and confusion from our members who are greedy. 

One of the things they are accusing hon. Zziwa of is denying them allowance when they have not attended sessions. They have been in this House –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Mr Speaker, we all believe the East African Legislative Assembly is a respectable institution and the Members therein are respectable members; just as we are respectable hon. Members. I believe that to attribute certain motives or weaknesses to members of the East African Assembly as if they were Ugandan weaknesses is not correct. 

Secondly, I do not believe that here, we have enough knowledge of what is angering or causing the motion of censure – we are not fully informed and therefore, we cannot fully make judgment. Is it in order for the honourable member to mistaken things and make judgments which will be a disowner –(Interjections)– is she, therefore, in order to attribute certain weaknesses to Uganda when there could be weaknesses of individual members?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister expresses great displeasure for the use of some of the words you used hon. Member for Butambala. But that is a choice of words; I have not seen anything that offends the rules of this House. 

But hon. Members, can we handle this matter substantially tomorrow when information is passed to the minister responsible for the East African Cooperation – when he is invited to the House to brief the House properly? 

I am, therefore, directing the Leader of Government Business to give notice to the minister responsible for East African Cooperation to brief the House tomorrow so that we can at least know what is going on instead of us debating things, which we are not very aware of. I pass this to the Chief Whip to notify the minister. 

MS KASULE LUMUMBA: Mr Speaker, hon. Shem Bagaine, the Minister in charge of East African Affairs is in Arusha because they are in Session. But in his absence, he left hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere to take charge of that portfolio. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Therefore, we will have that matter come back tomorrow when we have sufficient brief from the ministry and then, we can see how to handle the matter. 

I had an issue from Kween; let us receive it before we go to other matters. 

3.41
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise on a point of national importance. Yesterday, the 31stof March, at around 2.00 a.m., fire gutted one of the camps in Kween District in Kakwasa Sub-County. Around 93 houses were burnt down and all property destroyed. Nothing was rescued. The camp is called Luanda because it is a camp located on rocks.

The people who stay in this camp are part of the group that was evicted from the national park but they have never been resettled.

Mr Speaker, my prayers are: that Government, through the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, comes in urgently to recue these people by providing them with food items and shelter and some household items. Two, is the issue that I have already talked about. These people stay on a rock. It is not good to have people staying on the rock for many years. 

Mr Speaker, we have been trying to follow up on this issue of resettlement. We have had so many meetings and I recall that in 2011, the President gave a directive that these people be resettled but that has never been done.

Last year, in November, we again had another meeting and I recall very well that the President again directed that these people be resettled. However, nothing has been done to date.

So, I really would like to urge the responsible ministry and especially the Prime Minister’s Office, which was directed to resettle these people – these people’s problem should be put to rest. This is a community of about 400 families.

Mr Speaker, I will be very grateful if this issue is settled. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask the minister from the Office of the Prime Minister to handle this matter?

3.44
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the honourable member for bringing up this issue. However, I would like to inform this House that the honourable member actually entered a meeting this morning where this matter was being discussed. I recall that she was advised to hold on until we get done with the meeting.

Mr Speaker, I would like to inform her that we have decided as a sub-committee of Cabinet, to meet the Members of Parliament from the Kapchorwa sub-region on Thursday at 10 O’clock. We hope to discuss this matter with them.

But, secondly, on the matter of relief, I would like to say this is urgent and the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has taken it up.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, we have spent time on three very urgent matters that deserved our attention. So, I will suspend item three and we get to deal with item four. We will deal with item three tomorrow.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES BILL, 2008

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson of the committee, this Bill was presented by the committee. This is the Implementation of Government Assurances Bill, 2008. Is there somebody to move the motion for a second reading? 

No, the chairperson of the committee cannot move a motion for second reading. There has to be someone to move the motion, then the chair comes in to present the report. No, it is not a Government Bill; it is a committee Bill from the Committee on Government Assurances. It is like a private Members’ Bill.

3.48
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Implementation of Government Assurances” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I notice that the motion has been seconded by a member for Kasese, member for Soroti and the Member forJinja Municipality East. Would you like to speak to the motion or we just go straight to the committee stage?

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker –(Interjections)– yes, I am always in charge. This Bill is very important; there are very many promises that we have been receiving from Government either in this House or through other statements but they are not being followed and monitored.

We believe that we now must have mechanisms in place to monitor those promises and pledges so that Government can be held accountable for the promises they make to the people of Uganda.

Therefore, I would like to urge members to own this Bill and make it a reality so that we can – whenever we will be, whether in the constituencies or this House, ensure Government implements the promises it makes to the people. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. As you are aware, the Bill was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. They have studied it and I am sure they are ready to report on it.

3.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Stephen Tashobya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a report of the Committee of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the implementation of the Government Assurances Bill, which was a private members’ Bill of 2008.

Mr Speaker and hon. colleagues –(Interruption)

MR AMURIAT: Mr Speaker, whereas my good friend is preparing to present a report, and whereas we know that we have now gone digital and we can access this report through our iPads, it is unfortunate that we have been failed by technology, probably the network. My iPad cannot open the document to enable me follow the proceedings.

I do not know whether it is procedurally right for this House to proceed this way.

MR KATOTO: Whereas we were called to go and have a session about these iPads and other technologies, some people laboured to attend but others refused. Is it, therefore, in order, Mr Speaker for someone to start saying that these people did not upload the paper on the iPad when it is there? (Interjections)Is he in order? It is not failing; it is there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us proceed with this report because actually, the report is on the iPad. If yours is not opening, you may have to have some consultations because all the Members have theirs open.

Is there anybody whose iPad is not opening? 

MR OCHWO: Mr Speaker, the iPad is opening and I am seeing the document here. I am using the network you are using in Parliament. May be I will help one of the colleagues and show him where and then the rest he can get from there.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t we proceed and receive the report? It is uploaded on the iPads.

MR TASHOBYA: The committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs considered the Implementation of Government Assurances, 2008 and now wishes to report.The Government Assurances Bill, 2008 was read for the first time on 12 May 2009 in the Eighth Parliament. It was reintroduced by a resolution in the Ninth Parliament on 31 October 2011 and re-read for the first time on 8 February 2012.It was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs in accordance with rules 117 and 118 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

In analysing the Bill, the committee was guided by rule 118 of our rules.

Background

A government assurance according to the Bill is defined as any undertaking, which is given by a minister or an agent of government in Parliament. It is further defined as a government plan, programme or activity which is to be considered or approved by Parliament.

This is a Private Member’s Bill initiated by a Parliament Standing Committee on Government Assurances designed to make the government and its agents more accountable for implementation of assurances it makes to Parliament and the public. 

In analysing and processing the Bill, the committee received memoranda from the following stakeholders; the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, Uganda Law Reform Commission, the LDC and Dean Faculty of Law, Makerere University.

The Objective of the Bill is to establish a legal framework through which promises and undertakings given to Parliament by ministers and agents of Government will be enforced and implemented by the relevant ministers and agents. The Bill is intended to ensure that Government is accountable to Parliament and the people they represent in Parliament, which will promote transparency in the functioning of the government.

Observations and recommendations

The committee observed that;
    1. There is currently no specific law in Uganda to ensure Government carries out the assurances it makes to Parliament and to the people of Uganda.
    2. The only provision available to hold Government accountable for its assurances are as stipulated in the mandate of the Committee on Government Assurances in Rule 167 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.
    3. The spirit behind the Bill is partly to curb the habit of agents of Government who make promises to Parliament and the public that are impossible to fulfil and are neither within their means nor the means of Government (plans and projections) to fulfil.
    4. The law as proposed creates the offences of obstruction of a government assurance and proposes sanctions for this offence, which includes dismissal, termination of appointment and demotion for government agents who are not ministers. Ministers on the other hand are supposed to face censure for failure to implement an assurance.
    5. When the Constitution clearly states the circumstances under, which a minister may vacate office, this Bill seeks to add these circumstances.
    6. The proposed law adds little to what is already contained in the Parliament’s Rules of Procedure in terms of the mandate of the committee on Government Assurances. The law is likely to face numerous implementation challenges given that as proposed, it requires that a budget line be created to fund assurances made for and on behalf of Government by ministers and other government agents.
    7. There is a need to consider the assurances made by ministers in their capacity as MPs during their constituency activities vis-à-vis their positions as ministers.
    8. The committee raised the question of whether the law was necessary and whether other Parliamentary committees would also enact laws to specifically enshrine their mandates in the new laws proposed. 

While scrutinising individual clauses of the Bill, the committee considered proposed amendments to the Bill by various stakeholders and made observations on each of the clauses of the Bill as follows:

    1. Clause 1; interpretation: The committee observed that the words defined in the interpretation clause have already been defined in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The words defined include; Chairperson, Clerk, Committee, Leader of Government Business, Parliament Session and Speaker.”

    2. Clause 2, definition of “committee”; the provision establishes a Committee of Government Assurances. Article 90 of the Constitution of Uganda provides that “Parliament shall appoint committees necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions” and under Article 92, it provides that “Parliament shall by its rules of procedure prescribe the powers or positions and functions of its committees.” The committee noted that establishing a committee under an Act of Parliament would fetter the discretionary power of Parliament to regulate its committees through the Rules of Procedure. 

	What would, for example, happen if Parliament amended the Rules of Procedure by giving functions and powers of government assurances and implementation committee to another committee?

    3. Composition of committees; the composition makes a cross-reference to the Rules of Procedure for the composition of members of the government assurances. The provision does not add anything new to the existing provisions of Government  Assurances Committee.

    4. Functions of the committee. The Bill provides for functions of the Government Assurances and Implementation Committee. The committee observed that while some wording in the proposed provision is slightly different, the clause is a replica of Rule 167 sub-rule 1 of the Rules of Procedure.

The committee observed that during the consideration of the budget estimates, the Speaker, under Rule 134 (1) allocates the sectoral committees the part of the preliminary indicative allocations that fall within their jurisdictions immediately after the submission of the preliminary estimates to Parliament by the President. The sectoral committees consider, discuss and review the indicative allocations committed to them and submit their reports to the Budget Committee.

The provision proposes to give the Government Assurances and Implementation Committee the mandate to monitor all government activities on behalf of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, further the committee noted that the drafters of the Constitution were very clear under Article 90(2) that “Parliament shall, by its Rules of Procedure, prescribe the powers of the Opposition and functions of its committees.” It is a practice that at the beginning of every new term, Parliament amends its Rules of Procedure. Mr Speaker, establishing a committee with its powers and functions by an Act of Parliament would tie the hands of Parliament when amending its Rules of Procedure.


5.	Sessional reports. The clause proposes to impose an obligation on the Government Assurance and Implementation Committee to make a statement on the status of assurances made in Parliament during the immediate previous session. While considering the Bill, the committee received a proposal from the Government Assurances and Implementation Committee to have the powers amended by substituting the entire provision with Rule 167 (3) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

	Mr Speaker, in our view there is no strong justification in reproducing what is already provided for in the Rules of Procedure.

6.	Government Assurances. The clause provides for what constitutes an assurance. Clause 6 (2) provides that a government plan, programme or an activity for which funds have been approved by Parliament constitutes an assurance.

	Mr Speaker, in our view, this is a function for all sectoral committees under Rule 117 (e) and (f) of our Rules in ensuring that Parliament carries its oversight and monitoring functions under Article 164 of the Constitution.

7.	The clause provides for the categories of assurances. Mr Speaker, the same categories are provided for in Rule 167 (a) of the Rules of Procedure.

8. 	Time-frame for implementation. In our view, this provision is covered very well under Rule 167 of our Rules.

    9. Extension of period of implementation. The clause provides for an extension of the period within which to implement an assurance where a ministry cannot complete the implementation of the assurance within the specified period. Mr Speaker, this is always done as Parliament has the mandate to monitor all Government plans and programmes under Article 164 of the Constitution of Uganda.

10.	Implementation of statements. Mr Speaker, this is well covered under Rule 117 of the Rules of Procedure and under Rule 117 (e) and (f) of the same Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

11.	Withdraw of an assurance. The provision is provided for under Rule 168(1) of the Rules of Procedure.

12.	Implication of withdrawing of an assurance. Mr Speaker, the clause provides that where an assurance is withdrawn, it shall cease to be an assurance. In our view, this clause is redundant.  This is obvious that if an assurance is withdrawn with the approval of Parliament, it ceases to be an assurance.

13.	Obstructing implementation of a Government assurance. Clause 13(1) creates an offence of wilfully obstructing the implementation of a Government assurance. The provision does not provide the ingredients of the offence. This creates a challenge as to what would amount to wilful obstruction of implementing a government assurance.
	
Secondly, Clause 13(1) makes a minister personally responsible for failure to implement an assurance. The committee noted that the ministers make the assurances on behalf of Government and therefore, cannot be held responsible for acts done in the course of their duty on behalf of Government.

Recommendations

Mr Speaker, in our view, the law adds little, if anything to what is already contained in the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and in the Constitution. For this matter and in addition to the other reasons enumerated above, the committee, therefore, reluctantly recommends that Parliament does not pass the proposed Bill into an Act of Parliament.

Mr Speaker, the minister is helping me here but really, the basis of our report is that first of all, we appreciate that for a private member to come up with such an initiative is a good job on his part and maybe, he should be supported but under the circumstances and given the laws and the Constitution, we did not find sufficient reason or any gaps that would warrant putting in place another law. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for the report of the committee. Hon. Members, I propose the question for your debate. The motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Implementation of Government Assurances Bill, 2008” be read the Second Time. That is the motion that will enable us to debate the principles of this Bill before we go to the actual clauses at another stage. Debate is open.

4.11
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report and I also want to thank the honourable colleague who brought this Private Members’ Bill.

A promise remains a promise; it does not turn into a debt. As politicians, we know under what circumstances most of these promises are made. I must say that once somebody makes empty promises to voters, the voters have an opportunity to penalise that person every after five years.

Mr Speaker, as a country, we are running into a risk where we seek to act upon each and every matter in our communities through legislation. It is becoming a habit in this country that for each and every thing we seek to implement, we call for legislation. In the end, Mr Speaker, I fear that we might end up in a legal confusion of some sort.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I want to observe that we need is to enhance civic competence among our people for them to be able to appreciate who does what and who cannot do what.

Also, we must make sure that developments in this country are handed out to those people who made it – such projects or funding instead of depending on pledges either by the President, ministers or other politicians to cause developmental projects in different parts of the country. At the end of the day, it becomes very unfair for those communities that cannot access, for example, His Excellency or ministers. 

I entirely agree with the report and I want to propose that instead of causing legislation in this direction, we enforce discipline among politicians to create a situation where development or developmental projects in this country are not allocated as a reason of pledges by His Excellency, the President. Mr Speaker, I thank you.


4.13
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I want to appreciate the committee for having taken time to look at this proposal. 

The time this proposal came to his House, it was to do with the callous nature in which Government officials, representatives and spokespersons went about making endless and reckless promises to Ugandans, well knowing that they were not going to follow it an inch the day they turned their backs to the people and that is why I am actually disappointed that the committee has found no merit in creating a legal framework. 

I would have wanted a legislative framework that forces people or creates sanctions on those people who go about deceiving Ugandans left and right. These people and individuals who make these promise on behalf of Government do not care an inch whether Government has the money to implement it or not. They go about without caring an inch – you know people promising a ferry where there is no lake. That is how callous they can be. They just promise you anything. Maybe, the only thing they cannot promise you is life.

So, I would have wanted the committee to have created a legal framework, which tells me that if a minister like the Minister for Defence comes to my constituency in Serere and there, he promises that he will give them an airfield and it does not happen in two or three years, we should be able to take the Minister for Defence to sue him. (Laughter)

Yes, you see, Mr Speaker, ministers and the President are very important people whose word almost amounts to policy. They cannot go carelessly telling –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the example you are using for the Minister for Defence hypothetical or a real situation? 

MS ALASO: It borders in between. (Laughter) Given the position of the committee, we were confronted with a very big challenge and I can appreciate the feelings of hon. Betty Nambooze that we do not need to make laws. The reason is simple; we have been disappointed even where there are laws. Nobody wants to abide by the laws of the land. People just create different scenarios and they do different things and maybe, that is why she thinks so.

But just how do you, as a committee chairperson for legal, now plan? We are going into an election season and only last year, the Committee on Government Assurances came before Parliament and presented endless promises and pledges and assurances that have not been fulfilled. So, just how do you plan to hold these very important individuals to book? Moreover, the Bible says, Thou shall not lie” and yet, they are lying to Ugandans every other day and now there is no law.

Finally, I am even more worried because I thought that at this particular time we should be putting into place a proposal that stops them from creating more districts because that is what they are going to promise people. They are going to say we are dividing Serere into four and every sub-county – and then my poor voters think that they are now going to get more Members of Parliament and when there are no drugs in hospital, they will be happy that they have more-

I thought that at this time we would be saying that we stop the promises and creation of those administrative units. But now, Mr Chairperson through you, Mr Speaker, I am disarmed and cannot carry the Constitution and say that with this Constitution, arrest the minister who promised air. So, what do we do? I thank you.

4.18
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was a member of the Committee on Government Assurances and we found this Bill because it was of 2008.

In my first year in the Ninth Parliament, I was a member of this committee and we looked at this Bill as something that is going to save us from endless promises. When we came in, we even wanted to propose that even the party manifesto especially the party that wins the office, its manifesto should be taken as an assurance to Ugandans because when you come out with a manifesto, people vote for that manifesto. It is a promise to the people and you should implement it, otherwise, we take you to court for having deceived Ugandans. We went as far as that and we had even proposed on the budget. That year, you read the budget and ended up implementing only 15 or 20 percent of the budget. So, we wanted to come with all this. 

I am very disappointed today and for the first time – I do not know if this has happened before that the committee throws out the whole Bill. But most of the references that have been made by the Chairperson are to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and yet, these promises are not only made to Parliament; they are to the district, Local Council 1- I mean are these other local councils also going to be using the Rules of Procedure of Parliament?   

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker and thank you colleague, for giving way. Actually, the spirit after this Bill was after realising that the Committee on Government Assurances is limited in space; its operations are supposed to capture only assurances made on the Floor of the House and possibly, the confines of the Chamber. That is why the members of the Committee on Government Assurances through the Chairperson, hon. Issa Kikungwe thought it wise to even capture assurances made outside Parliament and that was the spirit behind this law. 

I am, therefore, surprised that the Chairperson of the Committee or the Committee on legal does not see merit in holding Government representatives accountable for the statements they make outside the Chamber. I thank you.     

MR KIWANDA: I thank you very much. As a politician in my constituency, I have my Political Assistant and it is upon me always to tell them not to ever promise my people – because you may not be there but somebody will say that the hon. Member is going to build this church or do this. That is what is happening. If a minister comes to my constituency and says that this is going to be done, it is an assurance to the people. It brings me a very big problem to explain to these people that the minister has failed to do this.

And if you throw this Bill out, Mr Speaker, how are we going to get onto these assurances? This has been a very big gap in the law and I am really disappointed that this Bill is completely thrown out and yet we thought that this was the only opportunity for us to hold government officials accountable for the statements that they make in our constituencies. And I am reluctantly in position to support the committee report.

4.23
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report but I am surprised that the committee can throw away a Bill proposed by members. That raises doubt as to whether it is necessary for members to raise private members’ Bills. I belonged to the Committee on Government Assurances, which was put in place to ensure that government officials including the President who make reckless promises especially during elections – raising people’s expectations – are accountable. That was why the Committee on Government Assurances was put in place so that we can put them to task to explain why they make such promises. But if the committee can throw away that report, then let us also throw away the committee itself because it is useless. Why do we move around and bring issues to the House where nobody cares about them?

Mr Speaker, the Committee on Government Assurances is very important and it also works in many other countries. But this Bill would have supported the committee’s work such that whatever is promised is implemented. I am surprised that even a minority report that we could support does not exist. So, I do not have anything to say. Thank you. 

4.25
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join the rest who think that it was unfortunate that the committee did not find merit in this. First of all, the President initiates policy – that is a matter of governance and a presidential pronouncement is an important policy statement. He or she may not be in position to implement but the government must implement. And if at all there is no legislative framework which obliges the President to implement the promises, it becomes very difficult. This legislation was meant to empower people to whom Government makes promises. A minister does not campaign to become a minister – they are Members of Parliament and so, they can make those empty promises. But as long as a minister goes into political space and announces that this and that is going to be done, it can only be done on the basis of policy prepared by that government. So it becomes an assurance. But without a framework which can empower our people to hold Government accountable using a law, it becomes very difficult to hold government accountable and –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Lulume for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I want to give to the House is that the country has a national development programme. And secondly there is a budgeting process; we have a budget cycle. That means that all that we plan to do as a country in a financial year must be aligned with the National Development Plan. That should be the spirit but what actually happens is that the government makes a budget but whenever some people make demands, you will hear the President making promises to them. So when it comes to the next financial year, all the reckless promises will be captured, thereby substituting the budget. That is when you realise that when you look at the Auditor-General’s report it indicates that what was planned and budgeted for within the ministerial policy statement is not aligned to the National Development Plan.

So by us rejecting this, we are actually saying that we should move away from the National Development and even from the budget cycle; so whatever they get, say from Kyankwanzi, will form part of the budget and hence deviating from the National Development Plan. So when you talk about Vision 2040, it must be in line with the National Development Plan but we are even running away from that. So when we allow that - actually it is going to be worse that whatever the population will ask, they will respond, “We have given it to you.” This seems to be the trend we are taking as a country. Thank you.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much for that useful information. Mr Speaker, you have now realised that this debate has generated a lot of enthusiasm towards re-casting or the committee getting back to the drawing board so that they get submissions from various members of Parliament to re-think on the way to empower our people to whom the policy makers are making promises which become lies. And we cannot allow Government to be converted into a liar. If at all Government is unable to implement a certain promise, at least people should have somehow an empowerment through a legislation to hold it accountable. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.30
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to identify myself with the presentation of hon. Alaso in relation to the power of the word given by the country’s CEO – the President. A presidential pronouncement is almost a policy and I know that every time Government brings here a supplementary budget, members complain of budget indiscipline and budget indiscipline is at the centre of empty promises. And I am a bit surprised that the committee did not see merit in the reasons why we had wanted to put a ceiling to the extent of promises within a particular framework. In my committee of Presidential Affairs, we have always complained because there is a budget that we vote onto. But before it is implemented, a supplementary budget comes with a catalogue of unfunded priorities. This is indiscipline. 

I want to inform the chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the House that actually by appearing to be against this legislation, you are legislating for budgetary indiscipline. Somehow, we are budgeting and legislating for empty promises and lies. There must be a cap to the extent which we can make promises as leaders and we must help our leaders appreciate the fact that there are things we cannot do within a given timeframe and there are those we can do. Even our people know the extent of our abilities; sometimes they are surprised that we can even promise certain things. 

So, I would like to invite the chairperson, with due respect with your team to re-think this particular Bill. May be the original construction might have had a bit of challenges but I do not think it is right for us as a House to give this country a chance to bring a modicum of discipline in our political leaders to start respecting the people we lead by way of our promises and start to act within the budget; and especially stop the indiscipline that tinkers with the official budget and we find that the bulk of the expenditures are actually outside the budget and it is a problem. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the origin of assurances and how they are captured – may be the changes are being made now. But the original assurances were assurances made to the House with the record in the Hansard and that is why it is a Parliamentary committee that processes it because the assurances are made to the House. Those pledges that are made outside the House were not supposed to be part of the original construction of what the Government Assurances committee does. They were not their responsibility initially. That is why the Bill is now proposing an assurance committee possibly outside this House. The reason is simple; it would be impossible to capture a record of assurances made outside this House with proof that they were made. That is why in all Parliaments before, the issue of Government assurances was those assurances that were made to the House and the House would take interest that okay, is that an assurance so that we can follow up on it? That is how it was originally constructed. Maybe this is changing now to capture pledges of bridges where there are no rivers and things like that. I am just giving you the background to why the Government Assurances committee in Parliament was set up – to follow up on assurances made to the House but that extension might have been made in recent times to capture assurances and pledges made outside the House. 

4.35
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity and let me express my admiration for that clarity you have given. The surest force of a Government that forces Government to act is the mandate it gets from the people and it’s polices, manifestos and national development programmes. All Government does is within the mandate the people have given it. 

Secondly, there is collective responsibility and that is why you are very right. If a pledge or a promise is made in this House, it binds Government because I am speaking on behalf of Government and therefore I subscribe to collective responsibility. But the moment Kabwegyere goes outside this House and says, look if you elect me, I will do this and that. If I have to be prosecuted for having said that this would be a very difficult law to implement –(Interjections)– let me first clarify this. 

The judgment of my pledge or promise in this House is based on the statement in the House; maybe a policy statement of the ministry or the manifesto of the party. If it were the case that there is a law which binds all of us who stand for public positions that all our pledges and promises should be under the law, I certainly would join in that law because some of us go and promise heaven on earth and we end up not delivering any. So I would like to congratulate the committee and in particular the chairperson who has presented the report so clearly. Thank you, Sir, for your additional clarity that this is no law and above all, most of human behaviour does not comply with law. It is not an issue that the way you walk or do things is guided by the law. In fact the law as an enforcer of behaviour is a very weak force. 

4.38
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Mr Speaker, you will realise that His Excellency the President does not sit in this House and does not debate in this House; yet he makes a lot of promises. In case His Excellency makes a promise in Gulu that we are going to build a bridge; it is upon me then to come here and follow it up in this Parliament. And it is the responsibility of the minister to respond to that promise. If the minister responds positively, then the Government Assurances committee captures that promise and it becomes a Government assurance. 

In that respect, I seek clarification if we should just think of what is brought here on the Floor of Parliament only that makes what we call assurances. Prof. Kabwegyere should clarify to us whether we should now disregard all the promises that are made especially by H. E the President when he visits the country. We only want to expand on this by making Government assurances very credible and implementable. 

In other countries, they are able to do it; why are we refusing to put in place a legal framework to make it possible for us to strengthen Government assurances –(Interruption) 

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was reluctant; I thought I would respond at once but the committee made contacts in trying to understand this law. In our knowledge, there is no single country that has enacted this kind of law in Parliament. Would the honourable member be kind enough to inform us of those countries she knows which have this law in place?

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, there are certain things that Uganda was the first to do. What is wrong with doing it first as long as it is the right thing for Uganda to spearhead this? It is good for the country and for the people of Uganda. My view is that the committee –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Hon. Betty Aol, the information I would like to give you that I have persistently heard from our friends who understand the law is that the law is made to cure certain diseases. So, it might be that in those other countries the disease of very important persons telling too many lies does not arise and that is why we need to make that law to cure it here.

Secondly, to hon. Betty Aol, in Uganda we are at least the only people in the neighbourhood without presidential term limits and my chairperson of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee agrees with me in one way or the other that it is good for us. So, if that innovation is good, why can’t we have another innovation on government assurances?

MS AOL: Thank you for the information. But I also would like to urge hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere that he must know that the pot is not before everybody; the pot into which we all put our resources of the country. The resources of the country are with the ruling party and the President and his Cabinet. That is why we follow promises made by His Excellency the President and maybe the ministers and other government agents. I cannot promise that I will construct this road and even if  Ido so, it will not hold because I don’t have a pot before me where we collect the taxpayers’ money. Thank you.

4.44
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL AND MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, I stand to support the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I think from now onwards, I will continue following up and listening, very carefully, to the submissions made by hon. Betty Nambooze because she touched me today –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not see that.

MR RUHINDI: She touched my heart. (Laughter)– Mr Speaker, she made a fundamental submission when she said that an over regulated society is not good –(Interjections)– be it whatever, I am speaking in view of her submission. Recently, the Justice, Law and Order Sector made a study worldwide and found that in terms of self-regulation and control, Uganda ranks No. 59 in the whole world, which is good for this country. So, I don’t think there is anything useful I can add to the committee’s report. Everything has been clearly articulated. They have considered the very delicate balance between the different roles of the organs of Government, particularly in respect of Parliament and the Executive. They have ably done that. They have clearly spelt out why we shouldn’t go beyond what is already provided for in our Constitution, in the Rules of Procedure and in other relevant legislations. What it is that we are trying to capture that is not already captured? That is the essence of their report.

Talk about the President; you can proceed under Article 107 of the Constitution. For a minister, you can impeach or the responsible appointing authority can either dismiss or you can come here and censure. But over all, it is a question of accountability to the people who elect us to this House. If you are a politician and you don’t perform, you must be answerable to the electorates who voted you. So, to begin talking about penal provisions in a law for political people is a very big challenge and a toll order. This is because when you read the relevant sections of the Penal Code that address offences of that nature, they are in respect of public officers and politicians don’t fall in that category because they have got other means of accountability. 
Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would like to submit with all due respect, to the originators and promoters of this proposal, good in intent, but certainly it cannot be sustained within the legal framework that we have and are not in fact, necessary. Thank you so much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have before us a committee report. We have had a debate presenting views from both sides. The time has come for us to take a decision on this motion for second reading of this Bill. I now put the question to the motion that a Bill entitled “The Implementation of Government Assurances Bill, 2008” be read the second time.

(Question put and negatived.)

Motion rejected.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO INCLUDE PERSONS WITH DISABILITY IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION ACTIVITIES AND INTRODUCE SPORTS AFFIRMATIVE ACTION

4.49
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Representative): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this Parliament considers and passes a motion for a Resolution of Parliament urging Government to include Persons with Disabilities in Physical Education and Sports Affirmative Action. The motion is moved in line with Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedures. Mr Speaker, to capture the record right, I beg that I read it verbatim:

“WHEREAS Objective XVI of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the Constitution enjoins the State and society to recognise the rights of persons with disabilities through respect and human dignity;

AND WHEREAS Objective XVII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of the Constitution further enjoins the State to promote recreation and sports for children of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Uganda is signatory to a number of international treaties such as the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights adopted in 1914, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights adopted in 1956, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights adopted in 1950 and the United National Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disability, which  enjoins Government to, among others, protect and guarantee the rights of persons with disabilities specifically to respect and promote sports for persons with disabilities;

AWARE THAT the Parliament of Uganda passed the Persons With Disability Act in 2006, which guarantees the rights and freedoms for persons with disabilities and to prevent all forms of discrimination against persons with disabilities;

FURTHER AWARE that the National Policy on Physical Education and Sports upon the rights of all Ugandans engaged in sports while guideline 4 (a) of the Children’s Act outlines sports as one of the activities key to children; 

RECOGNISING THAT inclusion of persons with disabilities in sports has been found to reduce stigma and discrimination associated with disability as well as empowering persons with disabilities in realising their potential and also provide opportunities  for persons with disabilities to develop skills to help their families and take on any other roles like their other able-bodied counterparts;

RECOGNISING THAT currently less emphasis is put in encouraging persons with disabilities to join sports yet their involvement has both community and individual impacts and goes a long way in reducing their isolation and their integration into the community as well as acting as a mechanism through which skills can be acquired and help in building self-confidence to take on the right challenges such as pursuing education or employment;

MINDFUL OF THE FACT THAT despite the various international instruments and domestic legislations and undertakings, persons with disabilities continue to face various barriers in their participation as equal members of society in sports which hinders their education and social wellbeing which results in their regard for sports as simply another area where discriminatory attitude is practiced towards them and perpetuated;

CONCERNED THAT children with disabilities have always been left out of sports programmes and physical education in schools and their communities leading to non-integration in schools and the community arena leading to high dropout rates in schools and ending up as social misfits in their communities;

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT sports plays an important role in improving inclusion and wellbeing of persons with disabilities, the development of the persons affected and acts as a mechanism through which persons with disabilities can be integrated into communities as well as help to advance the achievements of any development goals;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved by this Parliament that:-
    1. Government takes special interest and affirmative action in the promotion of sports and physical education for PWDs in line with Articles 32 and 35 of the 1995 Constitution of Uganda.

    2. Government increases funding to the Uganda Paralympics Committee with a view of enabling it fulfil its mandate to participate in sports.

    3. Government reviews and amends the current National Physical Education and Sports Policy as well as the National Council for Sports Act CAP 48 of the Laws of Uganda with a view of including provisions for persons with disabilities.

    4. Government ensures that all sports facilities in all schools and local governments make their facilities accessible to persons with disabilities.

    5. Not later than six months from the date of passage of this resolution, the Minister responsible for Education and Sports reports to Parliament on measures taken to implement this resolution as well as progress made towards the purpose of this resolution.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member. Is your motion seconded? It seconded by hon. Asamo, hon. Winnie Kiiza, hon. Lubogo Kenneth and hon. Betty Awol, hon. Santa Alum and hon. Betty Nambooze plus all the other Members.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I have three things to say. The majority of children and other PWDs in this country aspire and have a natural instinct to participate in sports and other recreational activities but the barriers of attitude, the lack of resources and neglect by the relevant Government officials and the community itself makes it impossible for our people to be able to enjoy these facilities and they end up being excluded altogether. So, what we are saying today is that it is important for Parliament to come out today and say no more exclusion of people with disabilities in sports activities.

For many years, the Uganda Paralympics Committee has been at the forefront of promoting sports activities for persons with disabilities in this country. However, this committee lacks the necessary resources to enable it execute its constitutional mandate which is also recognised by the Government. 

This committee for instance has 19 federations and a secretariat but it gets no more than Shs 8 million every year. Therefore, we are asking Government to set aside sufficient resources to enable this committee to execute its mandate and where possible we give it the capacity to be able to reach rural constituencies where this service is much more desired.

Sports in this country is governed within the framework of the National Council of Sports Act and the National Policy On Education and Sports. These two important instruments were enacted as PWDs are not citizens of this country. Therefore, we are appealing to Government to make sure that these two important instruments are amended so that PWDs can become citizens of this country in terms of sports and recreational activities.

With these few words, I appeal to all honourable members to stand up in unison and support this important motion for the good of our country. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Member, for the motion. Let the seconder speak and I will now propose the motion for debate.

5.00
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, representative of People with disabilities): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank Parliament which passes laws which are in favour of people with disabilities; very good laws and they have been assented to but their implementation remains a dream. Uganda is one of the best countries in promoting laws in favour of PWDs and there is no doubt.

Mr Speaker, we all know that sports give you physical exercise but when it comes to schools and institutions, we are used as the people who keep the uniforms. “Keeping waiting here,” You are judged without testing your potential, without knowing whether you can do sports.

Most PWDs do not go beyond university because of the services, because of the equipment that do not enable them go there. So the only alternative would be sports. And we know currently in South Africa we have somebody who is in court for allegedly killing his girlfriend, who participated in the Olympics.

It is unfortunate that PWDs are trying their best through the Paralympics and I know that the Minister of Sports is aware to participate in issues of sports but the budget given is so small that it does not cater for their equipment. The equipment is very expensive and the facilitation of these people beyond certain areas becomes a problem. 

We had a girl called Akullo from Madras School for the Blind who got a gold medal but the reception she got because she was blind was not the way Kiprotic got his. I thought a gold medal is a gold medal. Unfortunately, for the blind one it has remained quiet, she keeps calling us she needs allowance from the commissioner of sports and that money has not been paid. So, there is need for Government to recognise the potential of people with disabilities because that is the only way they can show their potential in public. It is the only way they can socialise and it is the only way they can come out. 

Our Act for Persons with Disabilities, 2006 provides that at least 10 percent of the budget in the Ministry of Education and Sports should cater for people with disabilities but, Mr Speaker, in the last budget, and I think the chairperson of the committee will bear us witness, we had a tough debate to see if we could have a special vote for people with disabilities. Unfortunately, that did not pass. I hope this year we shall succeed on that.

The other issue is that when schools are budgeting under the UPE policy - and let me start from the primary level - there is a budget for co-curricular activities but there is no money that is allocated for special sports for people with disabilities. When you go to a school and find a child with visual impairment, if you ask the headmaster why he has not allocated any budget, he tells you, “There are only four children with visual impairment compared to 400 in the school. Why should we buy one goal ball for this child?” This is a right, it is not a privilege and I think we need to begin looking at these people from the point of their potential because they can portray and show that Uganda is really dancing to the tune of the loss that it has made.

Mr Speaker, we have a small secretariat, which has tried to come up with issues about sports but again the struggle is especially with donor funds and you find that it becomes a problem for these people to move ahead. I am aware that in Gulu we have a very good basketball team. They play on wheel chairs but unfortunately when it comes to competitions, they are not brought on board with others. For example, when we have university sports, they could come and play and be seen that they are also participating.

I would like to add to what hon. Alex Ndeezi has said on the issue of the budget. I think we need to look at this critically and ensure that this budget is brought forward. I also think that an accessible environment - it is true that physical education is becoming a problem to all the schools maybe because of lack of fields. Many schools do not have them but the environment that makes these children participate should be created. These children can perform, they have the brains, they can play games and be able to come out and be useful people in our society. But this remains a challenge and I hope that from the motion moved today and as we move to the budget process, that this will be taken care of. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the motion which I now propose for your debate is for a resolution of Parliament to urge Government to include persons with disabilities in physical education activities and introduce sports affirmative action. That is the motion for your debate. I now propose it for your debate. Debate is open. It looks like we are going to have to limit the time - I think the honourable minister would like to support the motion. If he is supporting the motion then it might be a good way forward. Let the minister speak then I will come to Yumbe and Gulu.

5.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support the motion moved by hon. Alex Ndeezi and give clarification for the Members to understand what has been taking place so that we can move at par. In the body of the motion, there was a statement that people with disabilities have always been left out of sports programmes and physical education. I listened to hon. Asamo and she appreciates the role we have been playing but talks about the meagre resources. That is why I have come in at this particular time to first give you the picture so that the subsequent debaters can see where we are and what is required.

Mr Speaker, when I received that motion I decided to put a few points down for the Members to note. Government takes special interest in the promotion of sports for all persons in the country including the PWs and shall continue doing so. We promote physical education and sports in all our education institutions for all learners without discrimination. PWs have always been sponsored by Government to participate in both national and international sports competitions under their umbrella -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who are PWs?

MR BAKKABULINDI: The people with disabilities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that PWDs.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Yes. We have on several occasions supported the Uganda Paralympic team to participate in the Paralympics games and the Commonwealth games. Recently, Mr Speaker, in an effort to promote sports for the PWDs, Government supported them to organise and participate in the following events –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Procedure, Mr Speaker. Thank you very much. The point of procedure I am raising is that it has been a practice of this House that when a minister is giving a statement, which is written, we get copies. I see the minister is constantly referring to written notes, which contain very important information and I do not know if we shall have the opportunity to receive copies as we have always done. I kindly beg you to rule on that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister is supporting this motion and for the avoidance of making any mistakes, he decided to put his notes down so that he can follow closely what he has prepared in support of the motion not in opposition to the motion. I think let us give him the time.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As the sector minister in charge, I have to give all the details clearly indicated. During the Paralympic day event in July 2013 at Lugogo MTN Arena, we supported our colleagues. During the Paralympic week event from 17th to 21st February 2014 at Mandela National Stadium, we were also fully involved. 

It is true that Government funding for sports in general is still very low including that of PWDs and, therefore, we call upon Members of this august House to consider increasing the budget for sports. That is why I am here to support the motion.

Mr Speaker, as we talk, the PWDs are supposed to participate in the Commonwealth games in Glasgow in July but because out of the 54 disciplines that particular discipline had not qualified to go, I made it a point yesterday in our meeting to ask that they look for money to send four representatives of the PWDs to Dubai this week to qualify in order for them to be ready to go to Glasgow in July. This shows you that we are concerned.

Mr Speaker, we are in the process of reviewing the National Council of Sports Act and other sports laws in the country and provision for PWDs shall be given due consideration because we are aware of that.

Hon. Members, let me just remind you a bit. You may look at the international events and say, how about the local ones? In 2011, we gave Shs3 million to the Paralympic qualifiers for the London Olympics games. We went with them and they participated. National Paralympic air tickets were bought at Shs 2,595,000. The reason why I came with a written document, hon. Nambooze, is to give you figures that you cannot challenge.

Mr Speaker, we had Paralympics qualifiers in Rwanda for the sitting volleyball team on 21 November 2011 and we gave Shs 3,242,000 to the group. We had sitting volleyball on 29 February 2012 and we gave them Shs 600,000. We had Paralympic visas to Germany and we had to support them. That was in May 2012. We had Special Olympics in Rwanda and we were with them to support them. We had national sports championships for youth with visual impairment in Kayunga and we had to give them finances and that was in 2013. We had the National Primary Schools and National Adult Games for People with Disability and we spent more than Shs 2 million. Why am I bringing all this? It is not that we do not want to support them but I am giving you a background that with the meagre resources –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MRS OGWAL: Thank you. I have been listening to the minister and I do remember that you made a very good ruling on the statement that was made earlier on a procedural matter. I think that the statement being made by the minister is very important and contains figures. It is actually giving evidence of what the government has been doing. I know that he is supporting the statement and we are all very interested in this statement. Would it not be procedurally right if you, Mr Speaker, prevailed on the minister to have the document written and posted to our iPads so that we could benefit from the figures? He can make the statement in a summarised form but can he make a promise and fulfil that promise to write the statement and post it to our iPads? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I think, hon. Minister, since you are giving figures, it may be important that you share with the Members. So, you should act accordingly. I think hon. Members, the figures that are being read justify the motion because I heard a figure of Shs 600,000 and I am sure that the hon. Minister was feeling some resentment reading the figure of Shs 600,000 for a team and Shs 3,000,000 and other figures like that. The hon. Minister is justifying this motion that more funds will be required.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much. The reason I said that I am supporting the motion and reading these particular figures of one million, two million and Shs 600,000 is because these are meagre resources. What I am trying to indicate to the Members is that the spirit and the will have been there but the resources are so limited and that is why I support the motion by saying that it is high time, with your backing, we increased the figure for people with disability to be fully put on board. 

For purposes of the record and these good points as my sister has said, the Hansard is there but if you want anything from me, I will do it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you taking clarification from Nakasongola?

MR BAKABULINDI: Why not? I thank you.

MS KOMUHANGI: Mr Speaker, I chair the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the committee has information that the Special Needs and Inclusive Education Policy has never been adopted by Cabinet and now this is the reason why there are no enough resources apportioned by the Minister for Finance to this sub-sector. I want to know from the minister; are you telling us policy issues or are there issues that are organised from the sector without approval of Cabinet? 
 
MR BAKABULINDI: She is seeking clarification, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR BAKABULINDI: Mr Speaker, I am dealing with 54 disciplines and Paralympics is one of them. When I talk about disciplines, I mean football, volleyball, netball, games for the blind people and others. So, as the minister, I come to the sector in totality as sport and when it comes to the details of dividing Paralympics, volleyball, football, netball - that is administrative. 

MS KOMUHANGI: The minister has not answered my question. I talked of the Special Needs and Inclusive Education Policy meaning that sports for the children with special needs would fall under this policy, and will be provided for by the Ministry of Finance under this policy. The Ministry of Finance is saying that they are not allocating resources to this because the policy has not been adopted by Cabinet. I need a specific response to this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would that come to the gender ministry now?

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ELDERLY AND DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Mr Sulaiman Madada): I want to thank hon. Ndeezi for moving that motion but in matters of policy, I want to respond as follows:

There is generally a national policy on disability in Uganda. Under this policy, the vision is a society where PWDs fully participate in all spheres of development, including education. Under 3 (iv), we talk about objectives to create a conducive environment for participation of PWDs and when we come to strategy, under (viii), it is stated, “Developing and promoting PWDs cultural activity and sports events to enhance their recreational capacities and raise public awareness of their ability.” So in matters of policy, it is covered under the National Policy for Persons With Disability in Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Noted.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stood to support the motion and I have finished.  

5.19
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): I thank you, Mr Speaker. To me, the most important thing that this House must assert itself is on the budget provision to the Ministry of Education and Sports. I want to say this cognisant of the fact that you are recognised, Mr Speaker, as one of the pioneer members of the Parliamentary Football Club and in that regard, I take you as a sportsman. I think that for the new financial year, something must be done by Parliament acting on the recommendation of the parliamentary committee in charge of education and sports especially on sports. 

I was keenly listening to the figures being read by the hon. Minister and it leaves a lot to be desired for a national team to be facilitated to a tune of Shs 600,000, Shs 3 million, Shs 3.6 million! If resources could allow, sports is one of the ways we can market Uganda and change the negativity in the outside world about this country. People must stop asking us about President Idi Amin as if he still exists and start asking about people like Kiprotich, Akii-Bua, Jacob Oulanyah, Denis Obua to mention but a few. (Laughter)

I think that in supporting this motion, we are not reinventing a wheel especially on persons with disability. Before I got an accident, I used to be so restrictive with the definition of that word PWD. But after the accident, I had a second definition of the word PWD. It either stands for a person with disability or a person without disability. Therefore, we are all PWDs in my definition. So, we need to support these people because the wheel we invented was when we promulgated the Constitution. When you look at Article 35, it is very clear on the rights and freedoms of persons with disability and the state even made a commitment to ensure that we realign their full mental and physical potential in the Constitution.

When you look at the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVI and XVII, it is very clear. This is how we enacted the PWD Act in 2006 and I was a party to it. 
 
Therefore to me, we already have the will, we must support that will through making provisions that are eminent is supporting all the sporting disciplines that we have in this country. The She Cranes travel by road; when the national team, the Uganda Cranes have a match, they travel a day to the match. So how do you expect players to settle and play? We must invest in sports if this country wants to reap more, and investment that needs us to make enough budgetary provision to support hon. Charles Bakkabulindi who has done his best as state minister in charge sports. We should also support hon. Jessica Alupo who has tried her best if we want to realise our full potential – whether we are persons with or without disability. Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there seems to be a general consensus on this motion; so let us give it just brief comments and not lengthy speeches.

5.22
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand in support of the motion moved by hon. Ndeezi. I am supporting this motion due to the fact that sports have a lot of benefits to an individual. Sports provide improved mood, confidence, self-esteem, reduce anxiety and depression and increase a person’s ability to cope with a range of stressors. Sports also reduce the risk of dying prematurely from heart disease or stroke. Sports also help to control weight and lower the risk of becoming obese. Physical inactivity or dis-use of the body carries a health risk. For example, ageing –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have seen how much the mover of the motion is stretching his neck to see the interpretation from this extreme end. I think in this circumstance, the Opposition would not object for the interpreter to sit directly opposite hon. Ndeezi. I propose that from a humanitarian point of view, the interpreter should be allowed to sit here – in any case he is not a Member of Parliament. So I do not think that our colleagues on that side will imagine that I have ulterior motives to have him move over.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have that bench for the Sergeant-at-Arms right in the middle of the House; he can sit there.

MRS OGWAL: That is okay; thank you.

MR NDEEZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank you, my senior colleague, hon. Ogwal. What I wish to say is that I have learnt how to manoeuvre in different situations. So I want to assure you that I am very comfortable. (Laughter)

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sports also help in reducing health risks and disorders like ageing, chronic diseases and so on. Now, if sports have got all those benefits, why don’t we give the disabled the opportunity to participate in them? And if they did –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. Mr Speaker, I normally visit primary schools in my constituency. In one of my visits, I arrived during the time of Physical Education (PE). I found that all pupils from P.1 and P.2 were taken out but a disabled boy was left inside the classroom to keep watch over the property of the rest of the children. This clearly shows how we discriminate the disabled persons in Uganda. That is the information I wanted to give my colleague. Thank you.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, my honourable colleague for the information. Mr Speaker, I appreciate the prayers given by the mover of this motion and I would like to add the following recommendations – I am quite aware and we have been told by the minister that there is a policy in place. Maybe what I would like to know is: Is there a framework? If it is not there, I would like to recommend as follows: A national framework for inclusive physical activity and sport should be developed by a multi-agency working group that plans and promotes cross-disciplinary planning and collaboration in the field of physical activity and sports.

Secondly, national, regional and local public awareness campaigns around physical activity should reflect the diversity of the population and address the simple and broad opportunities that exist for physical activity.

Thirdly, the media should be more inclusive by developing strategies that allot space to a diversity of sports and should portray images of children and adults with disabilities in publicity material regarding sport and physical activity.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I suggest that we take that as we process the details of the resolution because we are currently having a general debate on the motion.

MS MUTYABULE: So should I bring it at that stage?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we will deal with that at the time we shall be adopting the clauses because right now there is nobody who is taking proper record of that.

MS MUTYABULE: Okay. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.29
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the motion. I wish to say that whenever I pass near people with disabilities in Gulu – there is a big place for them there - I often see people with disabilities playing and you will find them very excited; in the past you would find them engaged mostly in drinking – you know that an idle mind is the devil’s workshop. But when they are engaged in doing constructive things and planning on how they can also make their games successful, you will find them becoming more and more productive.

So this should start right away from the early stage. We have some schools, for example, Prisons Primary School in Gulu, where we have mainly mentally ill children and Gulu Primary School for the Blind and Laroo Primary School for the deaf. We need to introduce games as well for all these children at that early age. We should not only wait to provide – and that provision that exists in Gulu does not come from Government but from NGOs. When are we going to begin budgeting in order to cater for our people with disability? I know it is expensive but we need to do it, given that they are not very many. We need to make provision in school. 

When the minister stood here to testify that they were doing something very constructive, out of the 112 districts, he talked of 52 districts and he was only elaborating on those higher ones. How about those in primary and in secondary schools? We need them to be financed as well. So, honourable ministers of state for sports and also for gender, both of you need to work a little harder. We know that this is an area of affirmative action but if it is properly catered for, then you find that our people live more meaningful lives. 

We need the people with disabilities to know that they have potential. The fact that they are disabled does not mean that they do not have brains; they have brains and can do a lot more for the country. It is actually manifested by the people with disability who are here in Parliament who brought this motion. So we must appreciate the way we are and make sure that we make ourselves productive. We can do it if we budget for it. Thank you.

5.33
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to include persons with disabilities in physical education activities and introduce sports affirmative action. Persons with disabilities and especially children with disabilities are with us all the time: in our homes, our communities and the country at large. But everyone will agree with me that even at family level, these children are neglected. These children are segregated and that is why a Member said that at school level, the school authorities were not a shamed to ask them to take care of other children’s properties as they go to play. It is their right to play because we all know that disability is not inability. 

Mr Speaker, I want to thank the Minister for Sports for the effort he has put in to ensure that Uganda shines in terms of sports but there is very little being given to the sector. I want to speak in terms of the motion before us; it is talking about creating an environment that is conducive to help the persons with disabilities to participate in sports. When the minister was talking about the contributions that Government has put in place, that was in terms of the resource envelop that he holds. He talked of Shs 600,000 as a contribution of Government to a team going for sports activities; I remembered the time when Government was sending to districts Shs 500,000 for Women’s Day activities and that was reflected in the budget. And I would ask myself, Shs 500,000 for youth activities; Shs 500,000 for Women’s Day celebrations – now persons with disability going out of the country and you give them Shs 600,000? For heaven’s sake, are they going on foot or you think they can get there on their wheelchairs? And what can Shs 600,000 provide in a competition? Is it only for water, for only soda? 

Hon. Minister, this motion has come at the right time when we are in the process of discussing our policy statements and our budgets. I would like to request this Parliament to consider this budget of sports in totality. I also request that we consider the gold medallists; the person with disability whom the honourable colleague mentioned. That person would in a way inspire others. If we did it for Kiprotich, why not for the persons with disability and actually this one would be honoured doubly because of their nature. You know he has earned it with difficulty because he is disabled. But we just let it go; that does not encourage other children or other persons living with disabilities to give them morale to display their capabilities and potential. I therefore request this Parliament that as we go for budgeting, this medallist with disability be fully recognised and the Ministry of Sports be given enough resources and attention. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we need to shorten the time of our contributions. I think let us just give our support to this motion. 

5.38
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): I also want to thank hon. Ndeezi for introducing this motion before this House. I am a Member of the Human Rights Committee of this Parliament and I think this motion should have come sometime yesterday. 

Our Constitution is cognisant of the fact that for someone to realise their full potential, he needs both mental and physical empowerment and it is a fact that actually physically impaired persons have many times been left out when we come to physical education. Mr Speaker, it is my opinion that a person who is disadvantaged by way of empowerment should be advantaged more than others. So, if there may be budget limitations in other areas of sports, let it not be in the area of the physically disabled persons. For that reason, I support this motion especially in way of affirmative action in sports. While I am aware that the budget is generally small and there is little money for sports, what we are talking about is, if other areas of sports are suffocated, let the area for the children or people with disabilities be given the money. We need to reflect that affirmative action for these people. 

Mr Speaker, I have always thought about the way we treat people with disabilities in this country and I think that we should give them advantage in other areas besides sports. For instance, why would a physically disabled person pay the same tax with those who are not? This is something we need to look at. 

I want to end my submission by saying that I support the motion and that the Executive should take up this motion and the resolutions made in this Parliament and reflect it in the budget so that children with disabilities can be involved in the physical education. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Going by the way Members are debating, it seems no one is opposed to having the funding increased and the matter of the people with disability being included in sports. So, it is my considered view that since there is no disagreement, you put the question that the matter be voted on.

MS OLERU: Mr Speaker, the Member who is raising a motion has just entered the House and yet some of us have been seated here patiently because we know this is a very important motion where we should all add our voice. Now he is proposing that we put the question to the motion yet he has not been here and does not know what and how far we have gone. Is it procedurally right for somebody to just come in and stop Members from contributing when you have already even listed the Members to contribute on the motion?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I cannot recall any provisions in the rules that limit Members to a particular period of time of sitting before they can vote on a motion. (Laughter) I am not aware of any but if you recall any, you can draw my attention to it. I am not saying I know it all but if you remember a provision that says that a Member shall not move any motion unless that Member has sat in the House for a while, I will be obliged. In other words, I do not see any procedural violation. 

But, I will bear that in mind that there is now a motion that has been proposed for the question to be put. The rules say that once such a motion is proposed and moved, the Speaker has no choice but to proceed with the processing of the decision on the issue and I think there is general consensus on this matter. Hon. Members, we will take a bit of time processing because we need to handle each separately yet I also see some amendments. Hon. Members, if the matter arises, I will give people the opportunity to speak on the subject of what we are going to adopt. 

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, allow me say one thing. The honourable member who raised the matter that I have not been following up this matter, Mr Speaker, you know very well that you gave me an assignment that I have been handling from the office but at the same time watching proceedings from the screen that the Commission provided. That is why we have those screens in the offices. I was following this matter and because I have interest in it, that is why I came in here to speak to it. I now say, can we move the motion - (Laughter) - Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion that the resolutions be adopted as follows:

    1. Government takes special interests and affirmation action measures in the promotion of sports and physical education for persons with disabilities in line with Article 32 and Article 35 of the Constitution. 

I now put the question to that resolution.

(Question put and agreed to.)


    2. Government increases funding to the Uganda Paralympics Committee with a view to enabling it fulfil its mandate and to foster disability participation in sports. 

I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

    3. Government reviews and amends the current National Physical Education and Sports Policy as well as the National Council of Sports Act, CAP 48, with a view of including a provision for persons with disabilities. 

I put the question to that as well.

(Question put and agreed to.)

    4. Government ensures that all sports facilities in the various sports disciplines, schools and local governments, make their facilities accessible to persons with disabilities. 

I put the question to that.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

    5.  Not later than six months from the date of passing these resolutions, the Minister responsible for Education and Sports reports to Parliament on measures taken to implement this resolution as well as on progress made towards achieving the purposes of this resolution.

I now put the question to that so that in six months you report and advise the House on how far you have gone. I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any amendments at this stage will be entertained. Please propose quickly so that we can adopt where acceptable.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have the following amendments to move. I suggest that a national framework for inclusive physical activities and sports should be developed by an agency so that it can plan and promote gross disciplinary planning and collaboration in the field of physical activities and sports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that okay? Yes, hon. Alex Ndeezi.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, that is partly covered somewhere in the resolutions but I see no harm and so I accept the proposal.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but can’t we just say, “Government” instead of a ministry? Because there is the Ministry of Gender and that of Education involved together with the Ministry of Health. It is multi-sectoral. So, it would be prudent to use Government instead of just the Minister of Education.

Can I put the question to that amendment? I now put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS MUTYABULE: The second one is that national, regional and local public awareness campaigns around physical activities should reflect the diversity of the population and address the simple and broad opportunities that exist for physical activities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, is that still within the theme? Physical activities is such a wide concept and that might take us away from the focus on disabilities. But honourable members, there is the proposal.

MS MUTYABULE: Can I repeat it?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, please.

MS MUTYABULE: National, regional and local public awareness campaigns should reflect the diversity of the population and address the simple and broad opportunities that exist for physical activities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is now general. Yes, mover of the motion, anything to comment?

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I have a problem with the phrase “physical activities.” It is restrictive. If the honourable member can revise that phrase, I will have no problem.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the proposal from the mover is clear.

MR BAKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I said earlier, we are coming up with an amendment to repeal the National Council of Sports Act of 1964 and we are coming up with the regulation within one month. I think that is where we can incorporate that idea but if we bring it into this motion, it may lose or detract us from the core of the motion. Yes, the idea is good but it should come within the new Act and the regulations rather than in this motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the key problem that I have seen is that it is not emphasizing disability. It is general. Yes, sector minister.

MR MADADA: The information I want to give to Parliament is that three weeks ago, Cabinet approved the Persons with Disabilities (Amendment) Bill, which is to appear before Parliament. In that Amendment Bill we are talking about facilities for persons with disabilities in all public institutions. So, at that level, Parliament will have an input to that Bill which eventually will be an Act.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, are you proposing an amendment to the resolution or the resolution has no harm such that when you come up with the Bill it will be part of the implementation?

MR MADADA: I would think that we avoid it now and wait for the Bill which is coming and is under gazette and that area is already catered for.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. I thought that it would be better for you if Parliament passed this resolution and then you pick it as recommendation of Parliament and be able to include it in your Bill rather than saying that we avoid it now and wait for the Bill. Supposing it does not come in the Bill, will Parliament have not lost this opportunity?

THE SPEAKER: It is not against your Bill. So, on what issue does the Member for Oyam rise?

MS SANTA: If the proposal does no harm and it reinforces what hon. Mutyabule is proposing, then I see no reason why we should abandon it now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ok, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have something for the Ministry of Information and this is the media. The media should be more inclusive by developing strategies that allot space to a diversity of sports and should portray images of children and adults with a disability in publicity material regarding sports and physical activity.

MR NDEEZI: I thought it was not a main subject but since she has raised it, I accept.

MS ASAMO: I think it is going to water down the motion because we want to get what is urgent now and the issues of the media are already covered somewhere. I know that already in the communication for all, we can see how to get this thing out than adding it to this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, there is objection from the seconder. Hon, Mutyabule, would you like to withdraw that one? You have succeeded on two counts and losing on one would not be a bad loss. 

MS MUTYABULE: Mr Speaker, I withdraw that. 

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, my concern is on recommendation No.4 which says that “Government ensures that all sports facilities in the various disciplines, schools and local Governments make their facilities accessible to persons with disabilities.” We can say, “Government ensures that sports facilities in various sports disciplines”, because if we say “all,” there are some sports facilities that cannot be used by persons with disabilities, for example, the gym and swimming. I am therefore proposing that we remove the word “all.”

MS ASAMO: Mr Speaker, swimming is one of the best activities for people with disabilities. All the facilities - even the gym, you only need to put an environment that is enabling for one to perform and it shall be accessible to that area.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This matter has already been adopted so we may have to leave it the way it is. Let’s maintain it.

MR NDEEZI: You have ruled, Mr Speaker, but the idea is to end all exclusions. This means to end exclusions to all facilities.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Members, the prayers in the motion have been adopted. I now put the question for the adoption of the whole motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Hon. Members give me more 15 minutes and we receive what we had suspended under item 3 on the Order Paper such that we can lay those papers on the table and conclude today. Congratulations, hon. Ndeezi.

LAYING OF PAPERS

5.57
MS WINIFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman representative, Kasese): Mr Speaker, I am rising under Rule 30 of our Rules of Procedure to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General for Bundibugyo for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. There is a problem with how it was captured on the Order Paper. Those are reports from the Office of the Auditor-General but proceed and table them.

MS KIIZA: I beg to lay a report from the Auditor-General from Iganga District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS KIIZA: I wish to lay before the House a report from the Auditor-General of Jinja District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: I wish to lay a report from the Auditor-General regarding Wakiso District Local Government accounts ended 30th June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: This is a report from the Auditor-General of Kibaale District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.
 
MS KIIZA: I wish to lay on Table a report from the Auditor-General regarding the Kasese District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: I wish to lay on the Table the Auditor-General’s report of the Namutumba District Local government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the accounts for Tororo District Local Government for the year ended 30 June 2012, from the Auditor-General.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: I wish to lay a report of the Auditor-General regarding Kiryadongo District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report regarding Apac Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: I wish to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report regarding Agago District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: I wish to lay on Table the Buyende District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30th June 2011 from the Auditor-General. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General covering Rakai District Local Government accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General regarding accounts of Lamwo District Local Government for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on Nwoya District Local Government for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General on Kakira Town Council for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General regarding Manafwa Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report on Hima Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General on Karago Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report on Rwimi Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on Buliisa Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General on Arua Municipal Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General on Paidha Town Council for the accounts of the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the report of the Auditor-General on Zombo Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General on Busembatya Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General on Nebbi Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay a report of the Auditor-General on Ayer Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General on the accounts of Lira Municipal Council for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table a report of the Auditor-General on Namasale Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report of the accounts of Otuke Town Council for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity but I wish to call upon the Members of the Local Government Accounts Committee that laying these papers indicates a lot of work ahead for us. Mr Speaker, we shall request that at an opportune time when we present our programme and work even during the time when Parliament is sitting, you accord us the opportunity to do the work. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Member. All those reports from the Auditor-General for the year ending 30 June  2011 and year ending 30 June 2012 of local government accounts, town council accounts and municipal council accounts stand committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling. The prayers you made in advance will be granted when formally made at the right time. Thank you very much and please handle those reports expeditiously so that we can help clear the backlog that is developing and beginning to build up in the accountability committees.

The Office of the Speaker will grant you all the authority and permissions to enable you finalise with the backlog, and also deal with the current issues before your accountability committee. That applies to your committee, Committee on Public Accounts and other accountability committees.

Thank you very much, hon. Members. This House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 O’clock and let us make it 2.00 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.08 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 2 April 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
