
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Thursday, 28 April 2022

Parliament met at 2.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Colleagues. I welcome you to today’s sitting. I would like to remind the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development to complete the tax and revenue Bills so that the House is able to consider them before supply.

Colleagues, I think you have been seeing announcements. Today, we shall have High Mass at 5.00 p.m. in the Conference Hall. The main celebrant will be the Most Rev. Bishop Robert Muhiirwa, the Bishop of Fort Portal Diocese. You are all invited. And, because of that, I will be finishing this session at 4.45 p.m. so that we can attend Mass.

On 27 April 2022, this House halted the construction of structures in a greenbelt in Iganga. Yesterday, Hon. Peter Mugema again raised this matter on the Floor that the directive of this House had not been adhered to. I required the Minister of Local Government to go and report back to this House. I do not see the minister here, but maybe there is an update from Hon. Panadol since he was the one who raised this matter.

2.26
MR PETER MUGEMA (Independent, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your concern. The latest information I have is that yesterday, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury was there in Iganga at around 6.20 p.m. He went and visited the site and did not make any comment. He said he would bring back his findings, I think, to the line minister whom I am eagerly waiting to see and hear what he will be telling me. 

However, as we talk now, they build day and night. They even have floodlights. It is a racket of mafias who are taking away our Freedom Square – the greenbelt of Iganga. 

I remember one time I hosted Gen. Katumba Wamala there. It has been a greenbelt and people have been dancing and relaxing from there. So, I am eagerly waiting for the line minister to give us a status report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you will give us an update on the action taken. Do you want to do it now?

2.17
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO 
(Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, like he said, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury went on ground to see what was happening so that he could come up with a comprehensive report. We have not yet received that report and so we are still waiting. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that was a matter that did not need a comprehensive report – you can take your seat.

The town clerk was directed by the Physical Planning Board that no construction should take place in the greenbelt, but he allowed it to continue. So, if a town clerk would require the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury to first drive government fuel up to Iganga to see a person who is defying a government directive - You see, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury is from the Executive and Physical Planning Board is also from the Executive. 

What we want is very simple. On Tuesday, I hope that comprehensive report will be ready. However, the Member of Parliament has told you that they are building day and night so that, I think, they claim compensation – whoever they are. Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

2.19
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I would like to promise you that between today and tomorrow, I am going to use my powers, as Prime Minister, and stop that construction. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I have also read in the news – of course, we welcome the President of Mozambique, who is here visiting us. Mozambique contributed a lot to the liberation of this country.
 
However, I have read in the news that the Minister of Foreign Affairs was saying that they are negotiating with the Government of Mozambique for diplomatic passport holders – and I think official passport holders – to start travelling between the two countries visa-free.

Now, this brings me to an issue where I have received calls from very many people – and I think even you colleagues have received calls from people – coming for visa recommendations. It is very difficult for a Ugandan to get a visa to other countries. Our President has been fighting for Pan-Africanism and African integration – giving whatever he can to the rest of the continent. However, to get a visa to some of the African countries is not easy. 

We have a minister who was not feeling well and was going to be operated, but for him to get a visa for a caretaker to South Africa was a tug of war. 

So, the moment we keep thinking about ourselves as diplomats and ministers, what about that young man from Kikuubo who is going to trade in China, South Africa or somewhere? It is a very big concern currently for us as Members of Parliament and ministers – we go to many countries without visas. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I request that in two weeks’ time, the Minister of Foreign Affairs brings a comprehensive statement on the measures being taken to negotiate friendly visa terms for the ordinary Ugandan, who uses an ordinary passport. (Applause) You have a diplomatic passport, but you will try to take your sick child to some country and you will be denied a visa. I request for that because this is about negotiating for friendly visa terms for the ordinary person, who is going to trade in China or Turkey. 

I know of another Government official who was going on government business. She told me that she applied for a visa to go to the US in December 2021 and was given an appointment of November 2022. Yes. Now you need a whole year’s appointment to get a visa yet for people of those countries, they come here in just a short time. 

So, I feel that, as Uganda, we have made very strong strides that our visa and passport should be respected seriously. Let the Minister of Foreign Affairs bring us a comprehensive statement on measures being taken to ensure that Ugandans can easily travel to other countries like other citizens easily travel to Uganda.

I have received information from the sports team that we have a friendly football match tomorrow between the UPDF Generals and the Parliamentary team tomorrow. Our very own, the CDF will captain the Generals and Hon. Linos Ngompek will captain the parliamentary team. It is a friendly match to foster relations between the UPDF and us. We all work for the good of this country. 

I urge you, colleagues, to attend the match at Lugogo Phillip Omondi Stadium at 3.00 p.m. I hope Hon. Kivumbi will be our striker. 

I think these are the main issues - what are you raising a point of procedure on? You would like to raise a procedural matter on my communication? Hon. Tebandeke, what is your procedural matter? 

MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also join thousands to congratulate you on that elevation to the new position as our Speaker of this Parliament. 

I raise a procedural matter under rule 141 of our Rules of Procedure over the delayed Bills. Aware that yesterday you ruled that all the delayed Bills must be presented to this House starting next week. 

My issue is over the delayed Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill, 2021. I am aware that this Bill has taken almost six months from September last year when it was presented to this House. 

However, my main issue is not about the delay, but about the enforcement unit which is effecting some of the clauses of the Bill before it is debated here in the House. 

In the Bill, which I happened to read, clause 13 grants powers to the UPDF soldiers, the FPF (Fisheries Protection Force) to take on enforcement of the law. I also happened to read through the current Fish Act 2010 and the statutory instrument number 33 of the Fish Act, Cap. 197; rule 26 gives powers of enforcement of the Fish Act to the authorised officers. Rule 25 of the Fish Act describes who the authorised officers are to carry on the enforcement. This is not only in violation of the Fish Act and the rights of Ugandans, but also a violation of the Constitution; Article 212(b) properly describes enforcement of the law to be done by the police. 

Are we proceeding well if the UPDF soldiers are taking on enforcement of the clauses of the Bill which has not yet come into effect? Are we proceeding well if UPDF is taking over the work of the police? Are we proceeding well with the rights of Ugandans in the fishing community not effectively defended? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Honourable. The procedure has to do with what is going on here. Acts of the UPDF, whatever they are doing, could have been raised under other questions. You have very many opportunities of raising issues of national importance. 

Instead, it is you who did not proceed well because you violated rule 80 of our Rules of Procedure, which is debating in anticipation. It is very clear that you cannot come here to discuss the contents of a Bill when the Bill is not yet brought for consideration. Not everyone has seen the Bill. 

Therefore, honourable, we are proceeding well here and there is no problem. Hon. Atkins, is it on procedure? 

2.29
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Sarah Opendi is not here to translate for the Prime Minister. (Laughter) Prime Minister, will you be able to understand? (Laughter)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am honoured to have served as shadow minister of foreign affairs in the 10th Parliament. My position on this is in response to your communication regarding visas. I would like to specifically focus on the United States. 

While serving as Minister of Foreign Affairs in the shadow government, I had the opportunity to interact with the then Unites States Ambassador; Ambassador Deborah Malac. I shared it with some officials in the White House, in the Pentagon and the State Department. 

We got a window of opportunity where when our citizens would apply for United States visas, they would be offered 10 years visa window. I came and shared with the Speaker then, Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, about that opportunity so that a visit could be made to the embassy of the United States where our Government, specifically the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, could have a conversation with the members of the USA so that we could have the 10-year window of visa. 

I take this opportunity to inform you that that window is still available – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Atkins, I have requested the minister to bring a comprehensive statement which we shall discuss exhaustively. That statement will have measures being taken to help an ordinary Ugandan to acquire visa and travel easily – 

MR KATUSABE: I am only giving you the opportunity, Mr Speaker – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you do not give the Speaker an opportunity. Kindly take your seat. I have given you an opportunity; you do not need to reciprocate. 

2.32
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (NRM, West Budama North East, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On Wednesday morning and last night, disaster visited the people of West Budama North East. This is a county in Tororo District and it comprises a total of six subcounties. These are Sop-sop, Paya, Nabwire, Kirewa and Soni. 

We received very heavy rainfall accompanied by hailstones and strong winds that destroyed several farms, private houses and also institutional buildings including, but not limited to institutions of learning. A primary school at Senda was completely destroyed. 

The structural integrity of several primary schools including a primary school called Nyabanja, Katandi Primary School, Wikus Primary School, Kianja Primary School, Sop Sop Primary school, Paya Primary School and Sere Primary School were thoroughly compromised.

Mr Speaker, I rise to make the following prayers: One, the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is present here, responds immediately to the needs of the people of West Budama North East because they are now living under trees. Their children will have to go to school and study under trees yet they will still be expected to compete nationally when the examinations come.

Two, Government prepares relief packages to alleviate and mitigate the suffering of the people of West Budama North East County. I am absolutely certain they will not have any harvest for the next season. I pray.

2.34
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Government has received the information and shall act accordingly. Members, if you get such a problem, write to the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and we have been acting on Members’ correspondences. I promise that Government will act.

Mr Speaker, there is one point I would like to make. Members of Parliament need to mobilise communities to plant trees to act as wind breaks. This will save a lot. Thank you so much.

2.35
MR KENNETH KIIZA (Independent, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter concerning the people of Masindi who are in sugarcane growing areas. Masindi District is a predominantly a sugarcane growing area with over 7,000 farmers.

Lately, the farmers are suffering from lack of market which has led the sugarcane on people’s fields to go to 30 months plus. Previously, sugarcane would be harvested between 18 and 24 months, as per the cane production contracts that were signed by the farmers and the millers.

Mr Speaker, a lot of farmers have had to go and borrow money against their sugarcane in anticipation that they would sell and pay this money. Many farmers are now faced with loss of their properties since commercial banks are trying to recover their monies.

The same farmers are now suffering from increased prices of inputs, especially Urea and DAP fertilisers, which have more than doubled in price. A bag of Urea, which was costing Shs 100,000 has gone to over Shs 200,000, making it difficult for farmers to breakeven. 

These are my prayers: Government should intervene and ensure these farmers get markets for their products to alleviate poverty which is knocking at most people’s doors.

We pray that Government should heavily subsidise fertilisers and seed cane for farmers like they have been doing for others.

Finally, the sugar board, which should have come in place by now, will be constituted. As you are aware, the Sugar Act came into law, but to date, there is no sugar board which is supposed to mitigate these issues affecting farmers like pricing and regulation of the sugar market. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you have the Minister of Trade who can also supplement you.

2.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague for raising this important issue of sugar production in the country. It is true a lot of sugar is being produced in the country, some of which has not been consumed and Government is in the process - before I come to the Kinyara and Masindi -

In Busoga, we are putting up an extra factory and money has been put in the budget in Luuka to process it. On the side of Western Uganda, in Masindi particularly, Kinyara Sugar Works Limited has now increased capacity to do refined sugar. With the opening of the economy, we anticipate that the demand is going to increase and consumption of sugar will also increase.

Mr Speaker, the solution to this is putting up more factories especially, refined sugar and Kinyara Sugar Works Limited has now started producing refined sugar which has not been the case.

We think it is a temporary situation. In the next three to five months, consumption of sugar will increase when we continue to increase the capacity of producing refined sugar.

I will follow up these other issues that you raised. I will visit Masindi and talk to the farmers about some of those issues together with you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, how much time do you need to give us feedback because it is not only about one constituency.

MR BAHATI: I will give you feedback next week on the plan we have to resolve these issues. As I said, the solution is putting up more factories. 

The Member raised another issue of the sugar board. The problem has been funding for the sugar board, but we are glad to announce that probably by July, the sugar board should be in place.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me give you time to visit the affected areas, not only Masindi, but also Busoga. Hon. Olanya might also be having the same. Please report back after two weeks.

2.41
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Mr Speaker, thank you for the good guidance. I explore the honourable minister to meet people coming from the sugarcane growing areas. 

In my district, Amuru, farmers are crying. People were told to grow sugarcane, but currently, there is no market and the sugarcane factories are dictating prices; they are giving low prices, when farmers have put too much during production.  It is important the minister meets people from sugarcane growing areas so that we can discuss the way forward together with the factory owners.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sure. Hon. Lumu Richard? Hon. Nambooze, I know you have a point of procedure. Please take your seat. I will allow you. I said, if you sit, I will allow you. 

2.42
MR RICHARD LUMU (DP, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am raising a matter of national importance concerning Makerere University Main Building, which was gutted by fire on 20 September 2020. 

The building curved in and the walls were completely destroyed.

The Minister of State for Education and Sports (Higher Education), Hon. Chrysostom Muyingo, appeared in this Parliament to update us on the condition of the building. 

Mr Speaker, the Cabinet immediately passed Shs 21 billion to construct the building that had been destroyed. Today, they are repairing the building – the walls and the remainders of what was gutted by fire. 

Mr Speaker, that worries me and all of the people who actually attended Makerere University. The Ivory Tower is a very important building of the university. When I say “of the university”, I mean Makerere University. 

Mr Speaker, my prayers are: 

    1. We need to know whether the money, which was approved by Parliament, was for repairs or construction of a fresh building, known as the Ivory Tower. 

    2. We need to know whether there was a report of engineers or qualified people so that Parliament is aware about whether the walls, which had been gutted by fire and weakened, can be repaired to actually carry the weight of the roof, which will be put on the building. 

I pray, Mr Speaker, that this House interests itself in investigating what exactly it recommended. So, I pray.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you are putting me in a tricky corner. Do you doubt the decisions of this House? 

Honourable, a request came from Government and the relevant committee of Parliament scrutinised it. Okay? After scrutinising, we came here on the Floor – basing on the scrutiny that we had done – and made the resolution as House. 

Now, what we should be doing, as a House, is to allow whatever we passed to be implemented and then we do our oversight role. This is because, if we are to go beyond that – do you think someone needs to show us whether what we passed is being implemented before they could even start? Colleagues, let us know where our powers stop. 

However, I ask the Committee on Education and Sports to follow up that matter and ensure - Hon. Ssewungu, you are a member of the Committee on Education and Sports. I task the Committee on Education and Sports to ensure that the money we passed for that task is well utilised and used for the task it was allocated for –(Ms Nambooze rose_)

Hon. Nambooze, I know your issue. Allow me to finish matters of national importance which I have here.

2.47
Mr RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa East Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of urgent public importance. On the 22nd day of February 2022, a certain gang of goons rounded up Luzira Stage Seven Village. They were armed with pangas, sledgehammers and pickaxes. These goons started demolishing people’s homes. 

When the people heard, they came out and fought back. This team of goons ran away. However, the goons did all these acts in the face of a security camera. 

Mr Speaker, I was called at 2 00 a.m. and I swung into action. However, by the time I reached, the Police had not yet arrived. So, I called the police and, eventually, the police came after 45 minutes. I found the houses had been partially demolished. 

In the morning, I called the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development (Lands), Hon. Mayanja, who visited the scene and directed the police to carry out investigations and arrest the criminals. However, up to now, nothing has gone on. 

Just last Saturday – two months after – the same group came back, this time a little serious. They were armed with petrol in jerricans, sledgehammers and pickaxes. They started demolishing and pouring petrol around the houses. When the people heard, they made alarms and these thugs took off. 

Mr Speaker, my people are living under uncertainty. They are living under fear for their lives. The police have the mandate to secure the people and their property. 

I would like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs what he is doing to ensure security and public safety for my people. I also want to know what they are doing to make sure that they arrest the culprits. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, goons are terrorising people. It is a very serious matter and Hon. Eng. Balimwezo is concerned.

2.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I have taken note of my brother’s concern. I am going to direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to go on site, investigate and make sure that these goons are arrested and brought to book.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have children of the Holy Missionary Childhood, an affiliate of the Archdiocese of Mbarara Development Association and Kampala Archdiocese. They are accompanied by the teachers and have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause) 

They are very many and I cannot read all their names, in the interest of time. However, the teachers are: Immaculate Kyomuhangi, Allen Tushabe (who is the parents’ representative on the executive committee), Dorothy Atuhaire, Tony Mwebaze and Justus Amanya – media and publicity. 

However, colleagues, for the purpose of these young children of ours also hearing their names, let me quickly read through the list:

    1. Katerega Golden - You can just raise your arm and we see you.
    2. Maria Nassonko.
    3. Baine Jean Karl
    4. John Michael
    5. Monica Katerega

    6. Bron Enganzi
    7. Alton Escriva
    8. Brice Eli
    9. Mathias Havery
    10. Ainemukama Leona Pauline

    11. Henrietta Anna Maria
    12. Daniella Agumenaitwe
    13. Helena Immaculate
    14. Joseph Hathorn
    15. Noella Arinda Siima

    16. Beyondah Neoghan O.
    17. Manzi Ryan Mwesigwa
    18. Nicole Murungi Mwesigwa
    19. Barungi Tyra Mary
    20. Musiime Bruno

    21. Ampe Jonathan
    22. Davina Maria Bigirwa
    23. Mwembembezi Samuel
    24. Harry Tumwebaze, and
    25. Elvis Atwiine. 
(Applause)

Colleagues, I think you have copied names for your anticipated children. Hear the good names - (Laughter)

Hon. Mukasa Rogers, you have an issue on which I would guide. It is an issue on increasing cases of cancer in the country. I would guide that you hand over that issue to the Prime Minister so that on Thursday, she gives you a comprehensive answer. It is a matter of national importance, but not very urgent and it will need a comprehensive answer. Therefore, I request that you write a comprehensive question and you pass it on to her. 

Hon. Katusabe, there is no one on the Floor. The Prime Minister is already off. 

2.55
Mr evans kanyike (NUP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I arise on a matter of national importance. In August last year, I petitioned the Office of the Speaker over the forceful eviction of 3,000 people in my constituency in the villages of Kasanje, Nakigga and Birinzi in Ssunga Parish, Bukakata Subcounty by the National Oil Palm Project and Bidco Uganda Limited, to use the land for oil palm growing. 

The disputed land is comprised in a Free Register Volume of Block 271 registered in the name of Juma Mugunga, Fabiano Matovu and Robert Kizindo as administrators of the estate of the late Justin Kizindo and Nalubega Mauritia as the administrators of the estate of the late Paulo Mukasa.

The four mentioned individuals entered into a transaction with the National Oil Palm Project and Bidco Uganda Limited to use the land for extending the oil palm project in my area. This was, however, done without consulting and considering the bibanja holders, most of whom are bona fide occupants, despite having their homesteads on the same land and using it for agriculture and rearing cattle.

Following the intervention of the Rt Hon. Speaker, Anita Among, through a directive to the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Hon. Judith Nabakooba, the minister visited the area and halted all activities on the land until all the conflicts are resolved. 

She also promised to carry out a thorough investigation to establish how the leasehold land was registered as a freehold in the names of the four individuals.

Secondly, it was to ensure justice and fairness for my residents who are undergoing threat of eviction. However, up to now, there is no comprehensive report. They did not show any investigation carried out by the investigation officers who were directed by the minister. 

That notwithstanding, a memorandum of understanding –

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable member, mention your prayers.

Mr kanyike: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There was a memorandum of understanding, which was reached between the lawyers of the landlords and the bibanja holders. They agreed on 700 acres of land to be distributed among the residents. 

However, I would like to report to this honourable House that this agreement between the two parties has been violated and the residents are living in fear due to pending evictions. 

My prayers:

    1.  This honourable House takes a firm stand to protect the three bibanja holders in my constituency from the pending evictions since they have nowhere to go.

    2. The landlords and the National Oil Palm Project and Bidco Uganda Limited make a commitment to resolve this land conflict amicably.

    3. Lastly, the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development should explain to this august House why the National Oil Palm Project and Bidco Limited, have gone ahead to fence off this land before the standing conflicts are resolved. Thank you for the opportunity.

The Deputy Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. Colleagues, we need to be cautious when we are making our prayers. You cannot force a party to settle a matter amicably. What if I would like to go legal depending on my rights? These are matters, which can come either through petitions, or Prime Minister’s Time so that you get a comprehensive answer. 

Colleagues, if you could agree with me, let us pass on this matter to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, in two weeks’ time - if you feel there is a very urgent matter in it, the Prime Minister can respond to it now; or do a petition. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, just a minute. Let me first listen to Hon. Ssewungu – Hon. Nambooze, you have your time. 

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your wise guidance. Actually, before I seek clarification from the Prime Minister -

The Deputy Speaker: Hon. Ssewungu, a minute. Colleagues, let me just make this very clear. You will only get respect if you give it to others. A colleague has sent me here chits, which even had threats. I just became humble and said I am giving you time, but I am continually being harassed. 

Therefore, if I act in a certain manner – please, I am trying my best to be as humble as possible. I will give you time. I have a timeline in which I work. Let us take it easy. All colleagues here have issues. Honourable member, when your time comes, I will give it to you. 

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Indeed, I was seeking clarification from the Prime Minister. She did not hear me probably, but I saw her looking at me. 

These are the areas Members are paying interest to. Indeed, some of these matters, like what the honourable member has said here, were given a directive by the Speaker in the House, but the minister went there herself. We need to take keen interest in these officers who violate parliamentary directives. 

Yesterday, we had a similar matter. Right now, we have heard the honourable member from Nakawa who said, there were goons before cameras. Again, I seek clarification from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister on that. We have information that these cameras are no longer working. Can she take interest in finding out whether our CCTV cameras, where we spent a lot of money, are functioning or not? This information does not come from Ssewungu or any Member of Parliament; it comes from security agents who inform us that they are not working. 

I pray that other than responding to everything, the guidance you have given will provide better solutions to a Member like this one. Members must study what issue is of urgent national importance and what should be a petition to Parliament that must be processed by a relevant committee of Parliament to give an everlasting solution. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, kindly take keen interest in decisions of Parliament and those particular officers who violate them. Hon. Peter Mugema was here and we were happy that when he came back, you allowed him. Together with the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Local Government, you drove directly to Iganga. 

We cannot run Parliament- we are all presidential materials, unless some of you do not feel the same. You find people being given instructions and directives from here. When committees of Parliament invite people as witnesses, they refuse to appear and the committee goes on. When they bring reports here, we shall challenge them and this will affect Parliament. Thank you, Mr Speaker.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Your concern is well noted. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, would you like to add more to that? [Mr Nandala-Mafabi - Colleagues, at exactly 4.00 p.m., we shall have the Prime Minister’s Time. I have two matters to handle before then so we have to work within that time. At 4.45 p.m., I will be adjourning this House. 

3.05
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, I think you are the most generous Speaker I have come across. (Applause)

I have noticed that our colleague from Nakawa raised a police matter, but he brought it to the House. Otherwise, you would have advised him in your office to go and see the police. What my colleague has raised here is a petition. The reason we are not working on it is because if it was a petition, it would have appeared on the Order Paper. That would have been the best. 

One of the reasons we are wasting time - we are even going to hear matters of national importance, where a man and a woman have fought and we will not do our work. I would like to beg you, Mr Speaker, that when people come to your office, the generosity should end. Tell them “Police - Make a petition” and we come in. 

Regarding the petition he has raised, if I was a Prime Minister – it is just like any other normal question. If it was on the Order Paper, you would direct a committee to either look at it or the minister to handle it in black and white. What he has just spoken is on the Hansard. What time does Rt Hon. Nabbanja have to go and extract a Hansard? 

Mr Speaker, do not waste a lot of your energy and that of Parliament by entertaining each and everything, as a matter of national importance. There are so many institutions that can handle these things. The reason you see Members losing interest in the Parliament is because you take two hours on matters of national importance yet, we have very fundamental issues to deal with in this House. Mr Speaker, I beg that you act as a Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I am happy this has come from a Member reason being, I have talked to colleagues, but they do not want to listen. Today, I referred over 12 matters, where I was guiding, but there are colleagues who insist and tell you, “No, no, it is a matter of urgency.” For example, there was an issue from Hon. Ronald Kanyike. I was told it was an eviction of residents in Bukakata Subcounty. You feel it is a very urgent matter, but when a colleague reaches here, it is a wider one. 

Colleagues, you are not only wasting my time; you are also wasting yours. Also, the Prime Minister will stand here and answer your question, but you will not get value for your people. You will have spoken on TV and people will have seen you. Most of us record that component and say, “I raised the matter”, but you do not mind about the response. Since this has now come from you, colleagues, you will allow me to be tougher.

The Prime Minister has said she wants to give a small clarification on cameras, but for the rest of the matters, let us push them for the Prime Minister’s Time. If you want, you can also make it a petition. It is up to you.
  
3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, and Hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Allow me to inform you, colleagues, that our cameras are functional. Let me give you an example. We arrested those goons who wanted to kill my brother here, Gen. Katumba Wamala, using the cameras. Our cameras are working very well. (Interjections) If you want to prove this, commit an offence behind the cameras and see whether we shall not arrest you. (Laughter) Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.10 
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My matter is related to what has been raised by Hon. Nandala-Mafabi concerning other rules. 
There are some senior Members of Parliament here who know what petitions and questions for oral answer are because they had an opportunity to learn. I think it is incumbent upon all of us to assist the new Members to learn how parliamentary business is conducted. I am here to plead for the backbenchers and I know, Mr Speaker, you will listen to us since it is recently that you changed the seat to the Frontbench. 

I refer to rule 26. Mr Speaker, the rules give us an opportunity to raise questions in writing, deposit them to Clerk’s office and wait for the answer. According to our rules, the ministers should come and answer those questions within two weeks. I have written several questions and they have not been answered, as per the rules. 

I also refer to rule 45 – this rule talks about these matters of national importance. You come with a very important matter, take it before the Speaker and he/she accepts that it is an urgent matter of national importance however, when you raise it here, the Prime Minister will say, “I will tell the minister to write a report and bring it here the following week or the next”. That ceases to be a matter of national importance. 

When we look at the provisions of rules 49 and 50, they say on Thursday, the first two hours are for Members; backbenchers, to raise issues. I bring that together with rule 179(7). The rules provide that, Mr Speaker, you will allot time when Members will raise the assurances as made by the President, the Vice-President, the Prime Minister or ministers in their constituencies. You will facilitate the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation to follow up on these pledges. 

Mr Speaker, I know you wish us well and want us to come back here. I would like to persuade you to give your Members, sitting on the back benches, an opportunity to represent their people. Somebody can say “you go to police” or “you go to the minister”, but my mandate is here. I was sent here and not to the police. (Applause) I will not go to offices and chase after ministers. There is a Leader of Government business here – if you think that my matter should be handled by a minister, let him demand that that minister does his or her work.
 
However, Mr Speaker, our office is your office and I pray that you continue giving us space to come and tell you what is happening in our constituencies. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Betty Nambooze. Hon. Betty Nambooze is right and I think we have been doing this. 

However, colleagues, rule 179(7), which Hon. Betty Nambooze is looking at which talks about issues of Government assurance within your constituencies and all that – I think we have been actualising it under Rule 41, which talks about Prime Minister’s Time and rule 42, which talks about questions to the ministers. The one I have not seen being utilised much is rule 45, which is for questions for oral answers and you need to give a notice so that you can get an oral answer. 

What the Members are raising is: when you are asking a question, put yourself in the shoes of the person who is going to answer. If you were asked that question, which someone has researched on for a whole week, would you be able to stand on the Floor and give a comprehensive answer? So, you need to go through our Rules of Procedure and see where your question lies.
 
The challenge I have is that a Member comes and you tell him that “no, put it under rule 41” and the Member says, “no, my constituency know that I am going to be presenting this matter and they are all waiting”. Pressure. 

So, Hon. Nambooze, we are going to continue trying.

On the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation, colleagues, if you have pledges in your constituencies, the honourable chairperson is here. Always forward your issues to the committee. However, let us utilise rule 41, rule 42 and rule 45 extensively. However, we shall give you opportunity. It is not that we shall close off all these. 

(Mr Katusabe rose_) Hon. Atkins Katusabe, the issues are many – I know of procedure and all that. However, colleagues, yesterday, we considered a report from the Committee on Presidential Affairs on a nationwide assessment of the disaster-prone areas and the proposed sustainable strategies for addressing disasters in the country. We had a very extensive discussion. What remained was only adoption of the report so that it can be acted upon by the Executive. 

So, I would like to put a question now that the House adopts the report of the Committee on Presidential Affairs on a nationwide assessment of the disaster-prone areas and the proposed sustainable strategies for addressing disasters in the country. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Some of you are still having issues. Hon. Kaberuka, I will not give you time now. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, please, handle this matter because it concerns the continued homelessness of people affected during reaffirmation of boundaries. So, Hon. Kaberuka, link up with the Rt Hon. Prime Minister so that next week, this matter is also handled comprehensively. 

Colleagues, we do not have much time, but I would like you to allow me to amend the Order Paper and give only 10 minutes to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Sunday, 1 May 2022 is Labour Day and we usually get a statement on Labour Day. I will send this statement to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this will be the last time we are amending the Order Paper on the Floor to accommodate a statement for such days because there is nothing urgent on such a matter. You will always be telling us in advance so that we book your space on the Order Paper. This is the last time we are doing this. 

Honourable Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, you have 10 minutes.

STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR DAY, SUNDAY, 1 MAY 2022

3.18
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The statement is uploaded on the intranet. 

Uganda will join the rest of the world to celebrate International Labour Day on Sunday, 1 May 2022. This day is commemorated in appreciation of the contribution of workers to national development and it helps in raising national and international consciousness on the importance of promoting and protecting the rights of workers. 

The day is also used to reflect on the achievements, challenges and opportunities for enhancing productive employment. The theme for this year’s celebration is: “Mitigating the impact of COVID-19: enhancing productive employment for improved livelihoods through Parish Development Model.”

Mr Speaker, the choice of this theme is strategic in raising national consciousness on the relevance of Parish Development Model as a mechanism for promoting productive employment. This House will note that while Government has made significant success in reducing extreme poverty, creating employment and improving the standard of living of most Ugandans, unemployment and underemployment remain a big challenge. About 39 per cent of Uganda’s households are largely involved in subsistence agriculture and are mainly operating outside the money economy. 

Members may also be aware that the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted value and supply chain, causing adverse effects on the economy. The pandemic placed workers in unprecedented situations as witnessed by the drastic reduction in production, closure of workplaces and, consequently, loss of jobs – not to mention the diminished benefits for those who remained working under the COVID-19. 

To fully appreciate the impact of the disruption of COVID-19 on the workforce, Government, through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, commissioned a study to establish the impact of COVID-19 on labour, employment and productivity. 

The findings of this study revealed that nearly 57 per cent of the firms (employing about 2,945,372 workers) decreased employment to cope with supply chain disruptions and sales contraction, and only five per cent registered an increase in employment. This sank about 2.9 million people into unemployment due to the temporary or permanent layoffs by most and some firms. 

Mr Speaker, the study also revealed that the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated youth unemployment, with about one in every four youth (constituting 24 per cent) between the ages of 18 and 30 years, losing their jobs due to the pandemic.

In addition, there was a 35 per cent reduction in sales per worker and productivity of informal firms was reduced by 59.9 per cent. More than half of firms in agriculture and the service sector adjusted salaries downwards, by as much as 37 per cent and 35 per cent, respectively, to respond to the challenges and also increased access to productive employment, especially for the 39 per cent of households that are in subsistence agriculture, mostly youth and women living in rural areas. 

Government is undertaking a number of interventions, such as capitalisation of the Uganda Development Bank, Presidential Initiative on Wealth and Job Creation Emyooga, small business recovery fund and Parish Development Model to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the productive employment. 

Colleagues, you may recall that on 26 March 2022, H.E the President launched the Parish Development Model (PDM) in Kibuku District. The PDM is aimed at moving households from subsistence agriculture to modern agriculture. This move is projected to create more jobs, as 39 per cent of households will graduate from subsistence to producing for the market. 

The changes the Parish Development Model will bring will create productive jobs at the household level, increase consumption and demand and induce more jobs in the economy. This job creation model will lead to increase in production, and improved incomes, and enable us to achieve our vision of transforming Uganda from a peasant to a modern industrial and prosperous society by 2040. 

It is on this basis that during this year's Labour Day, it will be important to reflect on the importance of the Parish Development Model as a mechanism for enhancing productive employment for improved livelihoods. The day will be used as a rallying platform to sensitise the public to understand and participate in the implementation of the Parish Development Model. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is the ministry for community mobilisation and mindset change. As part of our mandate, we have so far undertaken the following activities; developed and printed 1500 copies of community mobilisation and mindset change pillar operational manual, developed and printed 6000 copies of the training of trainers manual, trained 63 National PDM facilitators. These are specialists in their areas to support the rollout of training activities across the country. We have trained 885 district, city, municipal council, trainers of trainees which comprise of the district community development officers, the district planner, communication officer, district production officer and the officers in charge of extension. 

We have sensitised 16 gazetted cultural institutions and religious institutions on Parish Development Model, undertaken talk shows and trained 775 lower local government staff – those are parish chiefs, the CDOs, extension workers, subcounty chiefs and Operation Wealth Creation coordinators from the districts of Budaka, Kibuku, Butebo, Pallisa and Butaleja. 

Mr Speaker, we are ready for the sensitisation for Members of Parliament, together with the Ministry of Local Government, anytime that we are able to have Members of Parliament free on a Friday, probably in Kololo. I have already written that letter. 

Honourable members, in addition, the ministry is also implementing other programmes that feed into the Seven Pillars of PDM, the green jobs and fair labour market program, a constituency-based intervention that focuses on the provision of business toolkits, equipment and green technology for Jua Kali business groups, the National Apprenticeship and Graduate Volunteer Scheme. This targets both unemployed and underemployed graduates and uneducated youth between the ages of 16 to 35 years with work-based learning opportunities for practical skills. 

The project is currently being piloted, but we will roll it out to the other parts of the country. We also have a Uganda-green incubation program, and the project is currently housed in Kampiringisa in Mpigi District. It promotes climate-smart integrated organic production skilling to the peri-urban and rural community, youth, women and persons with disability. It also promotes business skills development and behavioural change in the youth and juveniles who are in conflict with the laws. 

Mr Speaker, under normal circumstances the venue of the national celebration is selected on a rotational basis, and each city, district and municipality are eligible to host the celebration. However, due to COVID-19 containment measures, imposed to prevent and control the spread of the pandemic, this year’s celebrations will be held at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds, and will be presided over by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. 

As I conclude, I would like to ask Members to join me in thanking the number one front-liner during this COVID-19. I think we managed to contain the COVID-19 because of the efforts and the work of His Excellency, the President, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. His leadership; he has continued to steer us in this difficult moment. 

I also thank you, colleagues, because you are also workers. And you, Rt Hon. Speaker, have equally steered this country and Members of Parliament in the right direction. I thank you all. And I request that this vigour that we have undertaken in this period, and the collective vision and mission – we have moved together –extended support to the Parish Development Model through appropriation and mobilisation in our constituency. This will ensure that we are able to generate jobs and stimulate the economy under the Parish Development Model. I would like to thank you Right Honourable and wish all of you a Happy Labour Day.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORTS OF THE COMMITTEE OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE IN THE DISTRICTS OF MOROTO, AMUDAT, KAPCHORWA, KWEEN, TORORO AND JINJA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Colleagues, I am going by my schedule. I am referring this statement to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration of the issues that are in this process of budgeting. But also, if there are issues, which you feel are not very clear, these are some of the issues we can bring out on the Floor anytime. I am referring the statement to the committee. Next item, please.

Motion for the adoption of the reports of the Committee of gender, labour and social development on gender-based violence in the districts of Moroto, Amudat, Kapchorwa, Kween, Tororo and Jinja

Chair, I am giving you 15 minutes so that we can have time for debate and then Prime Minister's Time. But this is what is going to happen; Clerk do capture the whole content of the report in the Hansard so that whoever will be reading the Hansard in future will be able to follow what we are debating. 

Otherwise, this report has been uploaded to the system. I do not think Members were coming to read from the House as you read. We should have read earlier on. 15 minutes.

3.31
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Flavia Kabahenda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to join Parliament and the people of Uganda to congratulate you upon becoming our Deputy Speaker. Congratulations. 

I have a report of the Committee on Gender Labour and Social Development on gender-based violence in the districts of Moroto, Amudat, Kapchorwa, Kween, Tororo and Jinja. We considered this report, motivated by the Uganda crime report 2020 that was released in 2021, which cited that gender-based violence was the highest crime of that year. And that the districts of the Eastern and the North Eastern had a higher prevalence so we went to establish push factors so that we can bring appropriate recommendations to this honourable House.

Allow me to lay the minutes and the report as processed by the committee. I beg to lay.

I would like to draw the attention of Members to page 2, where we are looking at the regions of Sebei and Karamoja, which were very critical in regard to the report on gender-based violence because they had the highest incidence of gender based violence in the country, as reported by the police crime report.

Mr Speaker, allow me to take Members to page seven since the rest are the provisions of the law and international obligations around gender-based violence and to cite that the committee observed that while policy and legal framework is fairly solid, a number of shortcomings still exist within the law and its implementation.

The failure to implement the laws became a big setback and the failure to popularise these laws through translations, sensitisation and mindset change through various media also jeopardised the drive to eliminate gender-based violence and the interventions.

We have come with recommendations on page eight. The committee recommends that:
    i. Government should put in place measures to translate and implement all existing laws on gender-based violence and popularise them through existing structures such as women councils and other statutory councils.

    ii. The Domestic Violence Act be amended to provide for a gender impact assessment before commencement for all Government projects and an obligation for the state to provide shelters for the legal representation to victims and survivors of gender-based violence and create tougher punishment for the perpetrators of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM), especially on minors and vulnerable persons.

While the development partners have made a lot of interventions in providing gender-based violence shelters, the committee discovered that these were just reception centres. Otherwise, we expect the gender-based violence shelters to provide rescue, rehabilitation and resettlement to either back to their origin or resettlement by providing a future or transition into the service sector.

These reception centres that have been established by development partners can only hold the victims or survivors for two or three days, and then they advise them to go back to their tormentors, without solving any of the issues that drove them into this gender-based violence.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development take up the lead in all efforts to address gender-based violence, plan and budget for all interventions, coordinate and monitor all state and nonstate actors in the gender-based voice shelters.

Shelters for victims/survivors of and people at risk of gender-based violence 

Government has put in place guidelines relating to gender-based violence including; guidelines for referral pathways, the response to gender-based violence in Uganda. It has even put in place guidelines for the establishment and management of the gender-based violence shelters and guidelines for the prevention and response to FGM. However, besides these guidelines, there has been no attempt to institutionalise these shelters and yet they play a critical role to rescue, refer, rehabilitate the victims and resettle them.

We have come up with the recommendations on page 10, as follows:

    i) Government should provide funding of Shs 10 billion to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for Financial Year 2022/2023 to establish and operationalise in a phased manner, shelters for victims of gender-based violence in all regions of Uganda, prioritising regions with higher incidents of gender-based violence.

    ii) Government institutionalises the shelters through the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

    iii) Government equips all shelters with requisite services necessary to empower the victims such as psychosocial support, rehabilitation, skilling, toolkits and give a second chance education among others.

    iv) The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development supports and collaborates with local Governments especially the CBS Department and all development partners in running and inspecting these shelters.

    v) The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development fast-tracks the constriction of the rehabilitation centre in Moroto, which was given money, but for the last two years, its construction has stalled, and nothing is going on and the communities in Moroto are asking themselves what happened.

We request that the ministry follows up this so that the shelter in Moroto is complete. 

Inadequate social services as an aggravating factor for gender-based violence

Limited access to education.

I draw Members’ attention to page 11, the second paragraph after item 4.3.1. The scarcity of schools translates into abysmal performance of the Karamoja and Sebei regions with regard to nearly all statistics relating to education. According to Uganda National Household Survey 2019/2020, Karamoja has the lowest Primary School Net Enrolment (NER) Ratio at 42 per cent, it has the second lowest Secondary School Net Enrolment Ratio at 19 per cent, it has the lowest adult literacy rate at 25 per cent and the highest proportion of people with no formal schooling at 65 per cent.

We recommend that:

    i) The Ministry of Education and Sports urgently scales up the construction of primary, secondary schools and technical institutions in the Karamoja and Sebei regions.

    ii) The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development undertakes community mobilisation and mindset change initiatives to increase school enrolment, retention and transition.

    iii) The Ministry of Karamoja Affairs presents to the House an evaluation report of the State House Scholarship Scheme of 100 students per year from Karamoja for the last seven years.

    iv) The Auditor-General undertakes an audit of the State House Scholarship Scheme to provide us with equity according to the national objectives and value for money.

Inadequate health services

We recommend that:

    i) The construction and equipping of health centres in all districts in Sebei and Karamoja subregions in line with Government policy of ensuring that there is a health centre II in every parish, health centre III in every subcounty and a health centre IV at every constituency. 

    ii) Government trains all health workers in the clinical management of victims of sexual violence.

Limited access to ICT services 

We discovered that very many parts of Karamoja rely on Kenyan radios and, therefore, most of the Uganda stuff is lost from them because most of them keep listening to the Kenyan radios because they do not have a radio station that is being operated by any private person, nor that of Government.

The recommendation is that the Ministry of Information communication Technology and National Guidance should connect the whole of Sebei and Karamoja to the Uganda Broad Corporation radio and television network so that they do not have to rely on Kenyan stuff. (Applause)

Limited access to justice

Karamoja region relies on Mbale High Court and, therefore, this discourages even those who would be witnesses to go that distance and even the transportation charges are so prohibitive that they cannot proceed with the cases in court. 

The distribution of courts throughout the country also presents a cause to worry, more so in places which are far from those justice centres.

Mr Speaker, we recommend that:

    1. The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should set up more courts in the country, especially in areas with fewer and distant courts or justice centres and even those with higher prevalence of gender-based violence cases and crime.

    2. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should strengthen the child and family protection units at all police stations. Mr Speaker, I would like to tell the House that most of the child and family protection units at the police, of recent, were supported by Oxfam, but Oxfam has pulled out. These are the ones you find sitting under trees, without a computer and without a pen or paper yet they are supposed to follow up on cases in the communities. They also have no transport. So, they should also train and facilitate these police officers in handling and investigating gender-based violence cases. 

    3. The Ministry of Local Government should finance and induct the local council executives from LCI – where the vice-chairperson LCI is expected to be the one in charge of child and family protection – on their roles and responsibilities regarding family and child protection. 

Cross-border FGM

Mr Speaker, we are all aware that the children of Uganda are now being trafficked to the neighbouring countries, especially Kenya and Congo. Therefore, we recommend that: 

    1. Government of Uganda engages the Government of Kenya, where in September very many girls were brought back from the Kenyan streets and we found some of them at Koblin. Others have since been re-trafficked back to Kenya. We would like Government to work with the Government of Kenya in regard to the prevalence of the cross-border female genital mutilation with a view to ending the practice for harmonisation of policies and interventions. 

    2. The heads of state of the East African partner states should assent to the East African Community Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Bill, 2016 and the EAC Anti-Trafficking in Persons Bill, 2016.

Culture and gender-based violence 

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends in regard to culture because some of the push factors have a very great connotation on the cultures. We recommend that Government engages all cultural and other leaders in the fight against gender-based violence and work with them to have alternative rites of passage – and, of course, having appropriate cultural activities. 

The impact of COVID-19 on gender-based violence was another push factor, Mr Speaker. The minister has already alluded to the fact that it distracted very many businesses, enterprises and engagements. We equally cited that there was restriction on movement and women went to traditional birth attendants for their births and the traditional birth attendants would do the FGM when they were carrying out these deliveries to the women whom they found not to have undergone FGM. 

Even the development partners had a drop in funding -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Three more minutes, chairperson.

MS KABAHENDA: They could not follow up on these cases. Our recommendation is that Government should increase funding for the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to address gender-based violence appropriately. 

Integration of economic empowerment in the fight against gender-based violence

Mr Speaker, the lack of economic opportunities and empowerment made the victims very vulnerable to gender-based violence from their intimate partners and children and family members. 

We recommended that: 

    1. Government should set up affirmative action measures aimed at providing access to economic opportunities to people at risk of gender-based violence as most may not even have the capacity to demand for the money from the other government programmes. 

    2. Government should set up more affordable skilling programmes for communities at risk of gender-based violence.

    3. The office of the Solicitor-General should fast-track the processing of all bylaws and ordinances from district local governments and lower local governments to enable enforcement by local governments. 

Gender-based violence and disability is the last item on our presentation, Mr Speaker. The committee recommends that:

    1. Shs 10 billion be given by the  Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as enhancement so that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development can refurbish, equip and retool all the PwD vocational rehabilitation centres in the country, to make them fully functional and habitable.

    2. The Ministry of Education and Sports should align the curriculum of all rehabilitation centres to the Business, Technical and Vocational Education and Training and the Directorate of Industrial Training. 

    3. There is need to fill all the staffing gaps in all the vocational rehabilitation centres. 

    4. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development implements an inclusive education at Koblin Youth Skills Training Centre and across all the ministry’s institutions and the other centres. 

In conclusion, Mr Speaker, in order for us to attain Sustainable Development Goal No. 5, to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls, it is important to have efforts to end gender-based violence, in particular Goal 5.1 – which is a tall order – for Government to end all forms of violence against women and girls and eliminate all forms of violence against all vulnerable people. 

Therefore, it is critical to view gender-based violence as a human rights issue and appreciate that as long as it takes place, human rights of men, women and children are being impeded. It is important that Government reports to Parliament on the state of human rights the very same way they do to the United Nations. Mr Speaker, Government reports to the United Nations about the status of human rights and they do not report to this honourable House. 

In the same breath, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should popularise the 16 days of activism against gender-based violence to bring more people on board to fight the vice of gender-based violence and, of course, for community involvement and collaboration right from the household. 

Mr Speaker, I beg to move that this report be adopted by this House. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson, for the good work. It is very good work, indeed. There are just a few issues which I have seen:

    1. There is where you are recommending the establishment of health centres II, III and IV, but we all know it is a Government policy that they did away with health centres II. Instead, health centres II are being upgraded to the level of health centres III. So, I think that one needs to be clear for Hansard purposes. 

    2. Also, the Committee on National Economy, I need you to do for us a study and report back in two weeks’ time on the implementation of the loan for provision of health services to Karamoja subregion, which was passed by the Tenth Parliament. I remember I was on the Committee on National Economy when we processed the €20 million loan. We need to know the progress of that project. 

We keep hearing that Karamoja is still doing very badly in terms of health services, yet we passed that very important loan from the Italian Government.

Colleagues, you heard the report that the chairperson has presented. We are going to debate this for 30 minutes and it begins now. I am starting from this side and, after, I will come to this side. 

I will start with the chairperson of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA). (Laughter) Yes, that is the only way you can do it.

3.52
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank you for this opportunity and the committee for their report. It is extremely unfortunate that despite enacting the relevant laws, like the Domestic Violence Act and the Anti-Female Genital Mutilation Act, the issue of gender violence continues. The girls and women continue to face female genital mutilation.

We have to interest ourselves in the causes of this violence. In my view, I have noted that when you get to the countryside, most men have abandoned their role as the heads of the family. The women are actually taking care of the families and because of this hopeless state in which they are, the man comes home, but still expects the woman to provide the food when he has put nothing on the table. 

We must both work to ensure that the family that we have is well fed and the children are going to school, but not leave the role of taking care of the family on the shoulders and head of the woman. This is why we are seeing this violence actually continuing. In some cases, as reported, we have seen women as the ones battering the men because the little money men get, they drink. When you are drunk, you are helpless. 

The issue of alcoholism amongst our people at the grassroots where you go to the trading centres - when most of you go back to your constituencies, by 9.00 a.m., instead of the men being in the gardens or working, they are in the trading centres drinking. Therefore, we are coming up with the Alcohol Control Bill. I hope we shall have it worked on. 

Secondly, we need to deal with challenges. Where is the problem despite the Anti-Female Genital Mutilation Act; not providing an option of a fine? It states that when you commit that offence, then you are imprisoned for not less than 10 years. 

However, can we know whether there are people who have ever been convicted and imprisoned for the  offence of practicing female genital mutilation? Maybe, that is where the problem is, that we are handling people with baby gloves. We need to amend that particular provision to make it more stringent so that it is deterrent. If you say, “Not less than 10 years,” it means somebody can be in prison for a year.

I support the report, but I would like to request that the money cannot be given to the Ministry of Gender alone. We need to look at the enforcement agencies, which are the police. They face challenges. You go and report a case; the police tell you to provide transport. The officer assigned to investigate does not have the money to get to the grassroots to investigate what took place there. 

Therefore, we need to provide more resources to the police so that they can thoroughly investigate these cases of gender-based violence. Of course, at the end of the day, we can have prosecutions. However, the starting point is that we need to review our laws. We are going to look at that as the Uganda Women's Parliamentary Association and where necessary, come up with more stringent measures. I wish the Minister of Gender could give us statistics on how many of those who have committed this FGM offence have been convicted? 

Mr Speaker, allow me to end with the issue of the traditional birth attendants –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am sorry, I did not mention the time one should utilise. We have only 30 minutes and very many colleagues? She has used five minutes. I am giving you two minutes. 

3.57
DR LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, I would like to thank Government of Uganda for the efforts made towards empowering the women in this country. The issue of gender-based violence needs to be diagnosed from all perspectives. I am an advocate for cultural institutions. If you look into the past, our grandparents used to disagree, but they would not fight. 

It is important that Government looks into empowering the cultural institutions to deal with the mindset transformation and also empower them to address some of these issues at a local level. 
In Acholi where I come from, our way of handling cases those days was very simple and practical. Today, a woman is beaten and she goes and reports the case to the police. When the husband is arrested, that woman will be cursed and she will never find peace. 

Mr Speaker, let us focus and allocate some funding to empower our cultural institutions to look at how we can address the issues of gender-based violence across the board. This violence does not only look at the beating of a woman, but even the performance of a man in the house. That is also violence, which is very quiet that people do not talk about.

Another issue, which is the problem today is the empowered Ugandans - the so-called educated and the elites. People are too busy for their families. Someone comes back home and is on the phone. He does not attend to the wife or the children. At the end of the day, you will see conflicts because no one is attending to each other. This is the time we need the Minister of Gender to keep on advocating for people to take family issues very seriously –(Interruption)

MS ACEN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am seeking clarification from my sister, Hon. Lillian Aber. This is going on record and in the Hansard that if we say that performance of men in the household is a form of gender-based violence, I do not know what we are talking about unless she clarifies. 

To the best of my knowledge, globally, but also in the country, we have six main forms or types of gender-based violence. I have not come across what is called “the performance of men”; unless you explain what it is. Otherwise, we have rape, things like physical assault, sexual assault, including things like early marriage, psychological violence - that is what is globally known. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I am suspending this debate for 45 minutes. According to Rule 41, it is Prime Minister's Time. It is exactly 4.00 p.m. Let us have the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Thereafter, we shall resume the debate. Hon, ssewungu, that is what the rules say. 

4.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nsibambi, I thought you were going to speak for men. You are the only counsel we have here whom we trust. Please, remain in the House.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, I got a question from the Hon. Kawalya Abubaker, Member of Parliament for Rubaga Division North, Kampala. He asked the following questions. 

Let me give the background. 

Slum dwellers form an integral part of the urban fabric and make a significant contribution to the urban economy. It is, however, obvious that these slum dwellers settle in marginal areas with high environmental and health concerns. 

The question is: As Government, why has it become difficult to spearhead the development of these slums by atleast initiating affordable housing projects for the urban poor, drawing reference to the upgrading schemes for spontaneous settlements that resulted into the execution of the Namuwongo Upgrading and Low Cost Housing Pilot Project in 1987 and the Masese Self-Help Women Project in 1989? 

The response is that the Namuwongo Upgrading and Low Cost Housing Pilot Project in 1987 and the Masese Self-Help Women Projects in 1989 were projects of the NRM Government. Government is working on strengthening the National Housing and Construction Company and revamping it as the housing delivery arm of Government on low cost housing, including a slum upgrading. 

Under NDP III, housing is at the centre of Government development agenda. Government is targeting to reduce the acute housing deficit of 2.2 million by 20 per cent and decrease the percentage of urban dwellers living in slums and formal settlement from 60 per cent to 40 per cent. 

Hon. Richard Lumu, Member of Parliament for Mityana South gave a background that since December 2021, insecurity has heightened in Mityana South Constituency. Criminals had on several occasions attacked police stations, police posts and killed some officers and stolen some guns. Over the last few weeks, several police posts had been closed. Since that time, a total of six police posts have been closed. These were in Namutamba, Kiryokya, Kibuto in Bulera Subcounty, Ttanda in Ttamu Division, Nakaseeta in Busimbi Division and Kikandwa in Kikandwa Subcounty.  

The closure of these police posts had led to more crime and insecurity in the said communities and Mityana District generally than before. Residents were then living in fear for their lives and property. 

In December last year, two police officers - 30384 Corporal Alfred Oketch and Police Constable Moses Kigongo were hacked to death by criminals at Sebobo in Ssekanyonyi Town Council, after responding to a robbery call by residents. Surprisingly, according to him, Government responded by closing some of the police posts exacerbating insecurity in those areas then. 

His question was: Rt Hon Prime Minister, why were the mentioned police posts closed instead of being reinforcing?

The response is that the joint police forces decided that the police posts that were vulnerable then, to such attacks should be reorganised and merged in order to prevent further loss of lives and arms. Accordingly, five, not six police posts were merged, namely; Namutamba, Kikandwa, Ttanda, Kibuto and Nakaseeta. All police officers in these stations were retained. 

The other question is: what urgent, strategic and decisive measures does the state have in curbing the alarming crime and insecurity in the Wamala Region once and for all? 

The joint security forces have since carried out specific operations targeting the Ugandan Coalition for Force of Change (UCFC) in Kampala, Mityana, Wakiso and Kiboga in the Kassanda districts. Seventeen suspects were arrested and charged on several counts. All the five submachine guns that were robbed by the group were recovered. No further attacks have been registered since that time. 

The joint security forces continue to work with communities to weed out all elements of criminality. This is what we are going to do in my brother's constituency. 

Hon. Mawanda Maranga, Member of Parliament for Igara East County, Bushenyi District - His background is: I raised a question to you in accordance with rule 41 that Parliament approved Shs 334 million under Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for Financial Year 2021/2022 for the Public Service Commission to enable it conduct recruitment process as a matter of urgency. That was last year. 

The Public Service Commission commenced the recruitment process to fill the over 80 vacant positions at various levels in KCCA. The process was concluded in December 2021. The Public Service Commission submitted minutes and names of successful candidates to the Executive Director, KCCA for appointment. However, the successful candidates have not been appointed. He is also aware that the Public Service Commission communicated to KCCA and the concerned candidates that have failed to secure appointments and their offer, according to him, was to expire in 30 days. 

The question is: can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister explain why KCCA has delayed to appoint successful candidates, aware that the Public Service Commission submitted a list of all successful candidates for appointments, within 30 days, as communicated in the preamble, the Public Service Commission offer will expire?

My response is that Kampala Capital City Authority received the minutes of the Public Service Commission appointing staff in December 2021. In January, the Permanent Secretary of the Public Service Commission started issuing notes of appointment to successful candidates. Kampala Capital City Authority has completed the recruitment exercise. The other question is: Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister inform the House when the appointment of successful candidates will be effected? 

Like I told you earlier, KCCA issued appointment letters and the successful candidates are already working. They reported for duty in March this year. 

Hon. Jonathan Ebwalu, Member of Parliament for Soroti West Division, Soroti City gave a background that in April 2021, this Parliament honoured a 15 member medical team of Soroti Hospital for successfully conducting a surgery involving the separation of the conjoined twins. 

The surgery took place in Soroti Hospital, six days after the twins were condemned by Mulago National Referral Hospital and referred bock to Soroti without help. Parliament noted that Soroti Regional Referral Hospital only operates 40 per cent of its capacity. 

In honour of the above, Parliament recommended the following:
 
1. 	Rehabilitation and equipping the hospital.

 2. 	Expansion of the theatre.

 3. 	Enough staffing of the hospital.

 4. 	Installation of the CT-scan in the hospital.

 5. 	Awards for the medical team, amongst others. 

Honourable colleagues, you will realise that we have not been answering your questions and some of these questions have stayed for some time. However, I have tried to update them so that they can be uploaded on the intranet properly. However, seven months later, nothing has been done yet it would help to cut down on referrals to the national referral hospital. The question is: what is causing the delay? 

Mr Speaker, my response is that the Ministry of Health has planned to construct a new Soroti Regional Referral Hospital on a new site. The land has already been secured and the master-plan development is in progress. Once it is complete, it will fully be equipped with modern and expensive theatre and a 100 NM oxygen plant, which is under procurement, will be fixed in the hospital. 

A regional blood bank is also being constructed at the new site of the hospital.

Government budgeted for the installation of CT-Scans for all regional referral hospitals and Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is among the beneficiaries. The procurement process is almost complete. 

Regarding more staff, the Ministry of Health has advised the hospital to prepare a recruitment plan for more staff. The Soroti Regional Referral Hospital team that performed a successful operation of the conjoined twins were awarded medals by H.E the President of the Republic of Uganda at the NRA Liberation Day on 26 January 2022, at Kololo Ceremonial Grounds. 

Government is enhancing salaries for doctors, consultants and all other medical cadres this financial year –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, if you could, lend me a few seconds of your time so that I recognise our guests who are witnessing you present.

We have The Rt Rev. Robert Muhiirwa, Bishop of Fort Portal Diocese. (Applause)  He will be leading High Mass at 5.00 p.m. Colleagues, I urge you to join us. He is accompanied by Fr Charles Oyo, Fr Edward Muhumuza, Fr Richard Bomera and Fr Frederick Tusingire. Hon. Alex Ruhunda and Hon. Linda Irene are the ones who are coordinating for us. We want to thank you. (Applause) They will be animating at Namugongo on Martyrs’ Day. 

Parliament, through the office of the Speaker, on your behalf, has contributed Shs 50 million for the organisation. I thank you, colleagues. (Applause)

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, sorry for the interruption, but I felt it was important. You know he is watching you.

MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, Hon. Samuel Opio, the Member of Parliament Kole North County, asked the following question: 

On 30 June 1977, the East African Community come to an end and thousands of workers were laid off without payment of their service benefits. 

Monies for payment of their dues are understood to have been submitted by the EAC fund manager then, Crown Agents London, to each of the EAC governments, including Uganda, in the 1980s. In the 1990s, Government proposed on ex-gratia payment of Shs 7.7 million per claimant, which the former workers rejected and went to court. A consent judgement was made on 27 October 2000 under Civil Suit No. 1010 of 1996 in which Government agreed to pay retirement benefits to the former EAC employees. 

The payments included pension arrears and pension for the pensionable employees, service gratuity and repayment of provident fund contributions and accrued leave, among others. They were also entitled to a seven per cent simple interest on delayed payments. 

The question was: why hasn’t Government completed payments to the former EAC employees, 44 years later?

My response is that it is not true that Government hasn’t completed payments to the former EAC employees. Government constituted an inter-ministerial taskforce and made recommendations in 2000 to pay pensions and gratuities of former workers of East African Community upon verification by the Auditor-General. 

These included pension and gratuity for those who served for at least 10 years. Government is currently paying 485 pensioners, through the Ministry of East African Community Affairs, on a monthly basis. The verified pensioners were paid their entitlements, including seven per cent simple interest as directed by the High Court.

Hon. Francis Zaake, the Member of Parliament Mityana Municipality, Mityana District, asked the following question: 

On 18 November 2020, Uganda Police Force officers arrested NUP President, Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, from a presidential campaign rally he had staged in Luuka District. In response to the arrest, peaceful protests broke out across the country, particularly in Kampala Metropolitan Area. In order to quell the same, security operatives, mostly putting on plain clothes, conducted a shoot-to-kill operation on l8 and l9 November 2020 that resulted in massacre of several citizens who died innocently. 

The question to me is: did Government punish the security officers responsible for the shooting dead of innocent citizens during the protests of 18 and 19 November 2020? If yes, what sort of punishments were made and to whom specifically? 

The response is that Government has taken steps to apprehend the culprits. So far, two officers have been charged and convicted accordingly – Mustafa Ssali and Augustine Mugisha were charged for murder, convicted and sentenced to 35 years and life imprisonment respectively. 

The other question is: who was the overall commander of the security officers who participated in the shooting against the protesters? 

This was a joint security operation by the Uganda Police Force and the Uganda People’s Defence Forces. This was done by operational and tactical commanders who were responsible to the Inspector General of Police and the Chief of Defence Forces. 

The other question is when and how exactly is Government planning to compensate the families of the innocent civilians shot dead by security officers during the said process. 

The answer from Government is that Government is verifying the lists of the affected people. As soon as the exercise is complete, the affected families will be compensated accordingly. 

The last question that was posed is whether there is an official report about the shooting by security officers during the protests. Honourable members, a report was presented here before Parliament by the then Minister of Internal Affairs, Hon. Jeje Odongo, and I believe Parliament has this report. 

Mr Speaker, I have only used 22 minutes. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable colleagues, of course, you do not debate this and you do not have any questions. Our rules, which we amended yesterday, will only apply after being gazetted. We are still applying rule 41 as it is -(Laughter)- if you thought you were going to start oral questions, please be patient.

We have debate on an important report, but the Leader of the Opposition has a right to reply or comment. Do you have anything, LOP, on the Prime Minister’s submission? 

4.22
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On behalf of the LOP, I would like to clearly bring out the issue of the police stations in bad state. Some of the police stations have been reported to be merged. The issue of community members asking Members of Parliament to help them revamp the police stations by asking for building materials and land - all that pressure is put on the Members of Parliament. 

We would, therefore, request the Prime Minister’s office to give notice to the respective districts, especially DPCs, to communicate to the respective communities about the merger of some police stations, and that they should not expect any help. Additionally, when they pressurise the Members of Parliament, these police stations will not come into force as they will not be supported by the line structures. That was one of the comments. Thank you very much, for the opportunity. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Clerk, I think we should also have item number four sorted so that we can go back to the debate. 

STATEMENT OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS OF THE SUCCEEDING WEEK

4.26
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Mr Speaker, this is a statement of business by the Leader of Government Business. 

I move, under rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, which requires the Leader of Government Business to make a statement in the House regarding the government business of the succeeding week. I am, therefore, submitting the following government business for the week of the 3rd to the 5th of May 2022. 

    1. Introduction for First Reading, the Museums and Monuments Bill, 2022

    2. Motion for a resolution of Parliament to amend the resolution of Parliament on the supplementary expenditure Schedule No.1 for the Financial Year 2021/2022.

Mr Speaker, I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, please capture that business so that it is put on the Order Paper. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The procedural issue I am raising is that I heard the Prime Minister say that they want to amend Supplementary Schedule No. 1. The procedural issue I am raising is, under what rule do you amend supplementary budgets? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, that is in anticipation. It is just informing you of the business they are bringing. This business is submitted to the Clerk and the presiding officer and we engage and see whether it qualifies to go on the Order Paper or not. It will be handled by the presiding officer. 

Colleagues, let us resume debate on the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on gender-based violence in the districts of Moroto, Amudat, Kapchorwa, Kween, Tororo and Jinja. 

I had picked Hon. Hellen Nakimuli, but I do not see her here. So, I will start with her neighbour, followed by Hon. Nsibambi. The Prime Minister has given us some minutes; so, we shall utilise them effectively with the debate. 

4.29
MS ETHEL NALUYIMA (NUP, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the Shadow Minister for Local Government. Having read the report very well, I only wish to emphasise that as we continue to plan to ensure that we have no more gender-based violence, let us not only look at one side. 

In the report of the ministry of gender for April and January 2020, and further evidence under the Gateway Research Centre that is well quoted, it is clear that the districts of Kampala and Wakiso were affected very much as far as violence is concerned. The districts of Kitgum and Kasese were very high in intimate partner violence incidents. 

Let us have a general solution for matters of gender-based violence. Given that local governments are very key in ensuring that gender-based violence is solved, the office of the CDO – Members, I continue to emphasise that let us see to it that we have decentralisation. And let us go further and check whether we have districts that are well facilitated such that we ensure that these CDOs are able to do timely outreach and are also able to solve those issues. 

At the centre - even at the ministry level – we shall not do away with gender-based violence when we expect officials to come from the centre and check. Let us take it on as we plan to eliminate gender-based violence. Let us facilitate the local governments and the community development officers such that we can achieve together at the end of it all. Thank you. 

4.31
MR YUSUF NSIBAMBI (FDC, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. However, I find a problem with the fact that we are looking at this issue in terms of punitive action and the law. I know we are legislators and we are supposed to make laws, but looking at it from the perspective of punishments and police enforcement, I think we are missing the point. 

As we speak, this issue has been going on time and again. The communities affected are those whose economic empowerment is lacking. We should, therefore, call upon the Ministry of Gender to come up with a specific budget for the vulnerable communities on matters to do with mutilation. You should now think about establishing schools, sensitising people and changing mind-sets. Specifically, you should address matters related to do with economy in those specific areas.

We all have our backgrounds, but no member of parliament can subject his/her daughter to genital mutilation. Why? Because we had the opportunity to go to good schools and we were sensitised that this is not a cultural issue, but a violation of human rights; whether you build hospitals to treat people who are affected by this culture, you are treating a person who is subjected to that kind of violence –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Member is raising a very important point. He was my lecturer of law and he used to emphasise that the law fits in society, and not society fitting in the law. The moment you go for only punitive mechanisms, they will clash with the culture and you will find the society failing to fit within the law. So, it is very important that we emphasise that.

Honourable members, allow me to just pick a few people. Hon. Ssewungu - Leader of the Opposition, you are among the people to conclude - then Hon. Nabukeera, Hon. Nancy Acora and Hon. Kabasharira. Colleagues, let me be sincere. I first picked colleagues who have been here since 2.00 p.m. I would like to start rewarding people who come here much earlier and I think it is very important. (Applause)

4.34
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been here since 2.00 p.m. First of all, I thank the chairperson of the committee.

The methods of controlling gender-based violence are very simple, but they are not practised in this country. As Prof. Nsibambi said, schools used to compete and every year, there were themes, but as we speak, there is no single school in Uganda that can afford buying a set of drums to train teachers.

You talk about LCs, but are you funding them? These LCs would be helping in this. In the Catholic Church, where I come from, we have people called “Baseesa”. Mr Speaker, I am sure you know the Baseesa, since you are a Catholic. When you are getting married, these people will train you for three months. If you get disputes at home, they come in to help. All these are no longer in practice.

Regarding the police - Go and look for any police post anywhere and find out whether these people in charge of gender are given facilitation. People are fighting and killing themselves. Even at the police where you are sending gender-based violence victims, policemen are beating their women and women are shooting their husbands. How do you get a solution to gender-based violence? Where you are supposed to find solutions, the people who are supposed to provide the solutions are also suffering from the same. 

Mr Speaker, let us get back to the norms of the schools. When these children are trained, they go back and sing these songs and recite poems at home. Even their parents come for school concerts and hear those songs - Daddy stop beating Mummy, Mummy stop beating - and their parents will disparage.

And yet we think of using technical methods - LCs must be strengthened because they see people daily, but they are always demanding for money. Once it is time for elections, you see Government giving LCs money –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MS HANIFA NABUKEERA	(NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I would like to appreciate that you want to put justice centres and courts in those areas, but at the same time, we should not forget that these cases begin with the police. You lodge a complaint with the police, but the police delay in completing the files. They say they are still investigating, which hinders cases from being taken to the Attorney-General for sanctioning, on time. 

Therefore, I urge Government to investigate these cases at the police such that they are taken to court and cases are kicked off, for justice. Thank you.

4.37
MS NANCY ACORA	(Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also want to thank the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for bringing the report.

The reason we have escalating cases of gender-based violence in Uganda – it is not just in the few districts that have been mentioned. We need to look at the root causes of gender-based violence in the country.

When you track most families that have gender-based violence, you will find that most of the husbands in those homes do not have money; they are economically disabled. Now, when they have an inferiority complex, especially when women are the cashboxes - they are empowered economically. When these women come back home, their husbands feel insecure and definitely, the children and the mothers always suffer because the men will sit at the roadside to drink waragi in the morning.

Moving forward, I encourage Government, especially the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that when bringing programmes to empower women, the male role models in the society should also be empowered. For example, the Parish Development Model that we are talking about should not leave men behind because when a man sees that Nancy is richer than him, definitely, my husband will become inferior. So, whatever idea you bring in the house, the husband will think you want to override them. Therefore, we need to preach and practise gender equality in society, if we are to reduce gender-based violence. 

In schools, those days, we used to have drama –(Member timed out.)

4.39
MS NAOME KABASHARIRA (Independent, Rushenyi County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I should not be different, much as it is late. I congratulate you, Mr Speaker, for attaining that seat. I would like to thank the committee for the recommendations they have put to end gender-based violence.

The main cause of gender-based violence is poverty and the causes of poverty are several and most of these causes have been highlighted in the report. They talk of education, justice and health. Mr Speaker, if you give money to health units, the police and the gender ministry, to do mobilisation, you would have covered most of these gender-based violence problems. 

Many times, we pass recommendations and regulations in this Parliament, which are very vital and important, but they are kept. I pray we take this report seriously; at least, it will reduce gender-based violence in these given areas. 

Mr Speaker, I thank you and I pray that we take it like that.

4.41
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonzo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for that authoritative report. I think one of the reasons our interventions are not making a lot of impact is that our interventions are not anchored on evidence, research, facts and data. 

Mr Speaker, I think this Parliament is supposed to be a consumer of knowledge. We don’t have the ability to generate and produce knowledge. Knowledge producers are universities, colleges and all those institutions. 

Mr Speaker, I would have really loved a situation where we have citations from peer reviewed international journals. As a leader at Makerere University, you are fully aware that the university has a school of gender and women studies. How I would have loved and enjoyed the committee and the leadership of the committee to contact that school so that they could be in position to tap into the knowledge base and the knowledge resources. 

Not only that, Mr Speaker. Recently, we were looking at animal disease outbreaks. I was shocked to see a minister coming on the Floor here and he had nothing to talk about the –(Member timed out.)

4.44
MR JULIUS TUSIIME (Independent, Rwampara East County, Rwampara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also congratulate you upon assuming that position. 

I believe that to end gender-based violence, we need a multi-sectoral approach. For this, I commend the committee and the chairperson for elaborately prescribing the causes. However, I may say that we need to take keener interest in exploring the existing alternative dispute resolution mechanisms in our communities. 

Mr Speaker, you know that where we come from, we have different cultures. To begin to think we can alienate these cultures and not integrate them into the laws that we are making, we would not achieve as much as we would want. 

Importantly, also, is the issue of financial inclusion. Through you, Mr Speaker, we know that one of the leading causes is lack of access to resources in our communities. It is at this time that I would pray that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development looks at all these funds and opportunities that we have. I am a champion of the idea that you integrate UWEP funds into the Parish Development Model and increase access to funds by the women at the local level.

Secondly, there is the issue of the office of the probation officers. If you go to all local governments, this is the most unfunded office –(Member timed out.)

4.46
MS JANE AWICH (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those of my fellow leaders that the issue of gender-based violence is a serious matter. However, in some cases, even in our own districts, we, leaders, are perpetrators of this problem. 

I would like to pray and request my fellow leaders that let us try our best to be exemplary. Let us try to work together with the community development officers (CDOs) and subcounty chiefs. Sometimes we go to sort out cases and you find out that a fellow leader is a victim. It becomes very difficult to talk with the police. 

I pray that when we get back home, let us be exemplary. Every platform that we get to exercise our duty – like speaking to our voters – let us make sure that we put in a slot for the issue of gender-based violence. However, if you, yourself, are a victim, nobody will listen to you. I thank you all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Kapchorwa? When I am picking, I know people from the different areas. Like for Sebei, I know how many MPs I will pick from Sebei. I know my sister, Hon. Evelyn Chemutai, wants to speak, but Kapchorwa is also a neighbour because this is Bukwo and this is Kapchorwa. So, we try to balance.

4.46
MS PHYLIS CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to take this opportunity to thank you and congratulate you upon your new job. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to start by answering a question which was asked by the chairperson of UWOPA. She wanted to know whether we have reports on some of these gender-based violence cases. I would like to report that in 2014, in Kapchorwa District, Government imprisoned seven women who underwent female genital mutilation. These were married women, with children in their homes. So, they were put in jail for six months. They left their families and the families suffered so much. 

The entire district cried and they went to the President and asked for pardon. The President, indeed, pardoned these women after six months. So, at least since that time when these women were put in jail, I have never seen female genital mutilation being practiced in Kapchorwa. If it is there, it is being done privately or stealthily. This shows us that when we enforce laws –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chemutai tells me that she is a victim. We have a colleague who says that she is a victim. Let us listen to her. (Laughter)

4.49
MS EVELYN CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Actually, I am a victim of FGM, but positively. Yes. I would like to just add something to the report. 

Mr Speaker, Government gave us three anti-FGM schools, but the only school that was taken to Bukwo has never been built. It was taken by Government five years ago, but as we speak, the school is still wattle and mud. Therefore, the chairperson of the committee should take note. We need that school – Kortek Girls Secondary School – to be constructed immediately. 

For the surgeons and the team that used to prepare the girls for female genital mutilation, they were promised compensation but to date, they have never done anything for those women. So, they will go ahead and practice whatever they had been doing. 

In addition, Mr Speaker, just as Karamoja was given State House scholarships, we face the same thing with the people of Amudat. The girls of Sebei subregion have nothing and it is only education that will help them to get out of this female genital mutilation. Please, can the girls of Sebei subregion also benefit from the State House scholarships so that they can abandon the practice?

We also requested for special counselling for the women that have already undergone female genital mutilation. There is preaching everywhere, that undergoing female genital mutilation is bad. Women are traumatised, but no one is speaking to them and telling them what they should do. We now have women who are suffering. They are sick because everyone goes there and they have been abandoned in the community because they practised female genital mutilation.

Mr Speaker, we also request that the committee chairperson –(Member timed out.)

4.51
MR JOHN-BOSCO NGOYA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am glad that the committee looked at Jinja and Moroto. The source of what I am basically seeing as one of the key causes of domestic violence is the availability of crude and illegal waragi. It is too much.

In the study that was done on local development and alcohol abuse, in only two years, there was a rise in domestic violence by 17.1 per cent just as a result of the availability of crude waragi.

I do not know whether it is a result of a deliberate lack of enforcement of the Enguli Act. You will be surprised that in Napak, just next to the district police station is where the dealers of crude alcohol are. You have this alcohol being sold and moved in the jerry cans in the morning. You wonder whether all the roadblocks that we have from Jinja to Moroto are actually alive to the existence of the crude waragi.

I can tell you, it is disastrous. When you see the number of children coming to the streets, it is because of the inability of children to survive in particular homes where their parents are drunk all through, coupled with poverty. 

Alcohol becomes a cheaper thing to be able to take. Once you take it, you are high and the stomach, which is actually empty, seems filled. I think there is need to look at the enforcement of the Enguli Act and even modification of the Act so that it can be able to deal with these individuals who are dealers in it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I remember in the 10th Parliament, this House pushed hard and banned kaveera waragi. We thought we were mitigating it. However, most of the men these days, especially rural men, just go and drink waragi thinking they will survive on Mukama n’ayamba and those other drinks. In a rich home, when they fail to perform and women complain, the women are beaten - (Laughter) – so the issues are many. This is reality.

I think we shall need to deeply look into these issues through the action report where I will guide.

4.54
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Central Division, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we need to speed up the alcohol Bill that is being proposed such that we control its unnecessary intake.

On page 20 of the report, I am disturbed by the fact that the committee needs Shs 10 billion, but it is an unfunded priority yet we are in dire need of seeing the refurbishment, equipping and retooling of all the vocational rehabilitation centres. However, this is within our control because we are into the budgeting process. 

I think the committee must have ensured that this money is got because this was in the Budget Framework Paper. I hope that this time around, it is given priority. I see the Minister of State for Finance nodding, looking at me, which is very good. The minister of Gender is here; so, we should, during appropriation, ensure that this Shs 10 billion is realised.

Finally, I was disturbed on page 21, in the conclusion, and I wonder; they say that in Tororo, it is the other way around - that the men are the ones being beaten by the women –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Even in Bushenyi and Mitooma - that side.

MR RUHUNDA: Yes, I got concerned because my brother, Hon. Katusabe, is in Tororo - (Laughter) – I pray that he is not facing the same problem. Thank you.

4.56
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke East County, Otuke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. Their report is very beautiful and nice. Now, the question is, as a legislator who makes laws, a look at this is going to be a long story. What causes most problems in this country of ours? What brings all this gender abuse?

I think, first, it is lack of jobs. For example, last year you saw that during the lockdown when COVID-19 came - and then the drought - you would find the youth busy playing cards. After which, they would go back home jobless, very energetic. 
When somebody is not doing anything and goes back with that kind of energy, you would see things getting messed up in the homestead. Therefore, I request government to make sure that the men work harder and do not do those dirty games.

Secondly, they must also force all these youths to go to school. Some just play anyhow and do not care about going to school. For example, in one of the villages in my constituency, you find a young man having three women. Imagine having three women and then have children after. Now the – (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR EDSON RUGUMAYO (NRM, Youth Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to reiterate that the fight against gender based violence cannot be won by Government as a standalone. As colleagues earlier stated, this issue needs to be approached from all angles; the church is a very big player, the cultural institutions and then Government.

The committee made wonderful recommendations. Their first, on page eight, is that there is need to translate all the existing laws and popularise them. It is quite depressing that most of our communities do not understand or even at all know that there are laws that protect them. During the COVID-19 lockdown, I tried to interact with my community by asking, “Why is it possible that a young girl who has been defiled is pregnant yet the culprit is walking free on the streets?” The parents tell you, “What do we benefit by prosecuting this individual yet we can squeeze them at home and they compensate?”

Our communities do not understand the provisions in the law; for example, section 129(a) of the Penal Code provides for both serving the sentence and compensation. There is need for us to put in the effort and sensitise. This can be done. Government already has radio airtime. Let it provide the airtime to MPs at least monthly, so that we discuss these things and tell our communities about these laws that exist to protect them. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Colleagues, I cannot give you any more time, but I have two colleagues who have been here since we began and are likely to make their maiden speeches. Of course, it cannot be mama. I booked your time. Hon. Osoru from Arua and the honourable member from Jinja have been here from 2.00 p.m. I promised them yesterday that they would speak.

I know – we shall get guidance from our senior. Hon. Nakimuli Helen, I called you three times, but you were not here; so, I cannot go back.

5.00
MS MANJERI KYEBAKUTIKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja City): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for appreciating me for being a good timekeeper. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for the wonderful report. According to it, one of the districts that have been affected is Jinja, which I represent, as the Woman Member of Parliament.

When the committee was trying to identify one of the reasons for gender-based violence, one of the reasons was limited access to education. 

The fact is that our young girls sometimes avoid going to school because they lack menstrual hygiene kits, like sanitary pads. When a young girl goes to school and she is in her “periods”, she will be unable to study very well while in class, and she may end up going back home. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Finance should scrape off taxes for menstrual hygiene kits, like pads, so that our young girls are able to afford them –(Interjection)– so that they are able to attend school – (Member timed out.) 

5.02
MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I condemn gender-based violence in the strongest terms. This matter cuts across regions. In Arua, recently, we experienced a similar thing. A husband pushed his hand under a woman’s vagina to pull whatever things he could grab off. He has since run away and to date, we are looking for him. And the woman died. 

When we talk about gender-based violence, it is not just a joke. In West Nile, most of our women provide for their husbands. When a man comes back home hungry and finds no food, he will definitely launch his anger on the woman. 

Mr Speaker, I think one of the causes of gender-based violence is hunger. I, therefore, request Government that since we have local councils in place, why don't we invest in them so that they are able to put facilities in place to counsel some of our women? Women choose to keep quiet when we are being abused until we are physically injured that is when you will see women reporting. 

I request Government to invest in the Judiciary. These issues of delaying cases in the courts are not good. Criminals found doing these kinds of things should be apprehended immediately. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Gender, I have seen the Presidential directive requesting us to increase money for cultural leaders and institutions; that we give them Shs 60 million per month and cars. When you take government money, you should account for it. We have some of the cultural institutions even supporting some of these barbaric acts. Some of them are deeply rooted in the culture. 

Therefore, I implore the Minister of Gender to work with the cultural institutions to fight these barbaric acts in the community. Some of them are taken as part of culture. I think it is something you can look at - you do not need to say “Parliament wants you to do A, B, C, and D.” No, they are just requesting you to work with them to see how best you can get something good out of them, instead of supporting these barbaric things.

5.05
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for recognising me. We are discussing a very important subject. I have looked at the report and I have found that it is quite holistic. 

I just want to raise two points. One, who should be the driving institution to correct the situation? You will find that the Executive, who should be at the forefront - it was recently that the Executive realised women with distinguished qualifications exist and can be ably placed in top positions. 

You are aware that for years, we have had the Prime Minister's office occupied by men, yet there are women in the NRM with distinguished qualifications and training, but they could not be there. Nonetheless, we thank God that at least now they have realised it. We need to thank Him. 

When you go to the Judiciary, we need to line up the judicial system in such a way that they can humanly handle domestic violence. If a girl is defiled by a man, and the man is taken to prison, this police handling the case of the girl could be a defiler. I think the judicial system needs to be restructured to take care of domestic violence cases. 

Thirdly, I have looked at the law and it is quite good. Unfortunately, Mr Speaker –(Member timed out.)

5.07
MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have looked at the report and thanks to the committee for the compilation. There are some recommendations, especially on the need to increase the number of courts. However, we request that the number of judges and judicial staff be increased to offset the backlog. 

We also request that the judges are appointed by an independent body, other than the President, so that they are able to actually offset some of our complaints, independently. 

The appointment of judges and judicial officers, by Judicial Service Commission, should be approved by Parliament. This is going to help us because these judges and judicial staff are serving on behalf of the people and we believe that the quality of their rulings will be for the people. 

There has been a recommendation for the establishment of more technical schools in the quoted regions, but we are calling for the implementation of the NRM Manifesto of having a primary school in every parish, a secondary school in every subcounty and a technical institute in every region. 

Recently, you saw Karimojongs being taken back to their place and they were unhappy. If they run to Kampala and there is a technical school in Kiboga, we can even take some of them to a technical school in another district. At the same time, we see no priority to the Shs 10 billion that was requested to establish –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I know you have very valuable contributions to make on this matter. For example, Hon. Christine Apolot from Kumi wrote to me a chit showing me how they allocate only Shs 10 million every year to fight GBV in Kumi. This is very meagre. 

I do not see the chairperson of the committee here, but in the interest of time, honourable minister, these are issues where we do not need responses now. I am going to invoke rule 220 and I request the Prime Minister to do an inter-ministerial study because this is beyond gender. It includes education and justice, although the Ministry of Gender is the main ministry. 

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, do an inter-ministerial coordination and in six months, come back with a comprehensive action-taken report on the issues raised. Religious organisations are also under the Ministry of Gender. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, time is not on our side. The Bishop is already waiting. I have good manners. 

I would like to put the question that the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on gender-based violence in the districts of Moroto, Amudat, Kapchorwa, Kween, Tororo and Jinja be adopted with other recommendations that have come from Members – which can be extracted and submitted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable colleagues. Wow! I love the vibrancy. [Member: “Procedure.”] No, I am concluding and I do not see anything wrong with the House. Procedure? We should be having an issue in the House. 

I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.11 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 May 2022 at 2.00 p.m.) 

