Wednesday, 18 April 2012

Parliament met at 2.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a one- sided House; how do we proceed? The House is suspended for 10 minutes. Ring the bell.

(The House was suspended at 2.16 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 2.26 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome this afternoon to today’s sitting. You are aware that the budget framework paper has been submitted. It is the responsibility of the committees to have it all discussed, interact with the ministers, the public, and resolve the matter, and we should be ready by the 15th of May as the Act says. Therefore, in order to facilitate these activities and make sure that we are ready by that date, which is declared by the law, all work by standing committees is hereby suspended to enable the sessional committees handle this. All field trips by committees whether sessional or standing, are also suspended even if they have been scheduled, in order to facilitate this process. We want to be serious and we want to demonstrate to the public that we are serious. So let us sit, deal with it and make sure we are ready by the date scheduled by the law.

I would like to inform chairpersons and members of committees that you have Bills that are before your committees. I implore you to hasten in handling the Bills, finalise them quickly, such that Bills that have been submitted can be finished within this session. This session is due to expire next month and we should have finished with the Bills that are before us. I also call upon Government to present all outstanding statements that have not come. We want this to be presented early enough; they have been coming on the Order Paper, but the people responsible have not been coming.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

2.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (Ms Betty Bigombe): Honourable members, I move that Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill of 2010 be read the second time. I would like to say that this Bill was presented in this House during the Eighth Parliament, but unfortunately, it was caught up by time and, therefore, no progress was made on it. It is very important that the meteorological authority is established as soon as possible. The advantages and benefits are many.

It will give effect to the convention on the world meteorological organisation. The inter-governmental panel on climate change and other related conventions, protocols and memoranda of understanding to which Uganda is party, provide for the control and development of technically sound and scientific meteorological services, and to provide for other related matters. The object of the Bill is, therefore, to enact a law to establish a statutory body tasked with the management of meteorological services in Uganda, which will benefit agriculture, defence, security and many other sectors.
  
2.29
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES (Mr Michael Kafabusa): I would like to present a report of the Parliament Committee on Natural Resources on the Uganda National Meteorological Bill, 2010. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, you have 15 minutes. 

MR KAFABUSA: The Uganda National Meteorological Bill, 2010 is one of those Bills that were saved from the Eighth Parliament as indicated by the honourable minister for consideration by the Ninth Parliament.

In the process of securitising the Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010, the committee held meetings with the Minister of Water and Environment, and it is also worth noting that in considering this Bill, the natural resources committee of the Eighth Parliament had already held meetings with and gathered views of the following stakeholders: Ministry of Water and Environment; Ministry of Agriculture; Ministry of Works; Ministry of Defence; Civil Aviation Authority and employees of the Meteorology department.

The committee reviewed relevant documents namely: The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010 and the report of the Committee on Natural Resources in the Eighth Parliament on this Bill.

The objectives are as have been said by the minister, but currently, Uganda does not have a distinct piece of legislation governing meteorology. The existing laws relating to meteorology in Uganda are scattered over a number of enactments and in an uncoordinated manner. These include: The National Environment Act Cap 153, National Forestry and Tree Planting Act of 2003, and Civil Aviation Authority Act Cap. 3554, among others. This is in addition to other international agreements, conventions and treaties to which Uganda is a party.

The object of the Bill is, therefore, to enact a law to establish a statutory body tasked with the management of meteorological services in Uganda. The transformation of the meteorological services is a requirement by the World Meteorological Organisation and it dates back to 1994.

The East African Community Council under Minute EAC/CM/11/Decision 54 and approved by the Summit, urged Kenya and Uganda to expedite the process of transforming their meteorological services into autonomous institutions as recommended in the five-year development plan and investment strategy. The Cabinet of the Republic of Uganda under Minute CT/126 of 2007 directed the Minister of Water and Environment to transform the Department of Meteorology into an authority.

In comparison with other East African Community member states, Tanzania and Kenya already have institutionalised semi-autonomous meteorological agencies while Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda are yet to match them.

The proposal to transform the Department of Meteorology into the authority was born by an inter-ministerial committee of the ministries of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Public Service, Health, Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Water and Environment, besides the Department of Meteorology. 

Observations 

The committee observed that the Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010 is immensely important and timely as it is intended to ensure the control and development of technically sound and scientific meteorological services, respond to new trends in the area and introduce some global best practices. 

The Bill is necessary because it seeks to combine all the relevant pieces of legislation, which are spread out in several enactments, and ensure a coordinated delivery of meteorological services in Uganda. It is, therefore, envisaged that meteorological services will be sustainable and efficient.

The enactment of this law will help in promoting greater awareness in the use of meteorological services, information and products for public safety and socio-economic planning. Lack of awareness regarding the social-economic benefits of factoring weather and climate information into the development process has been a major impediment to the sustainable development of meteorological services in Uganda. The Authority is expected to sensitise the public and all those whose activities are impacted/affected by the weather and climate to appreciate the benefits of factoring weather and climate information into the entire cycle of their operations. 

The establishment of the meteorological authority will help in strengthening partnerships with national, regional, international and private organisations relevant to weather and climate services. Meteorological services cannot operate in isolation. They depend on internationally coordinated observation systems in addition to a rapid exchange of weather and climate data as well as disaster information. The Authority will promote cooperation at international and regional levels and relevant institutions.

Notwithstanding appropriations from Government, the National Meteorological Authority should be run on a commercially viable and sustainable basis. Whereas the committee recognises that to a large extent meteorological services are provided as a public good, it is also pertinent to note that the cost of generating and processing data is very high. As the government and the Authority continuously promote the commercial use of meteorological information, data and other related services by different players in the economy, the tariffs need to be regulated in order not to stifle the operations of other stakeholders.  

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010 be passed into law subject to the proceeding proposed amendments. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Honourable members, the motion is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010” be read the second time. We have heard from the committee. I put the question for debate. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.36
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a point of clarification. I am looking at page 5, point number five, which observes that the Meteorological Authority should be run on a commercial, viable basis. I am just wondering how this will operate because as we know, and it has been stated here, these services have been provided as a public good. Who is going to get information, data and other related services on a commercial basis? I seek that clarification.

2.40
MR ROBERT SSEBUNYA (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also seeking clarification. In the preamble, it was stated that there was no central place for meteorology and these legislations are scattered in different organisations or sectors. 

I am aware that in NARO, there are meteorologists; they have their stations and they have their historical use as far as agriculture is concerned. The clarification I am seeking is that; how are you going to encompass or bring on board those meteorologists, departments and equipment from NARO into this authority which you want to create?

The concern raised by the honourable Member from Zombo is also relevant as far as providing this service to these organisations is concerned. Shall it also be at a cost? Because, these are government departments and we want it to be very clear whether they are going to buy this information from the Authority or they shall be part of the Authority?

2.40 
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion because I am going to talk about how lack of this facility has hampered or affected agriculture. All people in Uganda depend on agriculture, and in most cases, you find that farmers ask about the weather. When is the rain coming? When is the sunshine coming? All this information is always missing. This Bill comes at the right time when we are all aiming at improving agriculture, the source of employment for the youth. Therefore, I support this motion and beg the technical people behind this Bill to include the technical information which is required to enhance agriculture. I will be happy to see that our farmers both at the subsistence and commercial level be supplied with instant information as to when the rains are coming; as to when they should plant and so on. You know how great that information is, dear colleagues, to support agriculture. Therefore, this Bill is timely and should be supported. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.41
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Like my colleagues, I want to commend the minister and the committee because the Bill is truly timely. However, I want to air out a few observations.

At the moment, we know that there is a meteorological school in Entebbe. When we are talking about climate change now, we need a strong research arm. This Bill is silent about that school and the significance of a strong research and training component. May I know from the committee; what is it they intend to do as far as research and training is concerned, because we know it is a strong research component which is going to influence policy. There is a lot of research to do on meteorology and climatology, hydrology and environmental analysis.

I would have loved to see the significance of hydrology because today, you cannot talk about meteorology without talking about hydrology. The bill is silent about hydrology because the two are inseparable. You cannot talk about the aerial atmosphere without talking about the aquatic environment.  When you look at the problems we have today of the ceding lake levels; what is happening to our aquatic environment; disappearing fish stocks; the floods – there is no way you can omit hydrology. The practice world over now is to talk about hydrology and meteorology concurrently. So, can I know from the committee why hydrology is that silent? Thank you.

2.43
MR RICHARD SEBULIBA MUTUMBA (DP, Kawempe Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister and the committee for the work they have done to bring on board the many things that have been lacking. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that they have been using soothsayers or ritualists to predict the weather. One time, I read in the press – Mr Speaker, in the area you represent, someone wanted to make a wedding and was not sure whether it would rain, yet his was an outdoor function. So, he got a soothsayer, whom he gave a goat and he assured him that he had put the rain at bay. But it rained harder than ever before. In fact, the man was beaten up and the payment was demanded back. Those are our local meteorologists. 

But I wonder what difference it is going to create because the department has already been there and now the authority is coming in. I do not know how they are going to harmonise – any way, much as I support this motion, I hope this time we will not operate on guess work. 

As my colleague rightly states, agriculture and other ministries have been affected, especially with regard to predicting rain. Sometimes even the meteorological department comes on air and tells us it is going to rain; then it does not rain. And when they say, “Do not plant”, the rain starts. So, I propose that as the Authority comes in, there will be real scientific early warning systems. For example, the rains have come late this time. Let them be able to say accurately that the rains will be late. Remember, some had already gone to plant their fields in February and all those crops were spoilt. Now the rains have come in April; I do not know how it is going to end. But guess work should be out and they should work as they have promised us; that it is going to be inter-ministerial. Otherwise, passing a bill here is one thing but bringing results is another.

Now, in comparison with other East African Community states, that is on page 4, Tanzania and Kenya already have institutionalised semi-autonomous meteorological agencies while Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi are yet to march them. I think they should throw more light on this. What do you mean by semi-autonomous in relation to the one we are trying to create? For the rest, I am in support of their move, but we want results. I thank you.

2.46
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like clarification on two issues. One, there is a new trend of transforming Government departments into authorities. These authorities are created and made autonomous and we give them powers to commercialise their services. Ugandans know that they pay taxes so that they can get services from Government. But when you look at the report, on page 5, there is a provision that the Meteorological Authority is going to commercialise its services. And when you look at the functions of the Authority as provided for under the Bill, in section four, you find that these are very general functions for which you do not expect any person to collect money directly from the beneficiaries of the services. So, I would like to know in details which particular services for which the Authority shall be charging fees from the beneficiaries. 

And on the finances, when you read the Bill, together with the report, there is also a proposal that the Authority will invest the surplus money it gets. I do not know whether that will not divert the Authority from its functions and get occupied in running businesses in which it will invest.

We are putting up this Authority so that the functions as provided for under section four are properly given to Ugandans. At the same time, we are saying it is an Authority that is supposed to make money. So, maybe, eventually we shall see people going into a private-public partnership with Government as the modern trends are – or are we at one point going to see this Authority taken over by a private company? We might soon have it privatised. I request for clarification on that.

I would also like to add, for clarity, that I do support the motion. But still, I request for clarification on those two issues. Thank you.

2.48
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Mr Speaker, from the Bill, you find that there is already a danger of Ugandans who are working in that department losing jobs. This has been happening every time an Authority is established. And it is already clear here that Ugandans working in that department are going to lose jobs.

Can we take it as another way to lay-off Ugandans from their employments by transforming bodies and calling them authorities? 

Honourable minister, it is said here that if a person is not acceptable in the Authority, that person will be paid their terminal benefits. We have seen that happening in KCCA. There has been a lot of confusion and I think we are yet to see more with the coming of this Authority. 

I expect an Authority to be wider than the department we have now. Why don’t we have it clearly stipulated that the people who were in the department are going to be retained by the Authority other than making excuses to suck them and pay them off. Can’t we retain all the members in the department rather than showing them the exit? Or are they unqualified to do the job they are doing today?

2.52
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report and I say that this Bill should be enacted into law very quickly because as you know, this country depends on agriculture and you know with climate change, the weather has become unpredictable. So, when this law comes into force and an Authority is formed – the experience in Uganda is that when an Authority is formed, it gets better resources, better salaries and better facilities. The present meteorological department said that we were going to have early rains in March, but we are coming to May and we do not see rains. So, we hope that the Authority to be created will be facilitated, bearing in mind that this is an agricultural country that depends on climate and weather. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.53
MR MARTIN MUZAALE (NRM, Buzaaya County, Kamuli): I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand to support the motion. However, I have something to query. As Government is coming up with a number of authorities, we are trying to kill the central ministries. If I am to give you an example of KCCA, as we speak now, they are highly paid as compared to the local government minister. This alone is going to affect the entire service delivery in the country because as people fight to go to the authorities and leave the central ministries, we are creating a crisis. You find a director in an authority is getting salary worth Shs 30 million while a permanent secretary in the ministry is getting Shs 3 million. What are we doing as Government? Are we not creating a vacuum within the service delivery somewhere?  

Therefore, as I support the motion for the creation of an authority within the Ministry of Water and Environment, we must also look at this as a serious issue because civil servants have now decided to create their consultancy firms outside their ministries because they are not being paid to their full expectations. Whoever they are trying to supervise is getting a lot of salary or big sums of money and for them they are being paid low. So, in this situation, as we come up with so many Bills to pass in this direction of creation of authorities, we should also look at that. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thank you. The honourable member and then I come to hon. Kiboijana.

2.56
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): I thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising to support the motion, but at the same time seek certain clarification for better understanding of the issues raised in the motion.  

In the presentation of the report, the chairman said that Government in collaboration with the private service providers is supposed to provide meteorological services. My concern is based on the fact that I may not understand so much what is involved, and the question I will need clarified is, What is the motivation and viability behind these services that we anticipate will encourage private service providers to come and give meaningful and sustainable meteorological services? Do we have some of these private service providers already? As hon. Nambooze asked, what are these services that they will provide?

We are saying that the generation and processing of this data is very costly. How do we plan to handle the regulation of the tariffs or bills to ensure that the ordinary person is not disadvantaged by the high or exorbitant charges? What sanctions would we anticipate for cases where poor or misleading services are provided by the different service providers, whether Government or private?

I would still be interested in knowing what the ministry or the committee will tell me about the boundary between a commercial service and a public good or service so that somebody can be able to tell and plan how to position his or her interests. 

Finally, of recent, we have also heard about a little strange idea where the Ministry of Agriculture is said to have engaged rain makers. How sure are we that when we talk about private service providers, the Meteorological Authority will not also be engaging the private rainmakers as private service providers? I thank you very much. (Laughter)

3.00
MRS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): I thank you. This Authority should have been created yesterday, but it is better late than never. 

I belong to a committee on agriculture and at one time, we were told that the meteorological machine that predicts the weather for this country was obsolete. Similarly, the technical people manning this machine were actually very unqualified. Fortunately, only about a week or so back, the Ministry of Agriculture came up and said that they had now, through the Ministry of Public Service, recruited staff. But like the honourable members have said, I do not know whether the staff will be taken over by this Authority.

Considering the adverse and unpredictable climatic conditions prevailing in this country, we need to have this Authority in place. I am not going to labour about the wrong prediction because with obsolete machines, I would not have expected anything better. I support more the principle of the Authority being semi-autonomous and we should make sure that it carries its own vote to empower it to be operational. 

However, as we stand, there is a conflict of the home of the Authority and this must be looked into. I am glad that the committee consulted the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Water and Environment, and Ministry of Agriculture. I pray that by the time we come up with the nitty-gritty of the Authority, we should bring everybody on board for harmonisation purposes to create the linkages to avoid back-stabbing of certain sectors, and to avoid watering down this Authority. I submit.

3.03
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to support the honourable minster by saying, just like hon. Kiboijana, that we really needed this Bill like yesterday, but as they say, “Better late than never”, it has come. There are services which you cannot directly tax and I wonder how these meteorological services are going to be taxed. The honourable minister must come out very clearly to tell us which beneficiaries he expects to tax because for my people in Lwabenge, who have been waiting for these services all this time, to be told that they will pay for this information, is not something that they want to hear about. 

Secondly, there are other sources of this information. When we tune to television networks, we get some information and I don’t know whether you considered these sources too, because if you expect to tax these, what about the other information that we are getting freely already? Have we looked at those other options and sources of information which are available to us? Honourable minister, I think you will give us this clarification. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I had already said I was moving in front, but I will allow only hon. Kamateeka and then I will come to the shadow minister, hon. Kamuntu, and then I will roll back to close. You will have another opportunity during committee stage.

3.05
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to be able to support the motion, but I have problems. So, I am seeking clarification. At the end of it all, all that the nation requires is proper forecasts of weather and climatic information, so that we can plan adequately, most especially for our agriculture as Members have said. But I am wondering; we have a meteorological department right now which is very inefficient. What is it that the Authority is going to do anew that will improve the situation? What is it that the Authority is going to do to make sure that we get proper information, because when I look at the observations especially, other than saying that the Authority will be commercially viable, which is highly questionable, I don’t see anything new that is being proposed here. So, the committee and the honourable minister could kindly tell us what it is that is going to be done so as to ensure that Uganda gets proper weather and climatic information so as to justify the creation of this Authority, and most especially considering the funding that is going to go into this exercise. 

As my colleagues have asked, are we going to kill departments that already exist so as to create more and more authorities? I think it would have been better for us to facilitate the existing meteorological department to ensure that they come up with the correct forecast rather than create a new Authority. All that notwithstanding, I will render support to the motion if the information is given. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.08
MR STEPHEN OCHOLA (FDC, Serere County, Serere): I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister and the committee for bringing to us this report. I do not really support the creation of the Authority, but I think it would be better to strengthen the meteorological department that we have because an Authority will be too big for this work. It is quite a small department though very vital for this nation, given the fact that we depend on the rain and the weather pattern for our agriculture. But I think creating an Authority is so ambitious. It would be better to strengthen this department and then have well-trained personnel who are well facilitated. The Authority should be manning a lot of functions and for us to create an Authority to run this department will be too big.

Another thing which I feel needs more clarification is the commercialisation. I was asking myself, how are we going to handle it and who is going to pay for this, because I think that should be the responsibility of our government. Government should take responsibility to help the citizens, especially the farmers, on understanding how the weather pattern is because, for example, in my constituency, in 2007, we had a lot of floods and in 2008, we had drought and this department failed to assist. Assuming we are going to pay for this service, I don’t know how my farmers of Serere are going to pay for this service, and I think they will fail. So, I think it should be the responsibility of the government - Chairman of the committee, I don’t know how you came about with recommendation five; I need some light on it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When you read this report, you find that on page 5 where the members signed the report, the chairperson who has presented the report did not sign it or refused to sign it. I am wondering whether it is procedurally right for him to present this report and defend it, or another member of the committee should have presented it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do the signatures constitute quorum?  [HON. MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Hon. Kamuntu, proceed.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Mr Speaker, I just want to thank you for two things. One, in your communication to the House, you gave a very clear road map on our legislative programme, which makes us plan ahead, and we thank you. That is part of the predictability that is envisaged in this Bill as well and I want to thank the chairman of the committee for a very brief precise report. In debating the report and the Bill, we should not lose sight of the vision we have as a country. The country’s vision is to transform, which means, changing the way we do business and the way we think; we become more objective, scientific and more efficient. It is very difficult, especially when transformation is going to come from agriculture as an engine – when you cannot predict as exactly as it is humanly possible with the art and science methods that we have.

I have a note from hon. Ssebuliba where he emphasizes the reliance on soothsayers and witchdoctors as a method of planning human society. This is very dangerous. The Bill establishes an Authority –(Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. A short while ago, hon. Isiko also referred to another article in the New Vision that talked about the Minister of Agriculture consulting rainmakers thereby portraying our minister to be a soothsayer. But I would like to inform Members – for clarity – that that pull-out he was quoting was published on a Fools’ Day. (Laughter) So, let nobody take it for real that the minister went to consult with rainmakers. (Laughter) As the Shadow Minister of Agriculture, I thought I should put things right.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, the honourable member was fooled on Fools’ Day; not so?

DR EPETAIT: Absolutely!

PROF. KAMUNTU: Yes, that is hon. Epetait for you. Anyway, the point I was making was about the fundamental need for the application of science and technology as the only way we can achieve our socio-economic transformation. Indeed, if these transformations come from agriculture, it is absolutely necessary for us to be able to predict the weather and climatic conditions in order to plan ahead of time.

Secondly, when everybody is moving from a meteorological department to an Authority – Uganda will be disadvantaged if we maintain a meteorological department instead of the Authority for predicting the weather.

I want to emphasize the point that internationally, we are connected. For instance, if today we decided to entitle our Speaker, the Chairman of the House, he would not be allowed to speak in an assembly of Speakers at par with other Speakers. The same reasoning can be attributed to this situation. When you have meteorological authorities in the region and we continue having a department, we cannot send a department head because that head cannot contest for chairmanship – you will have to wait for your equals. So, this would clearly disadvantage our country.

Therefore, to establish a meteorological authority is in keeping with the current trends globally. So, I would like to allay the fears of people about maintaining a meteorological department – (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of clarification pursuant to what the Minister of Tourism has attempted to put across. If power was levelled on the basis of titles, we wouldn’t be having a congregation of titles representing their respective countries in the UN, but still talk at par. For example, you will have prime ministers, chairpersons, presidents and secretaries commanding at par with all the powers and honour given to heads of state. So, what are you talking about when you say that because there will be a different title and that Uganda will not be entitled to speak at par? Even within the kingdoms, you will for example, have the Omukama; the Rwot; Emorimor; the Kyabazinga, but you can still see the command. What are you talking about?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Mr Speaker, I would like to submit to what hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi said. If today your title was a Saza Chief of say Kayunga, and you came to this House in that capacity, I am doubtful whether you would be recognised to speak at the same levels with honourable members. Anyway, the point is taken that the Meteorological Authority language is now internationally accepted. It would put our country at par with the rest if we adopted that title.

Thirdly, it is absolutely necessary for the Authority to be strengthened. I know that Members will appreciate how the situation that hon. Ssebuliba Mutumba described – we have seen it in our own life experiences, people wanting to take on the scientific role of predicting weather either for weddings, burials and so on. But when things don’t turn out to be correct, there have been conflicts and fights occurring.

Similarly, if you want to plan to transform agriculture and the rest, we need to adopt scientific methods. In fact, one of the most binding constraints in our transformation efforts is the lack of application of science and technology. This is one of the ways to cure this.

The country is at the brink of economic take-off and so, we should quickly pass this Bill and instruct the minister in charge of this sector to do everything possible to implement the Bill, in order to strengthen the Authority to enable the country to move to achieve the transformation we are all aiming at having. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I appreciate the observations and comments that have been raised on the Floor. I will answer those that have been directed at the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But try to summarise; they are very similar issues.

MR KAFABUSA: The first issue was about the payments for the services that will be provided by this Authority. There are certain organisations that use information from the meteorological centres the world over like the Civil Aviation authorities, airlines – these are actually commercial entities that need to pay for these services. Therefore, the Authority should raise money by way of providing these services. These are the kind of organisations that we are looking at.

However, on the part of the public, like doing agriculture – that is an issue that applies to all of us. So, there is no way the Authority will charge farmers. The specific areas that we are looking at are those private organisations and commercial entities that will need to use the information from the Authority.

MRS BAKIREKE Mr Speaker, the Bill as it stands now in clause 23 (d) is not specific on who will be supposed to pay. I wish to read it out and it says, “The funds of the Authority shall consist of: (d) fees charged from services and activities rendered by the Authority under this Act.” 

So, for the chairperson to come here and tell us that it will be very specific and special organs will pay, other than every beneficiary of the services as shall be provided by the Authority, is to try to put some words in this Bill, when the Bill itself does not particularly spell out the particular beneficiaries who are supposed to pay. It is not specific. And the clarification I am seeking is, how will they determine, therefore, who will pay once we pass this Bill into law. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nambooze, do you expect the farmer from Mukono to go to the meteorological department and be charged a fee?

MRS BAKIREKE: Indeed, I do not expect that. That is why I want it to be specified. 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you. I want to seek clarification, more especially on this Bill that we think should be passed into law soon. The chairperson has just explained that it will be a section of people who will pay and those in agriculture may not. I am seeking clarification whether it is constitutional for us to make a law which is discriminative. Thank you so much.

MR KAFABUSA: The areas that are going to be taxed will be specified in the regulations. That is what the Bill is going to do. As to whether we shall be discriminative, even as of now, the little that is coming from the Department of Meteorology, with regard to civil aviation, is being paid for because this is a business and airlines are business entities. Therefore, why not actually pay. It is not that we want to be discriminative, but if you are going to benefit from the services, why not pay for them. Even as of now, we do pay for certain services, even for some of the semi-autonomous agencies with regard to the private sector. So, I do not see any discrimination with that. 

Mr Speaker, I want to lay on Table the page regarding the signatures.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I already ruled on that matter. Please proceed. 

MR KAFABUSA: An honourable member raised an issue regarding research. We don’t have the institution of meteorological research. I consulted the minister and they don’t have that as of now. But I think the Authority is set to establish the research institute because there is no way you are going to have scientific data and information without having a strong research department or section of the Authority, and that is what the Authority is going to do.

Hon. Sebuliba raised the issue of the rainmakers. To me, that is not scientific and I believe this Authority is going to be giving services based on scientific research and information. (Interjection) We shall consult anthropologists and sociologists on that.

Hon. Nambooze raised the issue of which particular service – I think I have already alluded to that. 

The Ugandans who are currently employed under the meteorological department; what we stated in our report is that all those people who have relevant skills in meteorology or meteorological services will be taken on by the Authority and those who do not will be given their terminal benefits and they find other alternatives. 

We cannot force everybody – there are those who may voluntarily choose not to work under the Authority. So, we leave it to the Authority to take on those whom they regard as useful, and those who would like to retire, get their benefits. Those who are not able to benefit the Authority should also be given their retirement benefits. 

Again the issue of how the tariffs will be paid – because this kept on coming up. What sanctions will be put in place for those who mislead? The Authority is going to come up with a detailed regulation as to how it is going to function, and I believe it will include even those who may not be giving services appropriately in accordance with this Act, and I think that is where the sanctions will come in. 

What is the boundary between a public good and a private service? A public good is that service that will be for all of us; that which is in the interest of all the people of Uganda; and a private good is for those people who will be engaged in private business for their personal or organisational benefit. That is the difference. In this case, agriculture is for all of us and that is a public good. As I said, if airlines or telecommunication companies want information, these are private entities and they will have to pay for that information. And that is the private service that the report refers to.

The equipment that the meteorological department currently uses is obsolete and it is a pity. We have people who are trained; of course they will need retraining to cope with the challenges that we face now, but funding to this department has been very low. Why? Because it is attached to the ministry; and the ministry itself - when they came to the committee, they continuously indicated to us that they are grossly underfunded. So, you can imagine if you don’t have a semi-autonomous agency, which is so critical to this country in the areas of agriculture and other important sectors, you will continue having that challenge and we may not actually be able to –(Interruption) 
 
MS ABABIKU: Thank you. From what the Chair has just said that the department is facing problems of funding, now that we are moving to authorities, how shall we get the funds? I have experiences even before NFA was created, on how the Forestry Department had been suffering. When the Authority came into place, money is now there. What miracle is always played by the government to avail money for authorities and not for our departments? I wish also to know more on how we should plan to improve the inefficiencies in our ministries and departments. Thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairman, please roll up. We are going to committee stage and we need to finish the Bill today. 

MR KHAFABUSA: Mr Speaker that is precisely why we are here. It is Parliament to recognise the significance of this Authority and that it needs funding; if we are to have scientific data and information that is going to cut across all sectors. 

Yes, it is being underfunded under the ministry, but now that we are proposing to have an authority, I believe Parliament having recognised that we need it, after this report, I implore the honourable House to fund it adequately if we are to have proper data and information of a meteorological nature. 

I remember hon. Kamateka asking what the authority is going to do that has not been done by the department. I will leave this to the minister to respond because she is authoritative enough to answer that plus any other issues that I have left out. Thank you.
 
3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Allow me to supplement what the chairman has said on the commercialisation of the data. What will happen is that data will, for example, be sold to Civil Aviation Authority, which will in turn sell it to airlines that fly into the country because before they get into the country it is a requisite to know what the weather is like. And in case it has to be diverted to another country, the other country also provides weather information, and that is how it is going to generate revenue to be able to sustain itself. 

Regarding the current staff, I would like to allay your fears that those people who are good will be retained. But the others will have to apply and pass the test.
 
Regarding whether the authority is going to replace NARO or Kawanda and Namulonge, no, it will not. Instead, they will work in partnership with the authority. 

Why create the authority now? Meteorology was a stand alone in the old East African Community, but now it is being harmonised with other member states. If you look at point No.4, the transformation of meteorological services is required by the World Meteorological Organisation and this dates as way back as 1994, and further to that, in the East African Community, it is only Uganda that hasn’t yet established the authority. So, this is in conformity with the requirements of the treaties that we have internationally and regionally. 

I think the chairman has already explained that Government will fund part of it and the position right now under the Ministry of Water and Environment is that it is really not receiving releases or the recognition that it deserves. So, once it is established, it will be semi-autonomous and consequently releases will be made directly to it and on top of that, it will be getting what they will be generating out of selling information and data. I believe that is about it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Madam Minister. Honourable members, the motion before the House is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010” be read the second time. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NATIONAL METEOROLOGICAL AUTHORITY BILL, 2010

3.38
Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 3(5) we should delete the word “chairperson” and insert “Executive Director.” The justification is to enable the executive director who manages the daily activities of the authority to participate in the process of authentication to the official seal when affixed to any document.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the proposed amendment is clear. I put the question to the amendment proposed by the committee.
 
(Question put, and agreed to.)

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in clause 3(6) we should substitute the word “Chairperson” wherever it appears with the word “Executive Director.” It is actually a consequential amendment.  The justification is that it is consequential upon the amendment of clause 3(5).
 
Then underclause 3(8) substitute the word “paragraph” with the word “section.” The justification is to apply the appropriate legislative term, “section,” which is used in Acts instead of paragraph. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are the proposals for amendment. Any further amendments? Let me take a vote on the proposed amendments by the chair and then we can move to take any further amendments. 

Honourable members that is the proposal to amend clauses 3(6) and 3(8), I put the question to those amendments. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, clause 3(2)(a) “acquire, hold and dispose of” I think that “of” is not meant to be double ‘f’. The justification is to correct a typographic error. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is a typo; I put the question that it be amended accordingly. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3 as amended agreed to.

Clause 4

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, Clause 4(d) substitute the word “human” with the word “developmental.” The justification is to bring out the intrinsic developmental value of meteorology.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, you agree with this? I put the question.
 
MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 4(i) substitute “UNMA” with “Uganda National Meteorological Authority.” The justification is to write in full, especially that “UNMA” is not defined in the Bill. 

Then in clause 4(s) substitute “and climate change” with “science of climate change”. The justification is to achieve clarity.

Clause 4 paragraph (b), substitute the word “council” with “authority.” The justification is to make proper reference to the authority as envisaged under clause 4 instead of the council. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, those are the amendments proposed by the committee. I put the question.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Mr Chairman, I am reluctant to support the amendment “science of climate change”. At the United Nations, including UNEP, the phrase “climate change” is already scientific enough to portray what you mean. An addition would be a distortion of scientific practice.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, apparently, hon. Lukyamuzi is a member of the committee, so I don’t know -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Go to the substance, Mr Chairman.

MR WERIKHE: I think if it is in line with UN principles, it is okay, we can take that.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Good. The amendment proposed to clause 4 has been withdrawn. I now put the question that those amendments proposed by the chair of the committee be adopted. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in clause 5 we propose to insert a new sub clause between sub-clauses (2) and (3) to read as follows: “At least two of the members of the board appointed under sub-section (2) shall be women.” The justification is to ensure women representation on the board. I am saying at least two.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Of how many?

MR WERKIHE: Out of seven members.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Chairman, the number would be three as required by the law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Nambooze, you know how to propose an amendment.

MRS BAKIREKE: I am proposing an amendment that instead of being “at least two” the number comes to “at least three.”

MR WERIKHE: I think this is in tandem with the law that requires us to have one third of members who are ladies. I concede.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the feel good factor is slightly irresistible but this is a very technical area. With all due respect to the various professions, “at least two” means even all the seven can be women. Now if you raise the threshold to “at least three” you may even have a scenario where the authority will not be fully constituted because they are looking for technical people in that area.

I would even accept an amendment that all of them should be women, but why can’t we leave it to the discretion - we just put a minimum cut-off point of at least two. It can be four or five or six, but to raise the threshold to three means three must be women and you may get a scenario where you may not get three women in that specialised area. Let us just check ourselves against that.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I think for avoidance of doubt, we could say “at least one-third.” The mathematics will be worked out. At least one third of seven members, I think it is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, one-third of the membership. That means you are departing from your original position. Hon. Nambooze, that means you also concede to one-third? Honourable members, the only amendment not subsisting –

DR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, one-third of seven is 2.2. Where are we going to get the 0.2 of a woman to be on the board? So, we should have a minimum of two.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, we are not re-inventing the wheel. Most of the legislations we make here talk about one- third because it comes from the Constitution. The implementing minister goes ahead to calculate. If it is two and a half, there is no half a person, so it comes to three. You cannot reduce downwards, but this is the practice and I beg that the House accepts that we go by one-third instead of mentioning numbers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the amendment is that a new sub-clause be introduced that at least one-third of the members of the board appointed under sub-section (2) shall be women. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 6 stands part of the Bill.

MRS BAKIREKE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Clause 6 talks about the qualifications of the members of the board, and it has only one provision, that they shall be people of high moral character and proven integrity. However, I would wish to propose an amendment that members of the board should have some technical knowledge in this area. I so wish to propose.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, have you looked at clause 5(3)? You are satisfied? It is okay? I put the question that clause 6 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please Members, vote.

Clause 7

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 7, paragraphs (a) and (b); transpose (a) and (b) so that (a) becomes (b) and (b) becomes (a). The justification is to ensure a logical flow of the provision.

In clause 7, paragraph (d), insert immediately after the word “authorities” the word “plans” and add an apostrophe and an “s” at the end of the word “authority” to imply possessiveness. The justification is to introduce review of the authority’s plan among the functions of the board.

Then in clause 7, paragraph (g), delete (a) and replace it with (b). The justification is to correct a wrong cross-reference resulting from the amendment of paragraphs (a) and (b) of clause 7.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, it is consequential.

MR WERIKHE: I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the chairman of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR EPETAIT: I am now in a difficult position; I had stood to oppose one of the amendments – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Proceed and propose your amendment.

DR EPETAIT: Now, clause 7(d) talks about “to review regularly the authority’s structure, staffing levels, emoluments….” I oppose the proposed amendment because the function that we are talking about is already provided for in 7(b). First of all, 7(a) talks about the board monitoring the implementation of the authority’s plans and programmes. In 7(b) it approves annual plans. So, if we again provide for “regular review” of the already approved annual plans, don’t you think the board may over-interfere with the work plans of the authority? The involvement of the board in approving annual plans is enough, rather than giving them another function of reviewing those very approved plans. 

Instead, I propose that we abandon what the committee proposes – but then I have another amendment on the same; to interchange the words “review” and “regularly” for better drafting so that it reads “to regularly review”. The justification is just proper English for better drafting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, Dr Epetait, who would review staffing levels?

DR EPETAIT: We leave it as it stands now for the board to regularly review the structure, staffing levels and emoluments. I am opposed to the introduction of “regular review of work plans” because the board is already involved in approval of annual work plans of the authority. So, I think (b) is covering what you are proposing to introduce.

MR WERIKHE: After consulting the honourable minister, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the substance of that is that the initially proposed amendment of clause 7(d), inserting “plans” has been removed. Therefore, it is accordingly struck off and we retain the original drafting of (d) – 

DR EPETAIT: Interchange “regularly” and “review” so that it reads, “to regularly review”.

MR WERIKHE: That is a different meaning because “to review regularly” is different from “to regularly review”. The two are not the same and so you cannot use them interchangeably. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What is the difference, chairperson?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, we could say, “to regularly…”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Chairperson, is there any harm in leaving it as it is?

MR WERIKHE: I do not think so, because you are reviewing on a regular basis. That is what it means here. So, there is nothing wrong, at least from the grammar that I learnt in a very important school in the east.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 8 on page 11- the head note; substitute “for” with “from”. The justification is to correct a grammatical error. Instead of “disqualification for appointment to the board” I think it should be “disqualification from appointment to the board”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you sure of that?

MR WERIKHE: Or, I beg to move that we have this as “disqualification for the appointment to the board”. (Laughter) I do not know; there is a problem here, Mr Chairman. But I think it makes sense as it stands.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Exactly what I thought too. (Laughter)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, the marginal note is where the problem is. Probably, it should read, “Qualification for appointment to the board” while the others remain as they are. Then the drafting will now have to change to remove it from the negative so that when you fail to qualify, that is when you are disqualified. Disqualification is a stage you reach when you do not qualify. So, this section should instead be drafted from the positive – or even it can remain the way it is as long as “qualification” is used.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the only amendment that would stand, in my view, is an addition of letter “s” to make it “disqualifications” because there is a list of them, not only one. That would make perfect sense.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I will accept the addition of “s” and leave the sub-heading as it is. It will now read as “disqualifications for appointment to the board”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, please wait. Let me hear from hon. Mwiru.

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, I think what we are trying to say is that you have to first qualify before you are disqualified. And what we are all saying is that the marginal note of clause 8 should change to read as “qualification for appointment to the board” such that whoever will not meet those qualifications will automatically be disqualified. But you cannot talk of disqualification – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, hon. Mwiru, the way this has been drafted will require us to re-draft the entire section. What we have listed here are the disqualifications, not qualifications. Qualifications are found under clause 6.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am also restless over the standing provision that talks about disqualification. For example, if you went by the title “disqualification for appointment to the board”, provisions like (c) just die off because they remain ambiguous. Secondly, if we go by the basic law which is the Constitution of Uganda, I think the example given in Article 83 is good enough to direct us - qualification before you go to disqualification.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I am also wondering why under 6 you put qualifications of the board; under 7 you put functions of the board; and then under 8 you put disqualification. It does not flow. Disqualification should have come immediately after qualification. It would make perfect sense.

MR AMURIAT: Mr Chairman, thank you. I would like to propose that for easy reading, this disqualification clause be brought to clause 6; then it is going to be 6(3) and the whole of it is exported to clause 6(3) without the marginal note. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would even be smarter in my opinion so that you have a new clause 6(3) and clause 6(3) will just say, “A person shall not be appointed to the board who...” and then you list a, b, c.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I concede that under Clause 6(3) we create a new sub-clause - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But we now have a procedural problem because we had already pronounced ourselves on clause 6. So, we now have to recommit. 

So, it therefore means we stand over clause 8.

(Clause 8, stood over.)

Clause 9

MR WERIKHE: Clause 9(l); delete all the words after the phrase, “...more than one term.”  The justification is to give a uniform tenure of service for the board under all circumstances to avoid confusion. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: And then you leave the rest?

MR WERIKHE: Yes.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, where term limits are involved it needs very careful drafting. This one reads, “A member of the board shall hold office for three years.” I think that instead of tying and saying, “A member shall hold office for three years,” which makes it mandatory, someone may not be there even for three years, probably we should say, “A term of the board shall be three years.” We first define the term then we go ahead to say how many terms a member can serve. 

So, I would suggest that 9(1) would read, “The term of the board shall be three years and a member is eligible for re-appointment for not more than two terms.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you break up sub clause (1) into two? We can leave it as it is, “A member of the board shall hold office for three years.” That would have defined the term of the board - No this is tenure of office of board members. This clause is about members and not the board. 

MRS BAKIREKE Mr Chairman, I would wish to support hon. Otto because if we talk about the members and not the board, if we get a situation where we get a member in the middle of the term, then that person will be in office beyond the life of the board itself because he must be in office for three years. Supposing he joins in the last year, then he will have to be in office for the next two years after the board has expired. That is why I would agree with hon. Otto’s amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we stand over this clause and do good drafting on this? Somebody look at it properly and redraft so that the issue is whether we deal with the board or the board members. It might make sense to deal with the tenure of the board. Somebody could do it properly. We stand over it and go to Clause 10.

(Clause 9, stood over.)

Clause 10

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 10 stand part of the Bill. 

 (Clause 10, agreed to.)

Clause 11

MS AOL: Mr Chairman, we now have to have a beginning of making this authority the same as, especially Public Service. You will see that in KCCA, a driver gets Shs 7 million while our doctor who reads for a long time in Makerere – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIPERSON: First state the amendment then you justify.

MS AOL: So, the amendment is that we should not have the minister taking responsibility for determining the payment. We should take it either to Public Service or we should make the payment – because, now if you put the minister, then it is not going to be different from what is happening right now in KCCA and other authorities. So, we should have a beginning that our workers are civil servants and are given almost the same pay commensurate with the work they do. You cannot have a driver getting Shs 7 million and then a doctor getting less than a million. This is unfair.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the amendment – what was the amendment? (Laughter)

MS AOL: The amendment is that we should take this responsibility to Public Service. The responsibility of determining -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what is the amendment here now? 

MS AOL: You delete, “The minister may –” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposed amendment is that the chairperson and the members of the board shall be paid such remuneration as the minister responsible for Public Service - but there is Finance - you want to top it up?

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. According to our rules, Members who have amendments to move take them to the committee. I have been perusing through the report, I have not seen any indication that the honourable member took this amendment to the committee and it was not presented. Is it procedurally right for a Member to move an amendment which you have not internalised and yourself are having problems as to what kind of amendment she is moving? Is it procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, once a Bill is brought, it becomes the property of the House and the House can do whatever it wants with it. (Applause) We are trying to see if this amendment makes sense or can be accommodated. That is what we are trying to do. If it does not make sense, we will take a vote on it.

MS AMUGE: Mr Chairman, I do agree with the concern of hon. Betty Aol, but hon. Aol I think is catered for where they say, “The person who shall be responsible will be the minister responsible for Public Service”. She does not do it alone. She will do it in consultation with the head of Civil Service and that is why they are bringing Public Service and Finance. I think it is good enough. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, is it the minister responsible for Public Service?

MRS BIGOMBE: It is the minister. Let me just amplify what hon. Otengo has said. When it talks of minister, it does not mean that the minister decides alone. It is done in consultation with Public Service, with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and with Cabinet. Cabinet has to approve it. When it comes to salaries, it is the board that determines and then it is approved by the ministers.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think let us not take a lot of time. Let us take a vote on this. The proposal as is in the Bill is clear. The only amendment that I think we can agree to is as of now to take out the “s” from the ministers responsible for Public Service. That agreed?

Now, the proposal is that we remove the line minister from the whole process. Should we leave Public Service alone without Finance? Let me put it and we take a vote on this. “The Chairperson and members of the board shall be paid such remunerations as the minister responsible for Public Service determines”. That is the amendment and I will put the question to the amendment by hon. Betty Aol.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 11 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12

MR KWEMARA: Clause 12(2) reads, “The board may delegate to any competent person the power to collect meteorological data, disseminate information...” my concern is -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, you state the amendment then you justify. You do not start by justification. What is the amendment you are proposing?

MR KWEMARA: The amendment I am proposing is that the word, “person” either in the interpretation, should be defined because circumstances may arise when the board may delegate an institution like UBOS or a university. So, can we say, “person” or “institution” or if we maintain, “person” then we define the person in the interpretation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The word, “person” is already defined in the Interpretation Act.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I move an amendment that clause 12(2) be deleted because we already have the PPDA law if you want to procure services of specialised entities. Now, if we put it here that, “The board may delegate”, we are now going behind the other law which tells us how they can hire the services of specialised entities in a transparent and fair manner.

So, instead of saying, “The board may delegate any competent person the power to collect meteorological data”, this one now goes to almost a management contract which must follow other laws on how to procure services; bidding and all those kind of things. So, clause (2), Mr Chairman, with your guidance I think would contravene the PPDA Act.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Odonga Otto, this is not a contract; this is delegation. The wording is not to contract.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, my understanding is that the moment the board delegates somebody to collect meteorological data, it would be at a fee. It is now sub-contracting another entity to do the work which we are actually creating the authority for; to disseminate that information. In fact, delegation affects the substance of what the authority is created for. This is the work the authority should do on its own. However, if they feel they do not want to do it, then they should bid publicly.

This is the substance of why we are creating the law and to allow them to delegate, we are going to find a company doing the work of the authority and you will not do anything because the law provided for the authority to delegate. Why can’t we follow the normal procedure in doing any work that the authority should be doing at the centre of it all?

MR WERIKHE: Hon. Odonga Otto, are you proposing that clause 12(2) be expunged in its entirety or you are re-drafting, because that is what I want to know, so that I either concur or stand my ground.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Odonga Otto, have you looked at 3, 4 and 5. Have you looked at the whole thing?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Yes, in fact what 3, 4 and 5 attempt to do is to do what has been properly defined in the PPDA Act, on how you can challenge a decision of an authority which has allocated a contract to another person unfairly. Like saying a person aggrieved by the decision of the board to whom the powers have been delegated may appeal to the board; to the same person you are aggrieved to. This is even a double jeopardy.
 
What we should avoid first of all, is the board to source people without any fair competition; just to hand pick people. So, you wake up tomorrow, you find my company contracted to do weather forecasting, then if you are aggrieved with seeing me there, you have to appeal to the same, which appointed me. I think we should avoid reaching that scenario. In case the board wants to source for any service, they should follow the well-established procedures under the PPDA Act, which can also be challenged formally so that there is competition for providing any service for the board on such sensitive matters like meteorological data, disseminating information and ensuring security of installation. This means companies must compete over who should protect those installations wherever they are. You just do not bring someone with an arrow under delegation.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are still dealing with this; do you want to amend this one? Do you want to propose an amendment to hon. Odonga-Otto’s amendment? Hon. Odonga-Otto has proposed a deletion of clause 12(2). 

MS KAMATEEKA: I would like to propose that the clause stands, but the use of the word “delegation” is clearly a wrong use of the word. So, we should substitute “contract out,” for “delegation.” 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Thank you so much. The honourable member gave a green light towards the right direction. I think, maybe other than absolute deletion, we may now put the word “procure” instead of “delegate” then leave the rest because the moment we are talking about procuring, there is a law which regulates how you should do it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It would then require re-drafting because if you take that; that means the language will not flow if you adopt “procure.” They will need to –

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, as I indicated in the earlier debate, this authority shall be working with NARO; shall be working with National Water. Traditionally, these entities have had meteorological departments. So, this authority may delegate to NARO, National Water or any other organisation. 

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I propose we stand over this.

MR SSEBUNYA: Even in research, it can be NARO.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I concur with you, Mr Chairman, because the use of “procurement” would again be an anomaly. We better stand over it so that we get -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, can we stand over clause 12 and come back to it? Meanwhile, talk among yourselves to see how we can move forward.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 14(1) paragraph (b) on page 14; delete 14 and replace it with 12. Justification is to correct a wrong cross-reference. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is correct. I put the question to the amendment. Honourable members, you are not voting. I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no clause 15 there. I think there is an issue of numbering. Okay, there are two 16s, can you move that one? 

MR WERIKHE: Clause 15, which is actually indicated as Clause 16, Executive Director, page 15. Correct the numbering from 16 to 15. Justification; to correct wrong numbering.

Then clause 15 as renumbered sub-clause (1) page 15, substitute “board” with “authority.” Justification, it is the authority to be headed by the executive director not the board.

Clause 15 as re-numbered, substitute sub-clause (2) with the following: “(2) The executive director shall be the accounting and chief executive officer of the authority employed on a full-time arrangement.” 

Justification; to establish the executive director as the accounting and chief executive officer of the authority.

Clause 15, page 15 as re-numbered; insert immediately after sub-clause(3) the following: “(4) The executive director shall not be more than 65 years of age.” 

Justification, to ensure that younger and vibrant persons hold the office of the executive director by prescribing an age limit. 

I beg to move.

MR AJEDRA: Clause 15, I propose an amendment as follows: “The chief executive officer shall be the accounting and chief executive officer of the authority employed on a full-time basis-”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Excuse me, can you read it again? 

MR AJEDRA: To replace the word “arrangement” with “basis” on a full-time basis.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, start again. Read what you are saying. 

MR ARIDRU: Sub-clause (2) of clause 15.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes 

MR AJEDRA: I propose an amendment to read as follows: “The executive director shall be the accounting and chief executive officer of the authority employed on a full-time basis.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can you split that into two? 

MR AJEDRA: The second amendment I proposed, Mr Chairman –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think we are going to have too many amendments. Just hold. There are too many coming and we shall not know how to handle them. Can we start with the amendments proposed by the chair? Can we deal with that particular one first? The one of amending sub-clause (2). The chairman had proposed – can you restate your proposal, Mr Chairman.

MR WERIKHE: Clause 15 as re-numbered, substitute sub-clause (2) with the following: “The executive director shall be the accounting and chief executive officer of the authority employed on a full-time arrangement.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Ajedra, you were proposing an amendment on that. 

MR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, I think it is just the wording. You do not employ someone on a “full-time arrangement,” it is a “full-time basis.”  That is not the correct English.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is proposing that we change “arrangement” to “basis”. Is that okay?

MR WERIKHE: I think it is just a matter of semantics; I think it is okay.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay is it changed to “basis”. So, the final amendment from the chair is now “basis”, as proposed by hon. Ajedra. 

MS KAMATEEKA: I propose an amendment on the arrangement of accounting and chief executive. Chief executive can stand on its own. So, it should be: “The executive director shall be the chief executive and accounting officer of the authority”; the rest can remain as it is, I have no problem with it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What it is now is “The chief executive and accounting officer of the authority employed on a full-time basis”. That is what it is now.

MR MAGEZI: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose that we split the two and that we leave sub-clause (2) to only the accounting officer: “The executive director shall be the accounting officer.” Then we create sub-clause (3) to say, “The executive director shall be the chief executive officer.” 

The reason is, the set of responsibilities of the accounting officer actually relate to financial management and accounting. But the ones of the executive relate to executing the policies of the body and to me these two are separate. 

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman. I had already stood on that and my contention was that the executive director at times may not be present. But the responsibility of accounting can be delegated to the deputy executive officer. So, once we combine the two, in absence of the chief executive, who shall be the accounting officer? And is that delegable or not?

MR MWESIGYE: Mr Chairman, the normal practice in Government is that emphasis is put on the accounting officer. Once you appoint the executive officer in any organisation, under the ministries, you are given a specific appointment letter by the PS appointing you as an accounting officer and it is not transferable.

MS KAMATEEKA: The information I want to give is that even the accounting officers in Government are first appointed as permanent secretaries before they are made accounting officers. The chief executive should be above the role of the accounting officer. So, it should be the chief executive of the authority who is also the accounting officer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, what happens to the proposal by hon. Magezi? He has proposed the splitting of the two.

DR EPETAIT: I would like to implore my colleague, hon. Megezi, to abandon that proposal of splitting. Once you have indicated that the executive director shall be the chief executive and accounting officer – I think that is better drafting and it is very clear, rather than clouding it the way you have proposed.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I want to support hon. Magezi – (Interjections)– if he has withdrawn it, I can adopt it and try to persuade Members. In an event that the boss of that organisation is being charged - failing to do your duty contrary to this section as the accounting officer of that organisation - the drafting that makes the accounting officer and chief executive officer appear in the same paragraph, and to me it would even sound as a defence and I say, “I acted in my capacity as the CEO and not as the accountant”. 

For those who have worked in the Civil Service for long, unlike myself who has not worked in any such organisations, wouldn’t it serve better to have them different for the purpose of charging someone for a specific offence relating to a specific role given to that person? 

MR KYOOMA: Mr Chairman, I request for your guidance. When I look at this amendment, we seem to be making a repetition. I think, once you say that one is an executive director, then it is implied that actually, that officer is the chief executive officer. If that is the meaning, then I would suggest an amendment to the effect that we delete the words “chief executive officer” so that the sub-clause reads: “The executive director shall be the accounting officer of the authority employed on a full-time basis.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the final proposal that has been made is that the executive director shall be the chief executive and the accounting officer of the authority employed on a full-time basis. 

Now, the honourable member is now proposing that we take away the issue of the chief executive. So, I put the question to the amendment as it now stands that the executive director shall be the chief executive and accounting officer of the authority, employed on a full-time basis – I put the question that sub-clause (2) be amended in the terms now proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Chairman, I propose an amendment to clause 15(1) that, “The executive director shall be recruited according to the Public Service procedures.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Where is that in (1)?

MRS BAKIREKRE: It is not there; what is provided for here is an appointment by the minister on recommendation of the board. I would wish to offer a justification for my proposal. 

Mr Chairman, we must make a beginning. The minister here has already appointed the board. This one is a purely technical person to run the authority. Appointees by ministers are becoming so many in this authority and we all know that these people are appointed by politicians and yet we give them the role of becoming chief executives and accounting officers in these authorities. That is why we have all these problems cropping up in our authorities. 

I would propose that for the purpose of giving, everybody who feels they can run this authority, a chance to apply for the job, compete through the Public Service and serve the nation as a technical person – Mr Chairman, that is the amendment I am proposing.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable member, the practice has been that for all authorities that fall in this category like the Uganda Wildlife Authority, it is the responsible ministers that appoint the executive director, but on the recommendation of the board; that is the standard and is not anything very new.  So, I do not know whether you still want to pursue it because one of the issues in legislation is consistency. The language must be consistent - that is now going into the details of these drafting matters that I happened to have learnt a lot from school. There has to be consistency in legislation.

MRS BAKIREKE: I am very grateful for your guidance, but I wish to add that we can make a start because we have all been here and we have cases to refer to. We can learn as a country and make a fresh start - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the proposal by hon. Nambooze that we amend sub-clause (1) of this clause. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Amendment?

MR AJEDRA: Yes. I wish to introduce another clause under sub-clause (3) under clause 15 – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: After sub-clause (3)?

MR AJEDRA: Yes. The amendment should be that, “The executive director shall serve a contract of four years which is renewable” because we have not indicated how the tenure of the executive director –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Move a bit away from the microphone. Can you say it again because you are too close to the microphone?

MR AJEDRA: The proposal I am making is that we introduce another sub-clause (3) –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That would be (4).

MR AJEDRA: To include the duration of the executive director.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Have you looked at 19?

MR AJEDRA: Okay, I will -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I now put the question to clause 15 as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question - Mr Chairman?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 16(2), paragraph (b) on page 16, we delete, “affairs,” that appears immediately after the word, “authority” to remove repetition of the word “affairs”. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is editorial. Is that the only amendment on that clause? Honourable members, I put the question on the terms proposed by the chairman of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 17

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Clause 17, Mr Chairman.

MR WERIKHE: Clause 17(1) on page 16, substitute the words “Executive Director,” with “Authority” and the justification is to give the function of installing meteorological instruments to the authority as an institution and not to the executive director.

Clause 17(2) on page 17, substitute the words, “Executive Director,” with “Authority” and the justification is consequential amendment. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed by the chairman of the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have not yet pronounced ourselves on clause 17. Hon. Epetait?

DR EPETAIT: If we could re-read that the way the chairman has proposed the amendment - sub-clause (1), if we said, “the authority may for the purposes of the authority” -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is that 17(1)?

DR EPETAIT: If we go by this amendment, then we delete the phrase, “for the purpose of the authority” so that it would now read, “The authority may install, construct, place or maintain”, instead of being repetitive. That is just better drafting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, Mr Chairman, it is kept and so in other words, the proposal from the chair should now be that you delete from, “Executive director” up to the word - then you said, “The authority may install, construct” and then the next one on (2). (2) is okay. I now put the question to the second amendment by Dr Epetait.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 17 as amended stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 19 stands part of the Bill – amendment?

MR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, I propose an amendment to sub-clause (1) to read that, “The executive director shall hold an office for four years and is eligible for re-appointment,” without stating, “one or more terms.” The justification is that if somebody is going to be appointed for either one or two terms, it cannot give him that job security. I think it is better that we leave that to the minister to determine whether to renew the contract of the executive director or not. I beg to move.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The Bill is proposing that the executive director is eligible to serve 10 years – yes, that is what is proposed. So, what are you proposing?

MR AJEDRA: I am proposing to reduce the number of years from five to four and leave it open to the minister to renew or not without stating the number of terms that he or she may be eligible to serve. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you want it open?

MR AJEDRA: Leave it open to the minister to do that. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us first deal with the issue of the years. There is a proposal that we reduce the years from five to four. What is the justification for that?

MR AJEDRA: The justification is that with a shorter term, you are able to determine the performance of the –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But you can even remove him/her after one year if he/she is not performing. You can even remove after a month.

MR AJEDRA: Well, that is normal practice now, but it is okay if the Members feel that five years is fine; I will move it. I do not have any problem with the five years, but what I am saying is that we should not specify the number of times the minister may renew the contract of the officer.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, the honourable member is proposing that instead of having a cap on the number of years an executive director can serve, which is provided in the Bill as a maximum of 10 years, he wants it to open.

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, I was actually intending to move an amendment in the same direction, only that I propose three years. The justification for the three years is to promote good governance and to conform to –(Interruptions)– Mr Chairman, protect me. My honourable colleagues seem not to appreciate that I have a right to say something. I propose three years and the justification is to promote good governance and to conform to international standards in respect of chief executive officers. That is my view; you can also have your view. Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, the proposal of the honourable member for Jinja Municipality East is that the period be reduced to three years. 

MR MWIRU: Mr Chairman, the term should be three years, renewable for only one other term, and the justification is to promote good governance and to conform to international standards. Members of Parliament in this House know that globally, the chief executive now serves three years subject to renewal for another extra term.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Those are availed for private companies. The little law I know is that for most of the authorities in this country, the executive directors serve for five years. At least in the Wild Life Authority where I was, it was five years. Honourable members, I put the question to the proposed amendment to reduce it to three years, renewable once. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the amendment by hon. Ajedra, or did he withdraw it?

DR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, my condition was for the ministry to determine. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The amendment that is now being proposed is that the term should be open for the executive director to serve even for 20 years. I put the question to the amendment that there should be no term limitation on the Office of the Executive Director. 

(Question put and negatived.)

Honourable members, that means there is no amendment to clause 19. I put the question that clause 19 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, for clause 20 sub-clause 2 on page 18, substitute the phrase “on the advice of the executive director” with the phrase “in consultation with the executive director.” The justification is that the board has a statutory duty to plan and review the structure of the authority and staffing, as well as making and approving staff appointments, and this can best be done in consultation with the executive director. I beg to move.


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members that is the proposed amendment. Is the executive director the secretary of the board? So, do you consult a secretary or would you present advice to the board?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, the executive director in normal practice is the secretary to the board. So, how does the board consult the secretary or is it the board to take advice from the secretary?

MRS BIGOMBE: The secretary simply sits in board meetings and records minutes of the meetings and can advise, but he is not part of the decision-making. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: He is not a member of the board.

MRS BIGOMBE: He is a member of the board. He is a secretary to the board. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is why I am asking. Can’t the board, therefore, consult its secretary or can they take advice from the secretary in his other capacity as chief executive?

MRS BIGOMBE: Yes, the board can take advice and can consult.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There are two words here.

MRS BIGOMBE: Take advice, Mr Chairman. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, in other words, we do not take the amendment proposed by the committee. I put the question that clause 20 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 22 on page 19; insert immediately after the words “they give the words to the authority” and insert the words “on policy matters” immediately after the words “in writing” and delete the words “to the authority” which appear immediately after the words “in writing.” The justification is to achieve clarity as to the kind of directions envisaged. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, what is the justification, again?

MR WERIKHE: To achieve clarity as to the kind of directions envisaged.

DR EPETAIT: This is the first time I get this kind of amendment because there are so many amendments proposed within the same clause. The best thing could have been for the committee to say, “delete the clause and rewrite as follows” instead of saying, “insert a word immediately after this, then add.” There are lots of insertions and deletions on the same clause. The best would have been to delete it and rewrite as follows, because we are not following whether you have come with a better draft. 

MR WERIKHE: I can see Dr Epetait actually not following and I want all of us to be on the same page. Why don’t we stand over this? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, somebody should rewrite it so that it is clear. 

MR WERIKHE: At the same time, I can’t redraft and follow. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay. Dr Epetatit, can you capture the amendments?

Clause 22, stood over.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, for clause 24, substitute the word “board” which appears both at the beginning and in the last line of the clause with the word “Authority.” The justification is that the power to borrow should be granted to the Authority, which is the corporate entity. Also, the funds are borrowed for the Authority and not the board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chairman of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question clause 24, as amended, stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Chairman, during the discussions on the report, I brought up this matter, but it wasn’t clarified. Now I would like to move an amendment to provide that investment should be in areas covered by the Authority. I am saying this because here it is as if the Authority has been empowered to start businesses elsewhere. So, with your guidance, can we have an Authority that runs other businesses outside this mandate?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I thought the qualification is contained in that phrase where the Bill says, “in consultation with the minister and the minister responsible for Finance.” I thought that is the consultative process on how it can be invested – yes, because they cannot just invest, they have to first go through that consultative process. Is that okay?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I am only seeking clarification from the minister on what they mean by the phrase “surplus funds.” I am saying this because these days the accounting regulations about such funds are very clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable minister, what do you mean by surplus funds, because it is not defined in the definitions? Or no, I think it is defined - hon. Vincent Ssempijja. See the clause and it reads: “Any monies of the Authority not immediately required for any purpose.” That is the surplus funds. Is that okay?

MR SSEMPIJJA: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, in clause 29, the committee proposes the deletion of the sentence, “Or an auditor appointed by the Auditor-General.” The justification is to achieve clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But that is the standard practice. I put the question that Clause 29 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, clause 30 requires redrafting. So, I would like to move that we stand over it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, it doesn’t require any redrafting because you are just changing figures.

MR WERIKHE: Okay, in clause 30, the committee proposes that we substitute 40 with 120. Also, substitute 2 with 5. The justification is to provide for a harsher and deterrent penalty.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I would like to agree with the chairman of the committee to make this very deterrent and punitive. However, when you read it, you realise that it only talks about any person who destroys, damages or interferes in anyway, with equipment or apparatus. I think that destroying, damaging and interfering are not the only things that can be done to such equipment. They can actually also be stolen. (Laughter) So, we should add a provision for stealing. I am saying this because the way it has been phrased, it means that if one steals like a mast, this clause does not get them. They are only got when they destroy, damage or interfere. I think the honourable member over there understands what I am talking about.

THE CHAIRMAN: Wouldn’t that be interfering?

MS KAMATEEKA: Mr Chairman, I just want to inform the House that stealing can be dealt with by the other laws; we don’t have to put it here.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you for that information, but I thought we are creating statutory offences. Someone maybe charged under this law that we are trying to pass, but they need not necessarily to be charged under the Penal Code or maybe that can be done conjunctively. What I would like to propose is, let us insert the phrase: “Any person, who converts, destroys damages, interferes or steals.” In fact, stealing is the better word, given what has been happening in this country today. I beg to move.

DR LULUME: Mr Chairman, I think the honourable member holding the Floor has a point and I wish to augment it further with the phrase, “attempts to steal.” (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Will that attract the same penalty?

DR LULUME: Yes, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see, attempts are treated differently from the actual commission of the offences. Honourable members, there is a proposal by hon. Odonga Otto that we insert stealing into the list of the conducts prohibited by clause 30. I now put the question to that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Any further amendments to this clause?

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Chairman, I also would like to propose an amendment to include the offence of attempting to do all the others – you attempt to steal, destroy, convert and so forth.

DR LULUME: Mr Chairman, that one strengthens the arguments of deterring any kind of actions that can be committed -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, would that still fall under this because this is causing damage to meteorological equipment?

MR MWIRU: As a matter of fact, the law punishes two acts, the mensrea and actus reus. So, you cannot legislate to punish an intention because you even will not know that someone intends to steal. From a legal point of view, we should not stretch it. Since we have dealt with stealing, we should leave it at that.

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, do we now have to change the sub-heading of this clause, because it refers to damage of the meteorological equipment? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It is still damaging it. 

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, if we are going to include stealing as one of those offences, then we need to change the sub-heading of this clause to, “Causing damage to meteorological equipment”. I don’t know whether stealing is actually causing damage. 

DR EPETAIT: In order to cure the Chairman’s fears, we can amend the marginal note and call it theft of the meteorological equipment. That would now cater for the damage, the stealing,   and the conversion. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This is a penal section. We are creating offences. You cannot again be on the positive. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Chairman, somebody can steal part of a machine to go and use it maybe as a spare part of another machine. So, that would be disabling the performance of that machine. So, stealing can actually be part of that. One might not steal the whole machine, but part of the machine, therefore, making it not do what it is intended to do.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, we can cure that problem by adding “causing damage or loss” –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think that captures it. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, if something is lost, you might not have had the intention – say you leave it in your car and you find that someone has picked it. That is not what we intend to cure. Maybe the head note could read that “damage - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Causing -

MR ODONGA OTTO: No, we will leave “causing damage” because causing damage is already describing the act of carrying out that damage. We could say, “Damage -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If you take away “Causing” then you have taken away the act because if you just say damage, whom do you assign the responsibility to -

MR ODONGA OTTO: Anyway, let me reconstruct my thinking. In fact, in the whole of clause 30(1), the draftsman should have actually stated the offences specifically. Because, like we have agreed, theft, destroying, damaging, interfering, are very limited. There can still be other offences that someone can commit. The head note in this case could be, “Causing damage or theft of meteorological equipment”.  We could leave “Loss”; the burden of proof would still remain on the person who alleges. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, that is “Causing damage or loss to meteorological equipment”. Should we go by that? I put the question that the head note of clause 30 be amended in the terms proposed by hon. Otto and hon. Ssempijja. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, the amendment I want to move is that we insert the word, “knowingly” after the “person who…”, such that it reads that “A person who knowingly gives false information relating to the weather commits an offence.” 

The justification is that it is possible because weather information is usually forecast. It may or may not happen as true. If somebody gives information and it does not come as true, and we take it as an offence, I think we shall be punishing very many people in that regard. For that reason, I suggest that we insert the word, “Knowingly” such that it is after a deliberate act. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is no person who does not give information knowingly. So what you want to propose is, “knowing it to be false” but not “knowingly”. So, can you then think through it again honourable? Any person who gives false information knowing it – I think you should capture it from that angle. 

MR LUBOGO: Mr Chairman, may I suggest that it reads “Any person who gives information knowing that it is false, relating to the weather, commits an offence.” Thank you.

MRS BAKIREKE: Mr Chairman, the guidance I am seeking is whether it would be proper for us to make legislation that puts an offence on a forecast. I have been looking through the dictionary to understand the word, “forecast”. It is an estimate; a calculation in advance. A forecast may not come –

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Which clause are you talking about?

MRS BAKIREKE: This issue of giving information because information about weather in most cases depends on forecasts. We have never received forecasted information and at the end of the day, it does not come to pass as true.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But this one is dealing with information that is false.

MR SSEMPIJJA: You know weather information is always predicted. There is no concrete scientific assurance that rain will come in the next few days. So, do we take the Authority to court? I would like to understand why this clause is there? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I think this is a very specific clause, which is talking about giving false information, and the addition by the hon. Lubogo is that if you know that that information is false and go ahead and disseminate it. So, it is not about general projections that might come on this way or the other way. But if you know that the information is actually false and you go ahead and disseminate it, then there is a problem there. 

DR LULUME BAYIGA: Mr Chairman, the amendment as proposed by the honourable member is not justifiable because it is subjective. How are you going to prove beyond reasonable doubt that someone indeed knew and gave false information? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Actually, that is the best because if you went and used your machines and they showed you that tomorrow’s temperature will be 15 degrees and then you go on radio and say, “No, it will be 27 degrees,” the machines will show that you lied; you knew that it was false. It is that simple. 

MR AJEDRA: No, Mr Chairman. You know weather is not an exact sign and that is why they say, “The probability of rain is going to be about 30 percent.” It may rain; it may not rain. So, it is a probability. When you talk about giving false information, we need to know exactly what it is. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Ajedra, I am sure the people who drafted this Bill knew that. They are talking about information that is quantifiable and can be estimated accurately and you know that it is five, but you go ahead and say, “It is 10.” That is what they are talking about here; they are not talking about the general volatility of weather situations, no. 

MR AJEDRA: But, Mr Chairman, these people work under somebody, that is, the Executive Director. Information that normally comes out of an Authority must be authenticated or verified by the Executive Director.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If it is verified and then you go ahead and give some other information which is false; that is what they are talking about. 

MR AJEDRA: But, Mr Chairman, the question is, for example, suppose an airline needs the weather conditions at Entebbe, that information can only come from the meteorological department that must be authorised by someone who is the supervisor. This supervisor cannot let out that information until it has been verified. So, where does the issue of false information come in? I, as an officer, I may not give the information to the airline.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Engineer, let us be very clear about this. What this regulation is saying is that you know the actual information and then you proceed to give a falsehood. That is what they are trying to prohibit.  

MS AOL: You know that the information is supposed to be on weather and since it is supposed to be so, I really don’t know if we are so concrete about it that the probability is 100 percent. The chances of making mistakes are very high although the clause said, “If you know.” If you are going to do something knowingly, then that will stand, but somehow, when it comes to weather like they say, “It is going to rain in the early morning hours.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, hon. Aol you are taking us back. 

MR SSEMPIJJA: Mr Chairman, I just beg to add that “a person who intentionally gives false information,” and that is all.   The rest can remain as it is. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You see what they intend to capture here is that you give information knowing that it is false; that is what they are proposing to insert. That means the actual information is there; for example, the figure is 5 and then you deliberately say 10.  That is what they are regulating here. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, your guidance is very elaborate and it would serve the purpose. However, my concern is the word “weather”. For example, last week there was an earthquake in Tanzania where they had warned people to leave. But now we are only concentrating on the weather, what about information that relates to earthquakes, if we could embody it, because meteorology to a lay man like me should mean slightly more than that? So, we should maybe not only concentrate on rain because there are also earthquakes. I beg Mr Chairman to help there. 

ME WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I think hon. Otto is referring to tectonic forces of the earth and not the earthquake. There is a difference between weather, which may affect the earth’s surface underneath differently because tectonic forces tend to affect the earth’s structure.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 32 be amended in the terms proposed by hon. Lubogo and hon. Ssempijja.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

(Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 33

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 33 stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 34

MRS BAKIREKE Mr Chairman, I am proposing for the deletion of clause 34. Making an observation or perceiving something and I share it with friends or the public is not an offence, unless when I am doing it on behalf of the government and I am releasing it as official information. But when I am, say a church leader and I say that it is about to rain.   

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 34 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 35

MR WERIKHE: Clause 35 on page 23, re-arrange the clause as follows: sub-clause (3) becomes sub-clause (1); sub-clause (1) becomes sub-clause (2); and sub-clause (2) becomes sub-clause (3) and then sub-clause (4) follows, respectively.  The justification is to ensure that the provisions have a logical flow.  


THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: There is also an absence of the letter ‘i’ on importation, I think. Is that correct? Honourable members, normally, I am not supposed to communicate from this position at the committee stage, but because there are people who have been in the gallery for a long time now, I need to announce because they might go. 

In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Kacita Senior Secondary School represented by hon. Nabbanja Robinah, Woman Representative, Kibaale District. They have come to observe the proceedings, please welcome them. (Applause)

There is an amendment to re-arrange the clauses and also the issue of the missing ‘i’ which is on this. I put the question to the proposed amendment to clause 35.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, immediately after clause 37 and before clause 38, insert the following: The head note is, “Annual Report - The Board shall, within three months after the end of each financial year, prepare or cause to be prepared and submitted to the minister, an annual report on the activities and operations of the Authority for that financial year.”

The justification is to keep the minister informed of the accounts and activities of the Authority to enable him or her to execute his or her statutory mandate over the Authority.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members that is the proposal of a new -

MR BARYAYANGA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to propose an amendment that instead of calling it “annual report”, we call it “final accounts”. That is one. Then in the middle of the sentence where we have -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, this is about activities and operations; it cannot be final accounts.

MR BARYAYANGA: Mr Chairman, when you look at the justification below, it says, to keep the minister informed of the accounts and activities of the Authority to enable him execute his or her duties of statutory mandate over the Authority. The only way you can communicate such information is by preparing the final accounts. That is why I was amending in that direction.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Are you going by the justification or the amendment?

MR BARYAYANGA: Yes, that is what I was amending.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The annual report is on activities and operations.

MR BARYAYANGA: Perhaps, Mr Chairman, we can get guidance from the chairman of the committee, whether actually, the intention is to make the minister aware of the accounts or the financial status and if it is in that direction, then we cannot call it the annual report, but rather we call it the annual accounts.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the justification was in error because you do not account to the minister, do you?

DR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, I had the opportunity to serve on a Board and normally the annual report of any authority includes both the activities and financial report. So, it is not just the activities of the Board, excluding the financial aspect of it. It is part of that report.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, do you call it annual report? In other words, now you are saying report on the activities, finances and operations. Is that what you are suggesting? Is that correct? Okay. Mr Chairman, can you now reset the amendment with that in mind so that I do not have to put the question to it?

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose the amendment to read as follows, “The Board shall, within three months after the end of each financial year, prepare or cause to be prepared and submitted to the minister, an annual report on the activities, finances and operations of the Authority for that financial year.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment as proposed by the chair of the committee for the insertion of a new clause 38.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: That is a new clause 39.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that we have a head note, “Minister to report to Parliament - The Minister shall, in each financial year, submit to Parliament the annual report on the activities, finances and operations of the Authority within 30 days of receipt of the report from the Authority.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, I put the question to the proposed amendment to insert a new clause for the minister to report to Parliament.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

DR AJEDRA: Mr Chairman, sorry to take you back.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, you cannot take me back, you know the procedure. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40

MR ODONGA OTTO: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 40(3) be deleted because if we allow the minister to make regulations, we do not again give him powers to create offences in the regulations. At least as much as possible, we must state all the offences in the parent law. 

The regulation is just about operationalising the Act, but if you see (3), we have even given the minister the powers to make regulations where you can get five-year imprisonment for violating the regulation. I think it would be very dangerous to give such powers to an individual.

I think the statutory offences we have stated like obstructing, obscuring, stealing are enough, but to again bring some offences in the regulation would be a little too much. So, I beg to move that we delete 40(3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The proposal is that Clause 40 sub-clause 3 be deleted for the reasons stated by hon. Odonga Otto. When I read this provision, I also had the same difficulty; to create Penal provisions by Instruments. So, you might need to move this to the Penal section of the law.

MR WERIKHE: Mr Chairman, I concur and we can delete it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment proposed that sub-clause 3 of clause 40 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR KAFABUSA: Mr Chairman, clause 42, page 25; substitute clause - with the following - the headnote is “Former employees of Meteorology Department”. Clause 42(1) “The Authority shall on the effective date of its operations accept into its employment every person who immediately before the commencement of this Act was an employee of the Department of Meteorology and who was given an option to serve by the Authority and has opted to serve as an employee of the Authority. 

(2) A person employed by the Department of Meteorology at the time of the commencement of this Act shall be paid terminal benefits and pensions in accordance with the existing terms and conditions of service of that employee and shall cease to be a staff of the Department of Meteorology. 

(3) A person who is not accepted as an employee of the Authority is entitled to terminal benefits and pension in accordance with the existing terms and conditions of service of that employee.” The justification is to achieve clarity. I beg to move.

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, while the committee chairperson is justifying that this proposed amendment is to achieve clarity, I find the original drafting in the Bill clearer than the proposed amendment. If you looked at your proposal in sub-clause (1), it is clearly contradicting with sub-clause (3). Sub-clause (1) says, “The Authority shall on the effective date of its operations accept into its employment every person who immediately before the commencement of this Act was an employee of the Department of Meteorology…” and sub-clause (3) says, “A person who is not accepted…” You are causing more confusion in this proposal; I would rather suggest that we go with what is in the Bill because I find it clearer. I pray that you abandon this proposal.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I find the information given in the amendment as additional information to be original information. I do not want us to subtract from what the original statement reads, but for clarity, it would have just added “just in case somebody is not taken up by the Authority” such that his benefits are paid as per pending regulations. But to bring the confusion of uncertainty of “just in case somebody is not accepted”, that will bring confrontation with the new Authority.

MS MASIKO: I would support the amendment up to clause (2) because (3) is a repetition of some elements in (1) and (2) and it causes more confusion. If it is to do with pension for those who will be terminated, it is covered in (2), and if they wish to continue, everything is covered in (1). So, I would like to propose that the chairperson drops (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, there is a proposal to retain the draft as in the Bill because it is clearer. That, therefore, amounts to amending what the committee had proposed because it is not clear, as stated by hon. Kabakumba. 

DR EPETAIT: Mr Chairman, what hon. Kabakumba is proposing is to drop sub-clause (3) of the proposed amendment, but even that particular bit is catered for in the original draft. The draft is talking about automatic continuity – non-interruption of the current employees – and it is also catering for their pension rights. So, the original intention of the Bill is to protect the current employees. But if you bring in this, it even leaves out some of the clearly spelt out aspects in the original draft. Even if we went ahead to abandon this particular sub-clause (3) then the pension issues of the current employees will not be addressed. And yet it is clear in the original Bill. I think the best would be for us to retain what is in the Bill in its present form.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, my dilemma is what are you going to amend – the proposal of the committee or the Bill? 

MS KAMATEEKA: The committee’s proposal. And this is to say that I do not agree – 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then let me start by disposing of the proposal by hon. Epetait that we retain the original text of the Bill that is comprehensive in that it covers the situation better. I put the question that clause 42 as presented in the Bill be retained.

(Question put negatived.)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So now, we come to the committee proposal and -

MR MWIRU: Actually, it is implied that any retrenchment of any worker would be governed by the employment laws in this country because we assume that there would be an opportunity to every former worker. For instance, in the case where you say that every worker be given opportunity to go through fresh interviews so that the best would be chosen and then those would be the workers of the Authority, then those who will not have qualified would be catered for as per the labour laws in this country, that is why part B will deal with them as per part 2 of this clause.

MR SEBUNYA: Mr Chairman, I think let us stand over this issue because meteorology is a specialised department and they are professionals. The more we put their work in this uncertain mode, the more the Authority is going to face more problems.

So, let us think over this particular clause because it is affecting people who have worked for this department for a very long time. Once we put their remaining few years in jeopardy, I think we shall end up with the KCCA scenario. The Bill was clearer than the amendment. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Honourable members, my fear is that we are now looking at small aspects, but we are not looking at the whole picture. The patch-up might create us problems when the final thing is done. We might need to recast on this again. I am, therefore, saying that let us also stand over this clause so that we give look at it better.

First Schedule

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that the First Schedule stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The First Schedule, agreed to.

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE RESUME

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Ntional Meteorological Authority Bill, 2010 with amendments and stood over clauses 8, 9, 12, 22 and 42. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.07

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER (Mrs Betty Bigombe): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the clauses that were stood over were fairly challenging and we agreed that we need to look at them again properly so that we can spend less time on them. Can I, therefore, propose that the people who proposed the amendments interact with the Chair and the minister so that we conclude on the different aspects. House adjourned to tomorrow, 2 O’clock and I mean 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 6.08 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 April 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
