Thursday, 4 April 2013

Parliament met at 3.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, in chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Join me in welcoming teachers and pupils of Bukoto Midwest School represented by hon. Isaac Ssejjoba and hon. Gertrude Nakabira. You are welcome.

Secondly, I have received unconfirmed reports that we may have won an important case in London, in the arbitration process. I do hope that the Attorney-General will give us the details so that we can celebrate this evening.
Yesterday, there was an attempt to serve me illegally in this plenary. I will be making a ruling on what transpired and its implication. Hon. Amongin had something important to raise about hepatitis; I will give you two minutes.

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy about the news of winning the case. I think it is not only one case; I have just received news that the second case which was filed against UNRA about the Northern Bypass has also been won by our side.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. If it is confirmed then our legal brains are doing a good job.

3.21
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman representative, Ngora): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. The people of Ngora have been hit by hepatitis B since August 2012 to-date. Government has given little attention to this situation. 

The outbreak is worst in the subcounty of Kapir and it is spreading at an alarming rate all over the neighbouring districts such as Kumi, Soroti and the whole Teso sub-region. The rate of infection and death is alarming and it has become an emergency in the region. 

By October last year, 15 people had been diagnosed with the disease in Ngora and as I speak now, 45 people have passed on. In Soroti District, two people are suspected to have hepatitis B. In Kaberamaido, six tested positive for the same disease. In Kapir Subcounty in Ngora, the following parishes are most affected: Oluwa parish, four people have died; Kapir parish, three people; Kokong, two people; Koloin, three people; Agirigiroi, two people; Ajesa, one person; Abatai, three people; Akisim, one person; Atapar, eight people; Akarukei, five people; Omiito, one person; and Agule in Omiito, four people. 

Madam Speaker, hepatitis B is an infectious inflammatory illness of the liver caused by the Hepatitis B Virus (HBV). When a person is infected by HBV, the virus enters the body, the blood stream and body fluids and is able to pass through tiny breaks in the skin, mouth or the genital area. There are several ways of getting the infection. During birth, a mother with hepatitis B may pass this to her infant. Contact with infected blood is a common means of transmitting hepatitis B; one way this may happen is by being pieced with a needle or object. 

The disease could spread easily in Teso, particularly in rural areas -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now lecturing us about the impact. I thought you wanted Government to assist you.

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, the prayer of the people of Ngora and especially the people of Teso is that there should be increased provision of test kits to be provided by the Ministry of Health, so that we come up with a baseline survey and have this scourge addressed.
The other prayer is that vaccines be given to the communities rather than only targeting the people at risk, especially the health workers.

There is also an urgent need for more advocacy and sensitisation of the communities so that they can establish measures to control and prevent the spread of the disease and how the victims can be handled. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.26
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. The matter we are talking about, hepatitis B in Ngora, has actually reached epidemic levels. The figures being quoted by my honourable colleague are those that were confirmed but there are many people who have died out of unexplained causes. We believe that the figures are much higher than 80 but the confirmed ones are 45.

Madam Speaker, it is very disturbing that whereas information is taken to rightful authorities to see how to intervene, very little is done, thus culminating into epidemic levels. Now the disease is spreading like wild fire in the whole of Teso region. We would like to know what the ministry is doing and what it intends to do in order to salvage the situation, otherwise we are getting decimated. It is a very big issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to confirm I was in Ngora for Women’s Day celebrations and this was the main complaint they gave to me. I hope the minister will take some action.

3.27
MS JESCA ABABIKU (IND, Woman representative Adjumani): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker and members. I rise on an issue of national importance. The people of Adjumani are attacked yearly by the people from Amuru District, and this is causing a lot fear hence a source of insecurity. The last attack was on 28th of March in which three huts were destroyed and people lost farm implements. The root cause of this is attributed to lack of a Government pronouncement on where the border should be between Adjumani and Amuru District. 

Therefore, I ask the Government to tell us why for over 10 years they have not pronounced themselves on the border between the people of Adjumani and Amuru. Secondly, I ask why the Committee on Infrastructure Development has failed to bring a report to Parliament about this issue. Lastly, I want to ask what the Government is going to do for those who have lost their houses; the houses have been destroyed and they also lost their farm implements. So, I ask what the Government is going to do for them.

I would like to end by saying that the people of Adjumani have been handling this issue with a lot of respect to Government and to the Police. We have been very diplomatic with this issue but in the end it is eating us. So, we also feel that if action is not taken we may decide otherwise. Thank you.

3.29
MR STEVEN MUKITALE (NRM, Bullisa County, Bullisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. As this country is expecting a good resource, oil, the communities that host the oil are increasingly getting endangered and are at risk. As I speak, families have resorted to burning each other because when you lose land and you do not expect justice, the best is to sort it out yourself.

Two incidences related to oil wells have happened in Nyamutete. One person burnt family members because of a land conflict. Two weeks ago, another family did the same. As I speak, my chairman of LCI Kasenyi village is locked up under trumped-up charges for resisting those who claim ownership of oil wells where they have never been owners in the first place.

Rt Hon. Speaker and colleagues, I have been raising this matter here for over five years. The first time I raised it was when the herdsmen were actually using the Police to protect them against the community, and you know how much it cost us and now they are asking for compensation in court. Right now as we speak, the same method is being used to subdue, subjugate, silence any leader who stands against the vice of land grabbing including 100 per cent precision spotting of oil wells. Madam Speaker, the exact position of a well can only be spotted through a leakage from somebody within the industry, and this is done against our people. We are requesting that to avoid the oil curse, to avoid Ogoni, to avoid insecurity and future conflicts, Government and Parliament immediately settles the land matters in the region starting with Bullisa.

It is unfortunate for us to expect the oil companies to be the ones to acquire land. Government should be the one to acquire land from the communities. Government should produce a comprehensive plan instead of leaving speculators who get information which communities do not have to start putting our people under risk. 

I would not want this country, Uganda, which is expecting its future wealth from oil, to abuse the hospitality and cooperation our people gave by giving no conditions for the oil exploration to go on. We do not want to be put under pressure to halt all operations until our land ownership is rescued. That would be a hard line that we would not want to take. However, I can see that if we do not find money for systematic demarcation of land, for comprehensive land use planning and comprehensive resource management plan of our people- (Member timed out_)

3.33
MS CHRISTINE ACHAYO (NRM, Woman representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I stand on a matter of national importance.

During the time of the short recess, I witnessed an accident in Murchison Falls National Park. Whenever accidents happen in this park, all these cases are referred to Pakwach Health Centre IV. I happened to be at site and I would like to report that at Pakwach Health Centre IV, the situation is very pathetic when it comes handling accidents.

Two weeks ago, California Bus overturned at Gotafoyo; two people died on spot and very many got fractures. When they were brought to Pakwach Health Centre IV, there was no blood. Even for the cases that were to be referred to Arua, the ambulance had no fuel to take them. 

The Committee on Budget was at Kawolo Hospital and we also found out that accident victims that have to be transferred to Mulago - there are at least two cases everyday - there is no fuel in the ambulances to take them. They now were asking the patients to put fuel in the ambulances. Somebody who has just got an accident does not know where his or her bag is lying, how can such a person put fuel in an ambulance to be referred to Arua. Even I had to ring my brother, hon. Atiku of Arua, to tell the people of Arua to send some vehicles to pick the people of Arua and take them to Arua Referral Hospital. 

The Ministry of Health has to address this issue. When we pass budgets, we give ambulances without fuel, so how can these ambulances be operational. When we build hospitals, we do not provide the budget for the software and they end up being white elephants. So, the Ministry of Health should address these issues of health centres and hospitals on the highway so that they can handle these accident cases. 

The budget these hospitals and health centres get is for the area where they are but they are handling people from all over Uganda when these accidents happen. That has not been provided for in their budget.
I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Minister of Health has something to tell us about hepatitis or you will come back to us.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable Member of Parliament who raised the issue about hepatitis B. Indeed, it is becoming a concern nationwide. 

As she clearly stated, hepatitis B is an infection that is worldwide. In the whole world, about two billion people are affected. In Uganda, nationally, we have about 10 per cent of people who have chronic hepatitis B. 

The infection varies from region to region; the southwestern part of the country has the lowest rate, four per cent. The distribution however increases towards the North. In the north and northeastern parts of the country, it is about 20 per cent. It is a chronic infection and the mode of transmission is mainly through body fluids and it is primarily sexually transmitted. This tells you a lot about the morals of the people in that area where the infection is greatest.

Hepatitis B is mainly transmitted by body fluids and the main mode of infection is through sexual transmission. The other modes are through mother-to-child, blood transfusion and so forth – (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has just unleashed data on the prevalence rates of hepatitis B across the country according to region. She said that the North and the East have a prevalence rate of about 20 per cent and that since it is sexually transmitted, it tells a lot about the morals of people in such a region. (Laughter) Does the minister want to tell this House or Uganda that people of the North and East are sexually immoral to the extent that there is high prevalence of hepatitis B? Really, she should clarify on this, because it sends a funny signal or insinuation.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, why don’t you tell us how you are going to solve the problem. (Laughter) Otherwise, all the people from Karamoja to Jinja will be in trouble.

DR ONDOA: Rt Hon. Speaker, the Government has already done three things. One, in 2002, the Government through the Ministry of Health introduced pentavalent vaccines, which includes hepatitis B vaccines for under one. Therefore, children of 12 years old and below should be covered with the vaccines and they should be protected from hepatitis B through the vaccination. 

Two, the Government has also provided vaccinations for populations most at risk, and these include the health workers who come into contact with many people almost on daily basis. We have done immunisation of health workers countrywide. We have also provided vaccines to some selected places where the infection rate is very high. 

What the Government plans to do is to introduce vaccines for the whole country, but we will do this in a stepwise manner. This year, Government is introducing the pneumococcal vaccine for children under one year old; next year, we will introduce another vaccine for diarrhoea and for cervical cancer; and the year after we will have finalised the proposals for the hepatitis B vaccine.

Meanwhile, this is what is going on now: We want to step up the advocacy and sensitisation of the community. We are aware that many people may still not know the modes of transmission and how to prevent it; so we want to step that up by involving many of the stakeholders, the opinion leaders, the community and also the honourable Members of Parliament to help us disseminate this information. So, those are the key projects that we are doing.

DR BAYIGGA: I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I thank the honourable minister for giving way. The Ministry of Health should at least have systems to detect this information before Members of Parliament. It should have disease surveillance systems to inform the minister so that the minister can inform Parliament and the general public about any outbreak of disease. It is very annoying that such information comes to our notice through Members of Parliament and yet it is the minister who, in her docket, should be educating us about this before even Members of Parliament get this information. 

Can the Minister really clarify if this surveillance system works? What exactly are they doing to fix the problem in Ngora, specifically to address these problems, that is if you had prior information that Ngora has got an upsurge or outbreak of hepatitis B? 

The further clarification that I want to seek is whether or not there have been mechanisms of public health nature to address this issue, now that the minister is aware that the North and East has got the highest prevalence rates all that time. What I am hearing are plans and not mechanisms of addressing issues as they are now. I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the situation in Ngora is grave. Tell us what you are going to do about Ngora as it is really very serious before you touch the rest of the country. 

MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, we have heard the answers from the minister but I would like to seek further clarification. I sit on the Committee on Health in this Parliament and I know that the vaccination that is going to be rolled out on HPV and also on hepatitis B is targeting new born children. I have not seen any plan for people who are now adults and most especially in Ngora where the people who are dying are adults. So the guidance that I want to get from the minister is: what is that plan that you have for the adults who are now infected, perhaps not in Ngora alone, and are dying?

Two, if you look at the people who are infected and those who are dying, they range from the age of 13 and some are virgins - they have never had sex - and yet they say that this is sexually transmitted. I am not a medical person but I need to be guided on whether those innocent children dying in Ngora are sexually active. I thank you.

DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, from a clinical perspective and as a doctor for adults, I want to thank the Minister for Health for being informed on medical matters but there are some things that I want clarified in this plainly. 

One, we very well know that we do not have a definitive treatment for people with hepatitis B virus infection, and we know that once it is not treated and somebody has not died, they may end up getting Hepatocellular carcinoma which still has no definite treatment. The only remedy for what is happening in Ngora now is to vaccinate those one who are likely to get it. Everybody in Ngora, when you consider the percentage, is at risk. Forget about pregnant mothers or health workers; everybody in Ngora will get sick.

Do we now have immediate vaccines instead of thinking about planning and securing things? Do we have an immediate response that can take vaccines to Ngora as soon as possible, because the people who are very sick are going to be treated symptomatically and conservatively? The ones who are strong will survive and the ones who are not will die, but we must prevent further spread of this disease and plan for vaccines tonight because tomorrow, we must begin. I thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. At the beginning of this week, I was in Arua town and we are now talking about Ngora. I remember five gentlemen who stopped me on different occasions on the streets of Arua telling me about the same problem. So, part of the clarification that I wanted to seek from the minister has been raised by my honourable colleague, Dr Bitekyerezo. Is the minister aware that there is a similar problem in the other part of Northern Uganda, particularly in Arua, because that is where I got the information? What –(Interruption) 

MS BAKO: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The information I want to give you and the Minister is that as I speak, Arua has lost 22 people to this disease. If you went to Nakasero Hospital here for vaccination, an adult is vaccinated at Shs 65,000. So, if you transpose this to poor people across the country, it means an adult cannot actually afford the vaccine. Thank you.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you for that enriching information. So, we want specific steps that Government has taken. We do not want to hear about your plans. We want to see what you have done and if there is anything that you are planning to do. As Dr Bitekyerezo said, we want it not today but now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, are you in a position to tell us your emergency response to this situation today? 

DR ONDOA: Madam Speaker, we have surveillance at the Ministry of Health. That is why we are able to detect the different prevalence rates in the country. The situation in Ngora is indeed worrying and this is what we will do:  We will send a team on the ground to help with the verification of the data. As Dr Bitekyerezo says, hepatitis B does not have specific treatment but we can support the victims, what we call supportive treatment. We are able to give them that, so that we can arrange immediately as the Ministry of Health.

Meanwhile, we will still assess the population at risk to see how we can support them especially with the vaccination. But, Madam Speaker, the situation is that those who have already suffered from the disease or are chronic carriers ideally do not get vaccinated because they already have what we call innate vaccination. We have to do surveillance and tests to screen them from those who have not got, and those are the target population for vaccination. We are able to do this right away to get the situation in order.

We also have weekly surveillance reports published in the New Vision and if you look at that column, it also gives you the reports about infectious diseases and hepatitis B is inclusive. We have been reporting this almost weekly in the New Vision countrywide.  As one of the Members said, it is not only Ngora that has reported many cases; we have also received cases from the other parts of the country and we are acting on that. So, we have the capacity, as we said, to detect all these diseases and act upon then. I have given you the near plans for the Ministry of Health and the plans ahead. 

Madam Speaker, I remember about a year ago, I talked about hepatitis B on the Floor and these were the same things that I remember bringing up. Really, it is not something that has just come up. I remember also giving the updates to the honourable Members of Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, we were expecting, since last year, a statement from the Government mission on the land disputes. I recall that the Ministry of Lands was conducting a mission on the disputes on the land especially in the areas of Adjumani, Moyo and so forth but there was a big one. I do not know whether anyone from lands can tell us where they stand. So, can we require the Minister of Lands to update us next week on what happened to the mission? Also, our committee will have to update us on where they stand on the issues we asked them to handle. They will do that next week? No one is willing to stand up.

3.53
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I really have many things in common with this. I am sorry that the chairman of the committee has been appointed minister, perhaps that is why he is not able to present the report,- I do not know- but I think they had a deputy so he should actually come and bring the report.

Madam Speaker, we are all waiting really for the problem to be solved and the problem of borders or boundaries needs only opening of the boundaries. That is all. The rest can sort itself out. I think the report should come and if it is not coming then tell us when the report will come - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, you better exert your pressure. It is you now really to let us move forward. Thank you.
  
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are expecting two reports. The government assured us that they are undertaking a mission on that issue, so we want a report from the Ministry of Lands. My committee will also have to report. Where do you stand and how far have you gone? This has been continuing. Are you from the committee?

MR ROBERT MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was actually looking around for my chairperson but as far as I and other committee members are concerned, we concluded that report. Actually, among the members we met was hon. Olanya, hon. Ababiku and so many others. So, I also wonder why it has not come. Maybe it is the jam on the Order Paper which is delaying us but as far as the committee and the members are concerned, the report is ready because we concluded it a month ago. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the clerk to find out where it is because it has not reached my desk. So, clerk, find out where it is and we have a report as early as possible. There is the issue of the land grabbing, Prime Minister. Who will speak about the land in Buliisa and the Albertine Grabben?

3.56
THE MINISTER FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Madam Speaker, we have sincerely noted what hon. Birahwa has talked about land grabbing in Buliisa District and the surrounding areas. We are going to make robust investigations to see who those are and appropriate action will be taken. 

THE SPEAKER: On the issue of the accidents on the highways, there are resolutions of this House from the Seventh Parliament and Eighth Parliament on that matter. I think now we really need answers from the government.

3.57
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am supposed to come here and give a response to questions posed by hon. Alice Alaso. I am just waiting for a slot to become available and I will give information to members and to the nation at large.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, let us go to item No. 3 but I will alter the Order Paper later to allow presentation of a petition after the question time. Let us go to item No.3.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to lay on the Table a request to borrow UA 67 million from the African Development Bank for funding and support to the Higher Education, Science and Technology Project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: The request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back. 

3.59
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Madam Speaker, I am pleased to lay on the Table the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission, 2012.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to our Committee on Human Rights for perusal and report back.

THE SPEAKER: Chairperson of the Committee on Local Governments Accounts. Is there any member present? Yes, hon. Florence Namayanja.

4.01
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE(Ms Florence Namayanja): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the reports on accounts for the year ended 30 June 2011 for the following local government units: 
1. 	Kamuli Local Government;  
2. 	Luuka District Local Government; 
3. 	Iganga District Local Government; 
4. 	Kaliro District Local Government; 
5. 	Bugiri District Local Government; 
6. 	Namutumba District Local Government; 
7. 	Kayunga District Local Government; 
9. 	Kayunga Town Council; 
10. 	Kamwenge Town Council; 
11. 	Namutumba Town Council; 
12. 	Bugembe Town Council; 
13. 	Buyende Town Council; 
14. 	Dokolo District Local Government; 
15. 	Kiryandongo District Local Government; 
16. 	Kaliro Town Council; 
17. 	Kalong Town Council; 
18. 	Bududa District Local Government; 
19. 	Koboko District Local Government; 
20. 	Nakasongola Town Council;  
21. 	Luweero District Local Government; 
22. 	Amuru District Local Government; 
23. 	Kyegegwa District Local Government; 
24. 	Amolator Town Council; and 
25. 	Kaabong Town Council.
26. 	Napak Lurengochora Town Council; 
27. 	Ngora Town Council; 
28. 	Apac District Local Government; 
29. 	Lamwo District Local Government; 
30. 	Kasese District Local Government; 
31. 	Nwoya District Local Government; 
32. 	Yumbe District Local Government; 
33. 	Pader District Local Government; 
34. 	Nebbi District Local Government; 
35. 	Zombo Town Council; and 
36. 	Adjumani District Local Government. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Florence Namayanja. All those reports are hereby sent to the Committee on Local Governments Accounts for perusal and report back.

4.07
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer to a constitutional provision, which is Article 163 (4) and (5). This Article reads thus: 
“(4) The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament annually a report of the accounts audited by him or her under clause (3) of this Article for the financial year immediately preceding.

(5) Parliament shall, within six months after the submission of the report referred to in clause (4) of this Article, debate and consider the report and take appropriate action.”

Madam Speaker, since we begun the Ninth Parliament, and this is in specific reference to the Local Government Accounts Committee and COSASE because I am aware that at least the Public Accounts Committee has presented some reports here, so many reports have been laid here for consideration by these committees but we are yet to receive reports from the Local Government Accounts Committee. At least COSASE also presented one. We are now abrogating this provision in the Constitution which requires this report to be considered within six months. 

The procedural question I am bringing up is: what do these committees perhaps have? What is the problem? Why are these reports not being brought to Parliament? Why are we abrogating the constitutional provision that provides for these reports to be brought for debate to the House within six months? Madam Speaker, I would like to know from you and from the committees why they are not bringing these reports within the six months provided by the Constitution. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you cannot know from me. I have provided the offices, I have provided the clerks and I have provided the budget. So, the answers must come from somewhere else. 

6.10
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the vice-chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee. I appreciate the concern raised by my colleague, hon. Akol. It is a genuine concern. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, you will agree with me that from the manner in which we have proceeded as committees, we have not been in position to dispose of these reports as per conditions directed because of a number of factors. One of them is because we also lose time; for instance, we are now going to the budgeting process and you will of course direct that all accountability committees actually stop transacting any business until the Budget Committee is on. 

Two, and most importantly, are the schedules. As the leadership of the committee, we have decided in the Public Accounts Committee to sit from Monday to Friday but members also request that we sit from at least Tuesday to Thursday. So, as a result, if these committees are not fulltime committees, it is not actually easy to dispose of these reports. 

Also, we had backlog but what is most important is that in the Public Accounts Committee, we have also been receiving a forensic audit. Once they come in, you have to abandon any other work you have actually been doing. Like when the OPM issue came in, we had to abandon the financial audits and other audits –(Interruption) 

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, I think what hon. Akol raised was concerning the Local Government Accounts Committee and COSASE and she went ahead to say that at least for PAC, you are doing some work. My PAC vice-chairperson is submitting as if in defence of COSASE and the Committee on Local Government Accounts. I want to know from you, because they have said that PAC has done some work, are you defending COSASE and the Committee on Local Government Accounts? I want to hear from you. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, hon. Kyooma. Madam Speaker, I rose on the point because my colleague had referred to all committees. Actually, although he said that PAC has issued some, to me the word “some” is contextual and it depends on the depths of the use of the word. By saying “some”, it means that to her experience, we are not doing it the way we are actually supposed to do it. 

As a matter of way forward, as I conclude, what we have decided to do as PAC is to divide ourselves into two committees. We have written to you, Madam Speaker, for permission to allow us have two committees running concurrently and the Sergeant-at-Arms has told us that there is no space for us to even work and actually dispose off the backlog. So, maybe other committees can speak for themselves.

4.14
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, first of all, we want to thank you and Parliament for facilitating us to move to these districts to look at those books of accounts. As far as I am concerned, we have a report pending to come to this House, one report. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to maybe take this to your office; it is important that you look at the issues within some of these committees. We have issues internally within the committee which I want to draw to your attention as far as the Committee on Local Government Accounts is concerned. We have complaints as members and all members of the committee can adhere to this. We feel there is something still lacking within the leadership of the Committee on Local Government Accounts. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: I shall find time to talk to you, members. 

4.15
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am also a member of the Local Government Accounts Committee and I agree entirely with my colleagues. However, I just wanted to add that members will appreciate that this committee, even before this leadership, right from the Eighth Parliament had backlog. It had issues of accountability to deal with right from 2006 and the work was too much. 

I am not the spokesperson of this committee but I am telling you what exactly is taking place. So, with that much backlog and the leadership issue like he mentioned and internal issues, I think, Madam Speaker, you have to give it special attention to see how we resolve it.

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall discuss with the Business Committee and find a solution. 

4.17
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Shadow Cabinet and the matter that hon. Rose Akol has brought up is an issue that we also took up. It is true that for COSASE, for example, they have backlog from as way back as 2002. It is such a heavy backlog that we have thought it prudent to have an administrative arrangement within committees. We have advised the chairpersons to perhaps have subcommittees so that they handle activities concurrently. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give the acting Leader of the Opposition is that because of the backlog of cases from 2002, some members who were accused in those reports and were recommended for dismissal in those offices then at various levels and local governments have even since become Members of Parliament and they are also in the committee and some are even in this House. So, they are being accused for wrong activities in 2002 but they have changed address and are going on with life normally. Some are even ministers now. That is the information I wanted to give. (Laughter) 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, the other issue that we wanted to bring to the attention of the whole House is that we have noted time and again that there are a number of times in Parliament when a standing committee is sitting in room x and a sessional committee may be sitting in another room and many of the Members who are in some of these committees find themselves divided. At an appropriate time, we would like to convince the House to review our Rules of Procedure again and provide for one Member per committee. This is because sometimes we find a lot of difficulty in attending two meetings at the same time on the same day. That is something that we could look at, at an appropriate time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Business Committee will sit and we shall see how to resolve that matter. On the proposal, I think we brought it here and it was rejected. Maybe we will start again; I do not know.

4.18
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Mr Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you. This matter has now come out and it is very serious. People are just going around issues and nobody has ever reported them. Even if there are arrears since 2002, this committee has not even submitted a single report. So, what is this committee doing? These committees are specifically given to the Opposition for them to be watchful but you can now see that they take more time doing some other things. What have they been doing since 2002; why must it be with them then? (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, what is true and what I trust is within the knowledge of the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister is that –(Interjection)- I need protection from the Minister for Justice who will be a shadow minister very soon. It is true that the leadership of the committees today, under our rules, is entrusted with the Opposition. It is not true that these committees belong to the Opposition. In fact, the majority of the members on these committees are from the ruling party. 

Madam Speaker, the question of leadership has been raised but you have not ruled on it because you intend to go on a fact-finding mission; so, you cannot accuse the leadership as of now. Is the learned Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister in order therefore to insinuate that the Opposition is not doing its work of oversight? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all he was saying was that one committee of the Opposition is very active and the others are not. Let us go to the next item.

4.21
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am seeking guidance on whether there is a possibility of allowing me to lay a report on the Table on behalf of my chairperson. I happen to be a member of the Science and Technology Committee but the report reached me when you were moving to another item. It is item No.3(III).

THE SPEAKER: It is not that we moved to another item. We called this item and nobody stood up, neither the chairperson nor the members, but you can come and lay it on the Table.

MR BAGOOLE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report entitled, “Use of scientific and technological evidence within the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda.” I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Are you laying a report? Is that an investigation by your committee? It cannot just be laid; I think you would have had to present. So I think we need to give you time to present it. We shall put you on the Order Paper to present it and not to lay it on the Table because it is a report, which we need to hear. We shall put you on the Order Paper for Tuesday for presentation. Thank you.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 41/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

4.32
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): “1. How much fuel levies have been collected and remitted to the Uganda Road Fund each financial year since 2008? 

2. 	How much revenue has been collected from the axle load fines, bridge tolls and weighbridge distance charges in the financial years 2008, 2009, 2010 and 2012? 

3. 	How much revenue has been collected from traffic and road fines since 2008?”

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I want to thank my honourable colleague for his questions. On the first question, section 21(1) (a) of the Road Fund Act states that funding to the Road Fund shall consist of road user charges as the minister may, on the recommendation of the Board, determine by statutory order and this includes the following: fuel levies, international transit fees collected from foreign vehicles entering the country, road licence fees, axle load fees, bridge and road toll fees and weighbridge charges.

Madam Speaker, since the coming into effect of the Road Fund Act, fuel levies have not been collected. What has been collected is excise tax and in accordance with the URA Act, the funds are remitted to a URA account.

On question No. 2, the details of the fines collected since 2008 are as follows: In the financial year 2008/2009, a total of Shs 330,992,000 was collected. In the financial year 2009/2010, no fines were collected with respect to axle load and this was because of suspension by Ministry of Works and Transport. However, in 2010/2011, a total of Shs 473,120,000 was collected. In the financial year 2011/2012, a total of Shs 886,415,000 was collected from axle load fines in Uganda.

On question No. 3, in the financial year 2008/2009, a total of Shs 3,268,820,519 was collected as traffic and road fines. In the financial year 2009/2010, a total of Shs 6,871,027,134 was collected. In the financial year 2011/2012, a total of Shs 7,957,827,971 was collected as traffic and road fines. 
          
Madam Speaker, that is the information I received from the Uganda Traffic Police and we should thank them for their vigilance on the road. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary, hon. Mwiru?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The supplementary question I am putting to the Minister is this: Is he aware that when the Road Fund Act was created, road licence fees were abolished and, therefore, there was a levy which was put on fuel and is supposed to go the Road Fund? 

Secondly, is he aware that there are international transit fees collected from foreign vehicles entering the country? Those coming through Malaba-Kampala are charged Shs 120,000 per vehicle; Malaba-Katuna, Shs 350,000 per vehicle; Malaba-Sudan, Shs 364,900 per vehicle; Malaba-Jinja, Shs 77,500 per vehicle. All this money must go the Road Fund.

Finally, you did say that all this money is collected by URA and it goes to the Treasury. Are you aware of Article 153 of the Constitution of Uganda which states: “(1) There shall be a Consolidated Fund into which shall be paid all revenues or other monies raised or received for the purpose of, or on behalf of, or in trust for Government.

(2) The revenues or other monies referred to in clause (1) of this Article shall not include revenues or other monies- 
(a) that are payable by or under an Act of Parliament...”

Are you aware that there is the Road Fund Act, which creates the Road Fund? It means that any money which is collected as a result of what we have just stated must go to the Road Fund. If the money went to the Road Fund, there would even be no need for us to borrow money from outside to work on our roads. Thank you.

MR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to confirm that I am very much aware of that. As a matter of fact, there is a lacuna in the law which we in the Ministry of Finance are trying to address. What we have agreed is that we are going to amend the URA Act so that all levies – fuels levies, transit fees and all other charges that are mentioned in the Road Fund Act - will go directly into the Road Fund. So we shall be coming with that amendment to this House within the shortest possible time.

QUESTION 48/01/09 TO THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF THE PRESIDENCY 

4.31
MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): “(i) Would the Minister inform the House the composition of the team that was constituted by H.E the President to represent Government during its negotiations with Buganda Kingdom?

(ii) What is the agenda for the negotiations and how long are these negotiations expected to last?” 

4.32
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Mr Frank Tumwebaze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question was about composition of the team which was constituted by the President to represent Government during its negotiation with Buganda Kingdom, what the agenda of the negotiations was and the duration of the negotiations. Madam Speaker, the response had been given to your office much earlier. It is the same that I will re-state here. 

The leadership of Mengo or Buganda Kingdom proposed that the Vice-President should lead the government team when the time for negotiations comes and Government accepted this proposal. No other members have been proposed by the Government. 

The agenda will be set as the Mengo leadership raised its issues to the Vice-President, whom it requested to be the main representative of Government. The duration will depend on how the issues raised will be handled and how they will be resolved. Thank you.

MRS BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the Minister when Government intends to implement sections 2, 5 and 6 of the Traditional Rulers (Restitution of Assets and Properties) Act which provides that “Subject to the other provisions of this section, any asset or property previously confiscated by the State from or in respect of or in relation to any traditional ruler under the Constitution of 1967 is, with effect from the commencement of this Act, transferred to that traditional ruler without any further assurance than this Act.”

Subsection (5) says, “In the case of traditional rulers other than the traditional ruler of Buganda, the Government shall hold negotiations with the traditional rulers concerned with a view to returning to them such assets and properties as may be agreed.”

Subsection (6) says, “Subsection (5) applies to the traditional ruler of Buganda in respect of any asset or property other than those specified in the Schedule to this Act.”

I want to know when Government intends to implement these and if there are going to be structured negotiations properly stipulating the date of the negotiations and a formal team to be constituted.

Secondly, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Nambooze, your supplementary must arise from the answers. Now you have gone to something completely different. It must arise from what he has answered; you do not go fishing for new issues.

MRS BAKIREKE: Madam Speaker, I am very grateful for that guidance. However, the Minister here in his answers was talking about negotiations and these negotiations are based on the law I was quoting. 

In his answer, it appears as though Government was not making any move towards constituting a team to carry out negotiations with Buganda. In his answer, he is referring to proposals by Mengo to a date to be set by Mengo and the agenda to come from proposals by Mengo leadership. However, the law properly indicates that there will be negotiations to return assets which were not included in the Schedule to the Act. That is why I was asking when they intend to implement the law as it is stated here.

THE SPEAKER: Then your question should have been: When does the government intend to complete setting up the team and setting the date? That would have been appropriate.

MRS BAKIREKE: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can now answer our supplementary question – hon. Nambooze and I. (Laughter) 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for helping structure the supplementary question. (Hon. Lukyamuzi rose_)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for the Presidency is holding the Floor.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your protection against the Man. (Laughter) I answered that the proposal for the negotiation came from the leadership of the Buganda Kingdom and they were specific to the government that they believed the Vice-President could lead the negotiation team. Government gave a no-objection and so the issues she is raising in regard to the provisions of the law and their applicability, those could be issues for discussion. I do not want to be speculative here. 

QUESTION 56/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF HEALTH

4.38
DR MICHAEL LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): “1. Would the Minister of Health explain to the House the extent of the tuberculosis disease burden in Uganda?

2. 	What specific efforts has the ministry made in response to the stock-outs and shortages of TB drugs in health facilities?

3. 	What strategies has Government developed to step up community awareness and the capacity of health workers for effective treatment and management of the disease?”

4.38
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Christine Ondoa): Madam Speaker, the questions were moved under rules 35 and 37 of the Rules of Procedure. The first question was: “Will the Minister of Health explain to the House the extent of the disease burden of tuberculosis in Uganda?”

Madam Speaker, globally, Uganda is still among the 22 high-burden tuberculosis countries; and nationally, it is ranked among the top ten killer diseases for both adults and children. The number of new tuberculosis cases is currently estimated at 193 per 100,000 population. This translates into about 70,000 new TB cases while the prevalence is still estimated at 181 per 100,000, which translates to about 60,000 TB cases per year. The mortality due to tuberculosis is estimated at 14 per 100,000 and this translates to about 5000 TB deaths per year. 

Last year, from the various TB diagnosis facilities, a total of about 50,000 TB cases were diagnosed and treated at various treatment sites. The national TB drug resistance survey was done in 2010 and this informed the country of the burden of the multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in the country. 

From the survey, it was established that 1.3 per cent of the new TB cases were found to have the multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. Basically, this means that they are resistant to one basic drug called rifampicin and maybe a second one, isoniazid. While among the TB patients who have ever had treatment before and have been confirmed to have TB again, 12.1 per cent of these cases were found to have multidrug-resistant tuberculosis. 

The Ministry of Health, with support from partners, initiated a multidrug-resistant TB surveillance system which has been rolled out to all the regions in the country. There is now capacity to diagnose multidrug-resistant tuberculosis at the Ministry of Health National TB and Leprosy Programme Reference Laboratory, which is specialised in testing and acquiring the culture and drug sensitivity for tuberculosis. 

As a matter of fact, we have made a lot of strides; the National TB and Leprosy Programme Reference Laboratory last year on December 6th received an award from the African Society for Laboratory Medicine as the best TB reference laboratory in the whole of Africa. I have here a copy of the award which was won by our laboratory, indicating that Uganda National TB reference laboratory best practice was twofold. One was laboratory improvement in its quality management system and bio-safety practices. The second is that Uganda National TB Programme introduced a laboratory information system for timely reporting and developed a gene expert implementation plan. 

Furthermore, Uganda strengthened its specimen referral system by training health workers and postal staff and implementing a specimen courier system. The improved TB specimen referral system has ultimately improved service delivery and has enabled efficient utilisation of resources. So I beg to lay a copy of the award we received as a best practice reference lab that has improved service delivery for tuberculosis in the country. I also have here with me the award that we got last December. (Applause) I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the certificate. 

Madam Speaker, two other laboratories in the nation, apart from this laboratory, also received awards from the African Society for Laboratory Medicine. The Central Public Health Laboratory received an award for best practice in diagnosing infants with HIV/AIDS and the Infectious Diseases Laboratory in Mulago also received an award. So I want to report that we have made a lot of progress in the area of tuberculosis and specifically in the laboratory. 

The second question was: “What specific effort has the ministry made in response to the stock-outs and shortages of TB drugs in health facilities?” 

The Government of Uganda has included anti-TB medicines onto the list of essential medicines to procure under vote 166 and has a standing three-year framework contract for these supplies for both first line and second line tuberculosis medicine. The Ministry of Health has fast-tracked the supply of anti-TB medicine from the global fund for the first and second line to cover a two-year period and these medicines are now fully available in the country. 

The country has so far spent, in financial year 2011/12, Shs 357,249,931 for the procurement of the medicine. To date, we have started 60 multidrug-resistant patients on treatment. Our target this coming financial year is to cover the remaining 100,000 or so to be covered fully also. 

There has also been progress in engaging between the Ministry of Health and the National Medical Stores. As a result, TB medicines have been fully integrated into the essential TB medicine supply chain since March 2012. 

With these three actions, we guarantee that there will be no stock-outs since the country now has medicine to treat all TB patients for the next two-year period from the global fund and additionally from the Government of Uganda fund. 

The third question was: “What strategies has Government developed to step up community awareness and capacity of health workers for effective treatment and management of the tuberculosis disease”? 

The strategy is to apply a combination of advocacy, communication and social mobilisation for TB control. Ministry of Health developed a comprehensive communication strategy for TB and HIV collaboration in the country. It is evident that the very low case detection rate of 56.7 per cent for TB may be due to very weak advocacy communication and social mobilisation as a result of very limited information and knowledge base at the community level. There is a need, therefore, to target communities through non-conventional media so as to create awareness, knowledge base, de-stigmatise, motivate, persuade and empower the communities to make rational decisions that will lead to action toward early detection and assessment of the treatment.

The integrated advocacy communication and social mobilisation approach integrates the communication benefit of sound, sight and motion to target the audience. The community is using TB scenes, specific drama and cinemas. The messaging and the content recognises stigma and understanding about the causes of TB and the sources of infection, transmission and symptoms and how to treat and prevent.

In conclusion, the specific activities to meet these targets are: the community communication and social mobilisation, to produce audio-visual training materials, identify and encourage and train community volunteers and peer groups, reward incentives using the collateral material of communities, and lastly recording estimates of the numbers attending the mobilisation shows and the diagnostics. We hope that this will help us achieve the increasing of the awareness in the communities and increasing the TB detection rates and also increase in training the volunteers and the community leaders and hence helping us to maintain registers at all levels. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Only one brief supplementary question from hon. Bayigga.

4.49
THE SHADOW MINISTER FOR HEALTH (Dr Michael Bayigga): I thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the response that has been given. 

The minister has acknowledged the fact that there is low case detection – a rate of 56.7 per cent - for TB.  I believe that this information has been on her desk for all that time and I would expect that the solution, therefore, should not be futuristic but solutions to address this low case detection from time to time. Therefore, the address should be, “This is what we are doing,” and this is exactly what we are not seeing being done. I would ask the minister to really showcase whether there is any budget line for that and how it has been utilised to address this issue. 

Specifically, I want a response on whether the ministry is considering isoniazid as a combination for those who are being provided with antiretroviral therapy in order to prevent them from catching TB.  

DR ONDOA: I want to thank the honourable member again. I precisely outlined what we are now doing to increase the detection rate from 56.7 per cent onward. I have also highlighted the community mobilisation strategy that we have started. I have highlighted the improvement in the laboratory system that will help us to detect more cases. I have also highlighted that in case we have patients failing on the first line treatment, we have the second line treatment readily available and in the country. 

Currently, we have five centres that have started the treatment for the multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in the country. We plan to scale this up to all the 13 regional referral hospitals and some of the general hospitals. So, those are the steps we have currently taken now, and these steps that I have outlined already have budget lines for them. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you, minister. I now invite hon. Wamanga-Wamai to present a petition. Just read the title and prayers.
 
4.53
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda to present a petition on behalf of the civil servants of Mbale who were given rights to purchase former pool houses under the mortgage scheme by Housing Finance Bank. 

Madam Speaker, the tenants who have been servicing the loans have discovered of late that Housing Finance Bank has gone behind their backs and is trying to sell their houses. 

The humble petitioners pray to Parliament that:
    1. As a matter of urgency, the relevant committee of Parliament is tasked to inquire into the abuse of the pool housing scheme for civil servants run under Housing Finance Bank;

    2. With immediate effect, before any further evictions are carried out, an inventory is presented to Parliament on all pool houses sold to civil servants including details of the beneficiaries;

    3. All evictions are stopped. 

    4. The terms and conditions for the purchase of Government pool houses be reviewed.

    5. This matter be handled at the most appropriate national level given its scope and impact on the economy and social welfare of the citizens.

The humble petitioners, Madam Speaker, have signed the petition and they are about eight in number. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you. Hon. Wamanga-Wamai, by just listening to the prayers, I do not know whether they do not want to secure an injunction against the eviction while this process is going on because it may take a month or two. Would they consider applying for an injunction in the courts while this process goes on?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes, Madam Speaker. They have gone to court.

THE SPEAKER: They have?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: They have gone to court but I thought that since Parliament makes laws, they can come on their side and assist them.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We will ask the Committee on Finance to look at it and give us a report. Thank you very much. Item No. 5.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL - THE NATIONAL YOUTH ENTERPRISE FUND BILL, 2013

THE SPEAKER: If you can use 10 minutes for presentation and your colleagues can use another 10 to support.

4.55 
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I move under rule 111 on behalf of the Youth Members of Parliament and on behalf of the Parliamentary Forum on Youth Affairs to present this motion to you seeking leave of this House to allow us present a Private Members Bill entitled, “The National Youth Enterprise Fund Bill”.  

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Parliament has enacted its Rules of Procedure pursuant to Article 95 of the Constitution that empowers a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill under Rule 111;

AWARE that Government is mandated to give the highest priority to the enactment of legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance the right of people to equal opportunities in development;

NOTING that in the 2011/2012 budget under the Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital Fund, Shs 25 billion was appropriated for the Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital Fund to cure unemployment;

CONCERNED that there is no regulatory framework under which the said Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital Fund is regulated and managed to ensure its efficiency and effectiveness in attaining the set objectives, we are convinced that there is urgent need to provide a clear and unambiguous process of accessing and managing Youth Entrepreneurship Venture Capital Fund through a legislative framework;

NOW, THEREFORE, this motion is moved that:
    1. Parliament grants me leave to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “the National Youth Enterprise Fund Act, 2013”, a draft of which is hereto attached.” 

I beg to lay on the Table a draft Bill entitled, “the National Youth Enterprise Fund Bill, 2013”. 

THE SPEAKER: Seconded? It is seconded. Can you justify.

MS AMODING: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I have already noted that Article 79 mandates Parliament to enact legislation in promotion of the development of the country. Youth development is such a sector that is growing in this country but it is presented with great opportunities as well as massive challenges. 

Youth unemployment in this country is both an opportunity and a challenge for Uganda. As an opportunity, Government can harness these numbers and energies of the youth and channel them towards the development of the economy. Some statistics already show that 78 per cent of our population is under the age of 30 years and 83 per cent of this age group between 18 to 35 years is unemployed. This situation, therefore, presents an unemployment challenge for our country. This is therefore a time bomb and it requires urgent strategic intervention by Government aimed at utilising the demographic dividend availed by this youthful population to directly alleviate the unemployment challenge among the youth who are the heartbeat of our country. 

The announcement of the Shs 44.5 billion for the youth venture fund in the 2011/2012 budget was a sign of commitment by the NRM Government in responding to this unemployment crisis in the country. The government idea was to have youth access cheap credit through three financial institutions. Madam Speaker, this approach, though good in principle, is facing immense challenges which relate to the lack of a policy and a legal framework. Key among these challenges include: 

a) 	The prohibitive bank requirements for accessing these funds.
b) 	Limited coverage of the selected commercial banks.
c) 	Majority of rural youth have not benefited from this money. We have been consulting in the regions and we have noted that most of the regions have not accessed these funds.
d) 	In the urban areas, especially in the central region where the majority have benefited, female youth have been marginalised.
e) 	There is no clear coordination mechanism between the commercial banks, the ministry in charge of youth and the Ministry of Finance which supervises the Fund.
f) 	There is no clear way of information dissemination regarding how the young people can access this fund.

Therefore, we are saying that:
1. 	With a policy and legal framework, the realisation of the original laudable intention to establish a job stimulus package will not be possible and the fund will continue to be only a one-time measure. Without a policy and legal framework, the measure continues as a one-off intervention whereas the scale of the need of our young people requires long–term, robustly planned and implemented measures that can build momentum and find lasting solutions to the presented challenges. 

2. 	Amongst other measures, the proposed National Youth Enterprise Bill is going to:
a) Establish the fund within a proper legal and policy framework under Government but with a semi-autonomous institution with a clear operational, funding and management structure.

b) 	Provide equal funding opportunities to all youth through financial institutions and/or constituency funding through SACCOs.

c) 	Take a long-term structured approach to dealing with youth unemployment in the country including provision of structured entrepreneurship skills training for youth as well as enhancing labour exportation and job provision. 

	Madam Speaker, the intention to bring this Bill before the House is to bring the different funds in one docket. You are aware that there is a graduate fund in place, there is also a recently launched healing Uganda policy by Government, and of course the current youth venture fund. We are proposing that Government can tie this up in one fund.

d) 	Also, we want to inform the House that there is a guarantee from development partners to come on board in terms of funding this as basket funding if our Government takes lead with the existence of a legal and policy framework. 

Madam Speaker, I also want to inform the House that the Ministry of Finance and this Parliament sent us on benchmarking studies. We went to Kenya, Lesotho, Nigeria, South Africa and Botswana in line with strengthening the Youth Venture Fund. I beg to lay a report from that benchmarking study which will enrich our argument.  

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a report of a study tour by the Youth Members of Parliament to five African countries implementing national youth funds. 

I would like to lay on the Table a report from a benchmarking study from Kenya which has one of the best model funds in Africa. We were sent by the Ministry of Finance in terms of strengthening this proposal that we have before you - (Interruption) - (Laughter) - Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.  Thank you very much, Senior.  

THE SPEAKER:  I thank the- General has sponsored the water.  

MS AMODING: Yes. Thank you very much. I want to finish.  Madam Speaker, I want to conclude then I will take the water. This framework that we are proposing now is aimed at achieving these objectives which we have highlighted. At an appropriate time, we can unpack this Bill to detail for the Members but we believe that when we do this, we shall realise the key objectives provided by the youth venture fund and that our young people will be able to access equal entrepreneurial opportunities, hence encouraging job creators rather than job seekers. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Ogwang, three minutes. Please, take the water. (Laughter)

5.05
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to thank you for facilitating us to go and benchmark what our chairperson of the Youth Parliamentary Forum has presented. What has brought all this is in line with what we have been witnessing. 

Allow me to give some facts in line with what commercial banks have been doing to us. Stanbic Bank branch, Jinja - when I talk about Stanbic Jinja, it means all Stanbic banks within Busoga sub-region - to my surprise, you can imagine from last year to date has only given five youth money- (Interjections)- one, two, three, four, five. What causes this? It is the lack of a legal framework. If you go to DFCU branch Jinja, it has given six youth. So, what does this mean, honourable colleagues? 

In other districts, talk about DFCU Mbale branch, which means all banks of DFCU within Bugisu sub-region, they have only given 24 youth and that is a total of Shs 151 million. So, what does this say? Tororo, I am aware you do not have a DFCU branch, so for the whole Bukedi if I can give more statistics- 

Colleagues, why are we bringing you this? We are trying to solve the problem which has been happening among the young people in your respective constituencies. We are aware that Government gave money for training under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. To our surprise, 30 youth are trained per district. Of the 30, you are not even sure whether you are going to be given money to start, capital. Of the 30, only Shs 7,000 is availed to you per day for transport and feeding. What is this addressing really? It is instead causing a problem among the young people. So, when we went to some of these countries, we saw that these countries had well managed structures of how such a fund is utilised. 

Lastly, I want to comment on the way these commercial banks have been exploiting the young people. They go around mobilising youth to open up bank accounts and they ask for Shs 60,000. These youth pay the Shs 60,000 and they do not access the money. In Busoga, for example, they got about 100,000 youth - those are facts from the bank here. Now, multiply that number of youth by Shs 60,000 from each youth, how much money is that, and at the end of the day you are giving money to only five youth? What are you doing to us? It is a disservice yet we are meant to benefit from it. So, I want to appeal to Government and to you, honourable colleagues – (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter has been coming to this House many times. This motion is only to ask for permission from the House to print the Bill and we come back for a formal debate. I now put the question that this House do approve the request by the members to bring a Private Members’ Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Tuesday I said that we need to get time to hear the feedback from the party whips about their evaluation of the consultation process but I have not seen both the NRM and FDC whips. However, since the responsible minister is here, let us listen to him.

5.09
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my capacity as MP for Ruhinda Constituency, I took off time to go and listen to my people. From my interactions with the people, there were mixed reactions. There were groups that were for, against and those who were not very sure whether to support this Bill or not. However, what I discovered is that there were people who were knowledgeable about the Bill, those who were ignorant about it and those who were just peddling outright lies and falsehoods.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, my colleagues at the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and I have reflected on this matter. I will now beg your indulgence that we be given more time to consult the population for at least three months so that we can further explain to the population about the gains and challenges relating to this Bill. This will also help us to give all the stakeholders who claim they have not been consulted time to do so. After that, we will be able to debate this matter from a position of information. I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has informed us about what transpired in his constituency and also the ministerial position about this Bill. 

Madam Speaker, when you sent us for the last recess, we also consulted. So, before the minister asks for the three months’ extension, I request that you also give us time to inform this House what transpired in our various constituencies so that all these views can be included in this kind of arrangement. So, instead of – (Interruptions)

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, thank you. The Marriage and Divorce Bill was tabled here by the Government. The Minister of Justice, the honourable Maj. Gen. Kahinda Otafiire, who is actually the sponsor of this Bill, has given a position and also requested for more time for consultations to take place. Is the hon. Latif Sebagala therefore in order to move away from what the Minister has proposed and instead suggest that members be allowed to debate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we finished the general debate on the Marriage and Divorce Bill and had gone to the committee stage. That means that after this evaluation, further debate will only take place at committee stage.

Honourable members, although I also have not done consultations, it is clear that there is misinformation about this Bill. There are those who ignorant, and members who are consulting have not even read the Bill so I do not know what they are telling the population –(Interjections)- Yes! I do research. 

MR OKOT-OGONG: Are we really ignorant of this Bill? No, we are not ignorant of this Bill as Members of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you are not ignorant, take the three months to study the Bill and when you come to speak to it we shall tell whether you know it or not. So, the Bill is deferred for three months. Thank you. Let us go to the next item on the Order Paper.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW EURO 55 MILLION FROM THE EUROPEAN UNION FOR FINANCING THE WIDENING AND IMPROVEMENT OF THE KAMPALA NORTHERN BYPASS AND THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE MBARARA BYPASS

5.16
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the Committee on National Economy of Parliament, I want to present a report for the proposal by Government to complete the Kampala Northern Bypass and the Mbarara Bypass as part of the Northern Corridor, as per the East African Transport Master Plan. So, the project is not for Uganda alone but for East Africa. As a member state of the East African Community, we are only doing our part of the obligation to work on the road from Malaba to Katuna. We are only complying with our commitment.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that copies of the report are distributed to members together with the brief which was brought from Ministry of Finance. I will try to summarise. 

On page 4, the project components are listed as follows: 

1. 	Component 1: the Mbarara Bypass construction and reconstruction of part of Mbarara-Ntungamo highway. 
    • Construction of a 13.9km two-lane bypass on a new alignment, 2x3.5 metre lanes, two-metre paved shoulders. Further details are provided.
    • Construction of a new bridge over River Rwizi and a cross drainage structure along the bypass to allow for a dual two-lane carriageway in future.
    • Construction of five roundabouts, one underpass for cattle and several bus bays on the bypass.
    • Full depth reconstruction and marginal widening of 27kms of the existing 2x1 highway between Mbarara and Ntungamo (kilometres 9 to 36). Replacement of cross drainage. 
    • Installation of road safety signs; and 
    • Monitoring. 

2. 	Component 2: Widening and improvement of the Kampala Northern Bypass. 

Honourable colleagues who were here in the last Parliament will remember that there was a complaint that the Northern Bypass was done only on one side from Busega up to Namboole. It is only the Kalerwe section to Lubigi that is dual. So the intention is to complete that area. Land was already secured but construction has never been done.  
    • Construction of 17.5kms of a two-lane highway adjacent to the existing highway. So, the widening in the title is in regard to Kampala. We are widening an incomplete project. 
    • Construction of the four grade separated junctions at Ntinda Road, Hoima Road, Gayaza and Kyebando, and improvements to the existing grade separated junction at Bombo Road. 

Colleagues, you are already aware that Kalerwe is already congested. You are aware of the challenges at the Ntinda roundabout. That is why the second component provides a solution to remove some of those roundabouts so that you can solve the problem. These are the flyovers being provided in this component. 

    • Our pedestrians are also being inconvenienced. The project is providing for pedestrian bridges. 
    • Installation of road safety equipment including  vehicle restraint barriers, horizontal and vertical markings, a segregated footway, service lanes, pedestrian fencing and full length lighting. 

You will realise that only a few roundabouts have lights. Most of the roads are really in darkness and it is bad because at times it even causes insecurity. 

    • The existing carriageway will also have remedial works; 
    • Supervision and monitoring services. 

3. 	Component 3: Consulting services. This is a small component as per the table on page 6 - uses of funds and related costs. You will see the components in that table. We have even given percentages. So, you can go to the table. I do not have to go into details; the table speaks for itself. 

On page 7, we give the component of funding; the grant component of EDF, the European Investment Bank which is the loan of US$ 40 million you are talking about, and the Government of Uganda counterpart funding. 

Colleagues, I also want to mention here that the East African Master Plan northern corridor already has bypasses in Tororo, in Jinja - that is why you pass around Gadaffi Barracks and not in Jinja town - in Masaka and in Ntungamo, much as the town is developing on the corridor. So, what we have raised in this report are areas like Mukono, which needed the bypass yesterday, and in future for other places.

The financing terms: the figure is specific - Euro 55 million – and the maturity period is 20 years, the grace period is five years and the interest rate is 1.745 per cent per annum. The conditions are as given on page 7 and the implementation arrangements are on page 8. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, if you can allow me, I will go to the committee observations and recommendations on page 8. 

1. 	The committee notes that this road project is part of the Northern Corridor Route, which is aimed at facilitating trade and regional integration. It is currently the single most important trade route in East and Central Africa and this proposed project will ensure that this key trade route is in good condition and that disruption to movement along it is minimised. The project is included in the NDP. 

Colleagues, this is why Rwanda comes through here and not through Tanzania, Burundi and DRC. It is a project of national importance. The reason I have given you the brief to Parliament from the Minister of Finance is because you will read that the heads of State of East Africa already committed themselves much earlier about the importance of this facility. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government fast tracks the implementation of other complementary regional infrastructure investments especially in ICT and the energy sectors that are necessary for regional integration because at integration. We should be talking about interconnectivity and not just looking at ourselves as single member states. 

2. 	Though Government uses the Road Sector Development Programme as a main tool for determining the priority area for investment, there is need to transform this into a master plan that depicts the national outlook that will as well guide national investment in the road sector. That is why in the appendix, we have gone into details about what other projects are ongoing, at what stage they are and what criteria they used. You will find this in the attachments. Those who got the report last evening, I am sure you have done yourselves justice and you may not have to ask the questions which were being asked yesterday. 

3. 	The committee further observed that Uganda has not accumulated a sufficient infrastructure base to lower the cost of doing business and compete favourably for foreign investments. Here, we are talking about competitiveness of a country. In addition, the deterioration of road infrastructure causes congestion and cost increases, which add to the price of exports and imports thereby eroding the competitiveness generated by the reduction of tariffs and the elimination of trade barriers. Roads to areas with economic potential like tourism, mines, agriculture, fishing, petroleum exploration need to be developed urgently. So, colleagues, the committee has taken note of the concerns you were making yesterday.

In addition, other priority roads especially border trade roads and lakeside roads should be considered. The committee recommends that Government develops a National Road Sector Investment Master Plan that will guide future investment in this sector. Government should also mobilise enough funds that will finance all road projects in the whole country, while exploring possibilities of securing non-traditional financing such as Public-Private Partnerships and issuing private sector driven infrastructure bonds, which should be fast-tracked. 

It is for this reason that we have mentioned the various stages that different roads are in. We have even gone as far as bringing the 19 priority roads, which are now under Private Sector Solicited Funding. This is attached on the report if you go further.

On page 10, we observe that regarding improvement and expansion of road infrastructure, less attention is given to revamping rail and water transport. Although plans exist to have the rails expanded and refurbished, these processes are too slow. It has been noted that where there are planned improvements in terms of road networks, there are no plans for other modes of transport such as ferry landing and railway extension.

We are saying that we appreciate the good effort in the Road Sector but rail transport is the cheapest and water transport should equally be fast-tracked.

As a committee, we recommend that Government should have an integrated approach that takes into consideration all modes of transport to avoid future costs resulting from changes in design and plan. Here, the example we are giving is that now that we are constructing the Entebbe Express Highway, you will find that a bit of the Northern By-pass will be eaten away by the bigger development. Therefore, in future, we need to plan ahead to handle phase after phase without eating into part of what you have done.

In addition, the committee recommends that Government should fast-track the re-development and expansion of rail network to widen the scope of transport as already mentioned in the NDP. Government should consider the idea of disbanding the Uganda Railway Cooperation and merge it with UNRA for easy coordination and management. UNRA seems to be moving well on roads but railway is also in its own world so we need a holistic approach for all the transport sectors; rail, road and air transport.

On page ten, sub-section five, the committee observed that despite increased funding to the Road Sector, overtime, physical outputs have remained dismal. Projects are not executed in a timely manner thus raising a lot of anxiety among beneficiaries and leaving them frustrated. The sector is still grappling with the problem of delayed completion of road construction projects, which is attributed to several factors ranging from inadequate local contractors, delayed release of funds, especially, Government of Uganda counterpart funding meant for land compensation, right of way, acquisition of projects, affected persons, fluctuations in fuel prices leading to high construction costs and lengthy PPDA procurement procedures.

Colleagues, we are raising this because of the delays we have been mentioning concerning roads in different areas, which are not taking off or have a delayed delivery time. The committee recommends that initiatives towards reducing problems of delayed completion of road construction projects be fast- tracked. Capacity building of the procurement unit, in addition to the process of amending the PPDA Act with the view of reducing procurement delays, should be urgently considered in order to curb road construction delays and lack of absorption for projects especially those that are donor funded. Government should strictly ensure that provisions for counterpart funding are adequately provided.

As we have always stated in our reports, Government has to find money for every project. It has to find money for land acquisition because of the Constitution, which requires prompt, adequate and prior compensation. That is why all these projects are going to continue delaying because it is a constitutional directive that you have to compensate owners before you do any work.

In observation number six, the committee observed that ministerial policy statements of financial year 2011-2012 envisaged legal reforms to have the URA Act of 2008 amended to enable the collection and direct remittance of road user charges to the Road Fund account. These have not materialised up to now and continue to be cited as one of the reasons why majority of roads are still in a sorry state. We really need to operationalise the Road Fund and that is our recommendation as a committee. If this money is received directly and remitted to an independent account and not the Consolidated Fund, it will make the process fast.

On observation number seven, on page 11, regarding high compensation figures for the project and affected persons on the Mbarara By-pass, the rates for land ranged from area to area with the lowest at Shs 50 million and the highest at Shs 250 million. The committee attributes this to acquisition of land by speculators in areas designated for new road routes hence increasing compensation.

Madam Speaker, we had earlier made a request here that if Government intends to construct a road or power line, we should gazette that area and stop any further acquisitions by the district land boards and approval of plans by the urban authorities. It is unfortunate that even when the area is identified, because of the constitutional requirement of compensation, you cannot gazette it.

As Parliament, we need to provide leadership on how we intend to do this. The committee was informed that the principles of compensation were approved by the Chief Government Valuer and we have attached some of these details. There is a copy of a letter from the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to that affect. The proposed by-pass route passes through a primarily urban area where all the land is registered and titled. Bare land evaluation was based on current market transactions while buildings were based on replacement.

In other words, if this project was foreseen 15-20 years ago, the land should have been left bare but people developed it a few years ago and they are going to demolish their property. 

The committee recommends that valuations be calculated professionally based on market rates. It further recommends that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Ministry of Works and Transport put in place a mechanism to reduce speculation, which is normally fuelled by staff that have prior information on Government policies. That is why I was talking about gazetting.

On observation number eight, the committee noted that many towns such as Mbale, Soroti and Iganga have similar congestion problems, which equally need to be addressed. They noted that Mbarara Town had been exacerbated by parking problems, so, we think if the municipality also addressed management of parking, they would reduce the problem.

As I have already mentioned, Masaka, Jinja, Mityana, Ntungamo, Mubende and others already have bypasses. The committee recommends that efforts be made to source funding for other trunk roads to promote equal development in the country. Municipalities are encouraged to regulate and manage street parking to reduce traffic congestion on highways. Locally and in some of these regions, bypasses are not popular to those who have small businesses where these trucks park so there is also that local interest, which we must be mindful of.

Concerning observation number nine, Masaka and Tororo have claimed that they have lost business but I think we should provide leadership and look at the bigger picture than just looking at the small issues. 

The committee observed that some people had already erected structures in the road reserve of the already acquired Kampala Northern Bypass. Though UNRA is in the interim making use of the Land Protection Unit based in Kampala (UNRA station office), this measure has not produced the desired results. This has rendered UNRA strategy and capacity on protecting roads ineffective.

We do recommend for an expeditious establishment and operationalisation of the Right-of-way Enforcement Unit at UNRA. This unit should ensure constant surveillance and evictions from all road reserves in the whole country – not just Kampala.

The committee also observed that most of the district roads that were upgraded to national roads are still in poor condition due to insufficient funding. The current allocation of the Shs 50 billion translates into only Shs 5 million per kilometre, which we think is insufficient instead of the average Shs 30 million. So, honourable colleagues, we need to seriously consider that. This means that only marginal interventions to keep the roads open are possible and this cannot cause improvement to this road network.

The committee recommends that Government should provide the required funding in a phased manner to avoid further deterioration of these roads with far-reaching cost implications. 

The committee noted that the Kamuli-Nalya Road and Kyebando Road crossings were cut off by the Kampala Northern Bypass. The design proposed provision of foot bridges at these locations but this is insufficient. The committee recommends that these bridges be provided to link the communities, which have suffered this problem. Foot bridges should be provided as per the project plan to provide these accesses. 

The clear example, as we completed this report, we gave to KCCA was Tula Road which is supposed to connect directly to Mawanda Road. But the old Northern Bypass had blocked that road. So, the traffic now coming from Tula Road is causing congestion in Kalerwe because they did not anticipate this. So, we need a flyover in that place. There is, therefore, need to plan comprehensively. And that also comes with the KCCA challenges – as to whether it is working with the ministry or it is planning alone. This is very important.

The committee also observed that some heavy vehicles are still not using the Kampala Northern Bypass due to the location of URA tax office remaining in the city centre. We propose that URA should position themselves on the bypass if the intention was to decongest the city. This is because by the time they go through Kireka, Banda and Nakawa, they have already caused congestion and it is difficult to go back to Bweyogerere; they may force their way into the city. So, URA should move to the bypass to save that congestion.

The committee also observed that the lights on the Kampala Northern Bypass – we have already mentioned this; we would want lights on the entire road for visibility. We have attached responses from the ministry to the 40 questions; these questions are the concerns raised by the Members. The Committee on National Economy, while doing this work, moved together with the infrastructure committee and we engaged the ministry and UNRA and we raised all these concerns. I hope those who took the report last evening read through and those who did not should ask questions after going through the report because most of them have been addressed. 

The question of compensation rates was asked and that is why we attached these responses. We went as far as asking the Ministry of Works what informs their financing priority and we have put different modes, including the internal rate of return. If you looked at the Appendix, we have already attached that and this road happens to be the leading one. 

Honourable colleagues, we have also attached the 19 priority roads which Government, for purposes of tourism, cross border trade and other inter-connectivity - they are using private sector financing, including the bidders. We have also attached the third phase of the road sector development programme, which gives details of roads like the current works which are being done, the pending roads like Tororo-Mbale-Soroti, the works which have been going on like the Busega-Mityana Road, the just completed ones like the Kampala-Masaka Road, the Lira-Kamdini-Gulu Road (on page 31 of the Appendix), Mukono-Jinja, Mukono-Kayunga, Jinja-Kamuli, Kafu-Karuma, Kampala-Kalerwe, Kalerwe-Gayaza. 

The intention was to inform the plenary, where we report. Our intention was to find out from the ministry about the other parts of the country; what effort is Government putting there.
So, you will find on page 89 of that Appendix more upgraded, including Nateete-Nakawuka, Lweza-Kigo, Tirinyi-Aladot-Kumi, Mbale-Nakapiripirit, Atyak-Moyo, Nebbi-Goli, Mukono-Katosi, Seeta-Masindi-Nakiyaga, Hoima-Masindi, Bugembe-Sirobulongo, Njeru-Nyenga, Abayita-Kasenyi, Kyenjojo-Hoima – which we have been waiting for, for very many years – Zirobwe-Luwero, Kigumba-Masindi, Lira-Abim, Old Masaka Road, Masindi-Biiso – possibly with that one I will also get a road for the first time. 

We have given a map showing where these efforts are going and as I have told you, you check the contractors who responded and the reasons why the priority roads were made was tourism, agriculture, oil and gas – and these roads, as you will see, are quite many and I do not have to go through the whole list that covers two full pages – look at the two pages before the map which are not numbered. Those are the roads, which are attracting private sector financing. 

Honourable colleagues, the list of the contractors who submitted bids, totalling 46, is also given here. And the projects, which are currently under improvement, are on page 84, which is the last page of the appendix. 

I would like to lay on Table the committee minutes while scrutinising the work, including the field visits, which members of the Committee on National Economy made together with the infrastructure committee, the project appraisal plan and a copy of the responses are already in the appendix together with the draft agreement.

In conclusion, the committee scrutinised and looked at the different areas of need, the challenges and efforts being done as per the attachment and the recommendations.

The committee noted the progress made by Government in the undertaking of reforms in the road sub-sector through the implementation of the East African Transport Corridor Action Plan, the widening of Kampala Northern Bypass; the construction of Mbarara Bypass as part of the East African Transport Corridor Action Plan that will facilitate trade, lower costs for business, advanced regional integration and improve the economic livelihood of all East Africans. 

Modernisation of transport infrastructure and removal of non-tariff barriers along the East African Transport Corridor is critical for trade expansion, economic growth and regional integration, all of which contribute to creating wealth and alleviating poverty not only for Uganda but for the whole of East Africa.

The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House the approval of the €55 million from the European Investment Bank for financing the widening of Kampala Northern By-pass and the construction of the Mbarara By-pass as part of the East African Northern Corridor. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and your members. Yesterday, there appeared to be some fears about this loan request. So, I ask the minister to throw more light on this loan. 

5.50
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleagues and the Committee on National Economy for the report. When we were here yesterday, there were issues about how to determine which road to work on. That is why I have come in so that as we debate, we have this at the back of our mind. The following are some of the criteria we use: 

    1. We work on roads with high economic internal rate of return, which is over 12 percent. This reflects the big economic return the road will give to the country. 
    2. Regional integration and support to the regional trade. The chairman of the committee has talked about this; the Northern Corridor and the Southern Corridor. And we are now on the Northern Corridor from Mombasa to Katuna and up to the DRC border. 
    3. We also look at the inter-connectivity roads and corridors which link up the regions of Uganda for economic and social/political integration of this nation.
    4. We consider roads that free up traffic and facilitate business especially around and through the metropolitan areas. These are bypasses, which can free traffic. 
    5. The improvement of the existing earth roads; where we improve roads from gravel to tarmac. The moment you have more than 200 vehicles per day, it becomes very expensive to maintain a road. That is why we decide to tarmac those roads. 

What could have been unclear when the chairman was presenting his report is that for the first time, we are blending a grant and a loan. The chairman told you that 33 percent of the cost of this project is a grant from the European Union and then the remainder is the loan. So, we are approving this loan knowing that 33 percent is a grant from the European Community. We are blending a grant and a loan. This is a new initiative, which will make sure that the grants we get give us more mileage. Instead of getting 20 kilometres, by blending it this way, we get 50 kilometres. 

Payment of this loan is long-term and it has good security because there is an element of a grant; banks take this very seriously. 

Lastly, there was the issue about roads being in one region. Let me mention a few things to emphasise what the chairman of the Committee on National Economy has said. On-going projects: At the moment, we are working on Hoima-Kaisotonya; we are working on Moroto-Nakapiripirit; we are working on Kampala-Masaka; we are on Atiak-Nimule; Kampala-Entebbe Express Highway; Fort Portal-Bundibugyo-Lamia; Gulu-Atiak; Vura-Arua-Oraba and Malaba-Busia-Bugiri. In the pipeline, leaving out the contractor facilitation financing, we have got Kapchorwa–Suam, which we are discussing with ADB; we have Rukungiri-Kihihi; Kanungu-Ishasha; Kyenjojo-Kabwoya; Kamwenge-Fort Portal; Kigumba-Kabwoya – (Interjections) – this shows that we have roads in Karamoja, we have roads in Acholi region; we have roads in Arua sub-region and in the western part. 

Therefore, Members, this clarification on what we consider in taking on a road, and where we are currently working, should make it easy for you. You should also bear in mind that there is a 33 percent grant included in this. (Members rose.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will see you, but first, there is something I want to handle. Earlier this afternoon, I told you that I will give you a ruling on a matter, which transpired yesterday; that is a request to suspend further action on the Public Order and Management Bill. 

Yesterday, after I left the House, I received a letter from Alak and Company Advocates claiming that a constitutional petition has been filed, which substantially brought in the issue of Public Order and Management Bill, now before Parliament at the second reading. 

The advocates were urging the Speaker to suspend action or debate on the Bill until the final disposal of the constitutional petition No.8 2013, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi vs the Attorney-General. 

I have carefully read the letter from Alak and Company Advocates and also the copies of the petition filed and I would like to guide as follows:

First, under Article 79(1) of the Constitution, it is the Parliament, which is mandated to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda. 

Secondly, in considering the Public Order and Management Bill, Parliament is exercising one of its core functions; that is the function of legislation. We must take note of the doctrine of separation of powers. This is the most fundamental principle that determines the relationship between the different branches of Government. It is a principal means of effecting a Modus vivendi between the Legislature and the other two branches of Government. Therefore, Parliament’s freedom from outside control cannot be over-emphasised, especially as it performs constitutional functions.  

In performing our functions as Parliament, we have, of course, to mind the sub-judice rule under Rule 64. I have read that rule before, but I want to restate that under Rule 64; “(1) Subject to sub-rule (5), of this rule, a Member shall not refer to any particular matter which is sub-judice. (2) A matter shall be considered sub-judice if it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, the discussion of such matter is likely to prejudice its fair determination. (3) In determining whether a criminal or civil proceeding is active, the following shall apply; 
a) 	Criminal proceedings shall be deemed to be active when a charge has been made or a summons to appear has been issued by the court - 
(b) 	criminal proceedings shall be deemed to have ceased to be active when they are concluded by verdict and sentence or charges have been withdrawn;
(c) 	civil proceedings shall be deemed to be active when arrangements for hearing, such as setting down matters for hearing have been made, until the proceedings are ended by judgment or settlement or withdrawal;
(d)	appellate proceedings whether criminal or civil shall be deemed to be active from the time when they are commenced by application for leave to appeal or by notice of appeal until the proceedings are ended by judgment or withdrawn;
(4) 	A member alleging that a matter is sub-judice shall provide justification to show that sub-rules (2) and (3) are applicable.
(5) 	The Speaker shall make a ruling as to whether a matter is sub-judice or not before debate or investigations can continue.”

Sub-judice means “under judicial consideration”. It is an aspect in establishing the independence of the Judiciary. It is also a way in which we recognise the doctrine of separation of powers. 

The rule governs what can be said by the public with regard to on-going legal proceedings before courts of law. It is true that the basis of sub-judice is that in any legal system, it is the role of court to deal with legal issues that are before it. This role should not be interrupted by others who make public statements as to how the court is proceeding with the matter. So, the rule applies where court proceedings are on-going. The rule applies to all and sundry; that is, the parties in the case, lawyers and the public.

Parliament, as I said, under the Constitution, is enjoined to ensure good and democratic governance. One major aspect of good governance is to ensure that established institutions are accorded the utmost leeway in performing assigned functions. No organ should be seen to interfere with the other although they should work in harmony to ensure the smooth functioning of the country. 

As I said, the Speaker should determine whether a matter is sub-judice and is expected to act judiciously. I have made my position clear on this matter, especially when we were dealing with the Public Accounts Committee.

Now, coming to this Constitutional Petition No. 08 of 2013, hon. Members, it was filed on 28 March, just the other week. Therefore, there is no evidence that the matter has been fixed for hearing. It is not active within our Rules of Procedure. 

Besides, in my opinion, the attempt to seek court orders against the Legislature is an abuse of the court process since the process of the Bill had been commenced already. What hon. Kivumbi is trying to do is to stop Parliament from doing its work, which I think is unconstitutional. (Applause)

The petition was filed in speculation. First of all, I do not know, which Bill he has taken to court because the Bill is under process. It may come out in a different form from how it was presented. So, we do not know what sort of Bill will come out in the end and therefore, his presentation is just based on speculation. 

If we allow this conduct, it means that Parliament’s hands will be tied as anyone who thinks that they have a problem will go to court and seek to stop us from working until the matter is resolved.

I am fortified in my decision by decided cases in the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court of Uganda. If hon. Kivumbi and his colleagues are aggrieved, they have the option to raise the matter after the Bill has become law. In my opinion, the matter is not sub-judice and the legislative process of the Public Order and Management Bill can proceed. Parliament must really be allowed to do its work.

Finally, I do take very strong exception to the attempt by hon. Jack Sabiiti, MP Rukiga County to serve me with papers while I was presiding in the House. (Applause) In my view, this is an abuse of the process and the rules of this House. Therefore, I direct the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to take up this matter with a view to disciplining hon. Sabiiti. I thank you very much. (Applause)

Hon. Members, we can now proceed to the loan. Hon. Odonga-Otto, three minutes and then hon. Odoi –(Members rose_) - okay, I will write the other names down. 

6.02
MR SAMUEL ODONGA-OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): On this one or the loan?

THE SPEAKER: The loan. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Okay. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. At the risk of being seen as sectarian, I want to oppose this loan based on Article 32 of the Constitution and the National Objectives (11) of the Constitution. I am opposing the loan partially, especially in relation to the Mbarara By-pass and not the Northern By-pass.

Article 32 (1) of the Constitution states, “Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the State shall take affirmative action in favour of groups marginalised on the basis of gender, age, disability or any other reason created by history, tradition, custom, for the purpose of redressing imbalances which exist against them.” 

The National Objective number 11 of the Constitution says, “The State shall give the highest priority to the enactment of legislation establishing measures that protect and enhance the right of the people to equal opportunities in development.”

Madam Speaker, I will lay on Table and unfortunately, I did not make my copy but I will get the copy of the laid one, of all the motions and resolutions of Parliament that were passed from 4 August 1996 to date. Out of those motions and resolutions, 115 of them are motions for resolutions of Parliament to borrow money.

Now, if you read through the 115 motions and resolutions of this Parliament to borrow money for various purposes, it is as if 80 percent of Uganda is in Western Uganda because 80 percent of these loans we have been borrowing – of the 115 loans that we have been borrowing, which I will lay on this Table is heading towards one region, which is Western Uganda. And then we come here and hold the Constitution high and swear under oath that Uganda is a republic - What does republic mean? I beg to lay.

If you go through this document, I will need a whole afternoon. Every time we are borrowing money – this is a very smart masterpiece and I do not know the person sitting where – let me just read three examples; on 24 September, 2009, “Motion to authorise Government to borrow £52.1 million from African Development Bank for financing Mbarara-Nagenda Road – (Interjections)- Mbarara-Nakenda Road on 24 September, 2009.”

Again on – [Honourable Member: “That is Mukono-Mbalala.”]- 24 March 2010, we authorised Government to borrow –

THE SPEAKER: Order. Please, listen.

MR ONDONGA-OTTO: I beg for your protection.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, the first loan, hon. Odonga Otto, we do not have that road. Can he clarify - the road you read, we do not have it.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Just relax. You know, in our culture, they say that a frog does not jump in broad daylight for nothing. There must be something chasing it from where it is coming from. (Laughter)

As I said earlier, unless the Speaker would allow me to read all the 115 loans we have approved in this Parliament, but since I will lay it on Table, you will have the laxity to read and present a substantial case. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think that you just highlight a few. More time for hon. Odonga Otto.

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Let me highlight a few; on 24 March 2010, this Parliament authorised Government to borrow UA 80 million from the African Development Bank of the African Development Group for Financing Road Sector Support 3 - upgrading Nyakahita-Ibanda-Kamwenge Road.

On 24 September 2009, we authorised this Government to borrow UA 52.51 million from the African Development Bank for financing construction of Mbarara-Nakenda-Nyakahita Transmission line project. Now, when we go to borrow money for other regions - (Interjections) - look at the figures; the figures are very distinct - (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, well, I respect hon. Odonga Otto as a friend and I think he will give me time to explain. You are entitled to your own views. 

He has tactfully left out the road which was approved on the same day for Gulu-Atiak - (Interjections) - I do not know whether we are procedurally right to allow one individual to confuse the whole House by reading only the roads from one section without mentioning the loans that we have approved for other roads in other regions. We have just completed a road from Soroti-Dokolo-Lira. That is not in Western Uganda and we borrowed money from the World Bank. We are constructing a road from Arua-Vurra-Koboko-Oraba. That is not Western Uganda and we have borrowed that money. We are doing Gulu-Atiak; we are doing Atiak-Nimule. 

Sincerely, is it procedurally right for one individual to come here and confuse the whole House as if we have been borrowing money for only one region, Western Uganda, and on top of that, singling out the word “Mbarara”?  Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not know whether you had not summarised your focus because you are going to electricity, to roads and soon, you will go to health. What is the –

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I was just reading that of Northern Uganda. On 11 May 2006, we authorised Government to secure $7 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) for financing construction and rehabilitation of roads and bridges in North and Eastern Uganda. Now, when it is ours, it is $7 million; when it is in other areas, it is $80 million. We are not children. (Interjections) Please, we represent constituencies -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, what we say, what we do as Members of Parliament, can have very negative consequences for the whole country. We have had programmes for equalisation. We have special programmes for Northern Uganda. We have ministries set up to address imbalances. We have borrowed money to address those differences. 

Is the honourable member, who is a very active lawyer and who is aspiring to tower the horizons of Uganda in the future, in order to engage in absolute sectarianism without looking at the totality of actions, which are addressed following the Constitution, and only identifying selectively, for purposes of poisoning the public’s goodwill, and therefore, endangering the security of this country? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Otto, I think you will lay the documents on Table. They will be circulated to the Members so that they can look at them in totality before we – then we can have a debate in the future to look at the distribution totally. So, make your prayer and conclude. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: I have one prayer - just a prayer. Madam Speaker, in the last Parliament, we requested the Speaker then to constitute a committee –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Otto, the information I would like to give to back what you are saying is actually on - when you look at the committee report on the lists of the road projects where they have already carried out internal rates of return –(Interjections)– the page is not indicated, I am afraid, but it is where the heading is about internal rates of return of selected national roads. 

Hon. Otto, of the 27 roads that are already on course and where most internal rates of return feasibility studies have already been completed - 11 are from Western Uganda and the rest of Uganda shares the balance. So, actually, you can read that list and – if you may allow me, Madam Speaker, to read- Can I read, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it is part of the report.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: (1) Masindi Port-Lira-Kitgum- 

THE SPEAKER: Which page?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: It does not have a page number, Madam Speaker, but if you go to the appendix, you will find a list of projects after 89, I think. Are we there?

So, of the 27, the first one is Masindi Port- Lira- Kitgum; Kigumba-Masindi-Hoima-Kabwoya; Kabwoya-Muzizi Bridge; Muzizi Bridge- Kyenjojo; Mubende-Kakumiro-Kagadi; Nabumali-Butalejja-Namutumba- (Interjections) - that is Eastern. (Interjections) - no, I thought I was reading the whole thing. 

So, when you read the list from 1 to 27, you sort out those ones - (Interjections) - the next one is Gulu-Atiak- (Interjections) – Yes, it is the one, which the minister is talking about; Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba; Nyakahita-Kazo-Kamwenge-Fort Portal; Musita-Namayingo-Mayuge; Olwiyo-Gulu-Kitgum; Atiak-Adjumani-Moyo; Kapchorwa-Suam; Mbale-Bubulo-Lwakhakha; Muyembe-Nakapiripirit-Moroto; Moroto-Kotido; Soroti-Katakwi-Moroto; Mukono-Kyetume-Katosi; Mpigi- Maddox –Ssembabule; Villa Maria Ssembabule; Musial-Lumina-Busia-Mayanja. Some of these are technical, Madam Speaker. Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko; Rukungiri-Kanungu-Ishasha; Kayunga-Bbaale-Galiraya; Buwaya-Kasanje-Mpigi-Kibibi-Mityana; Hamurwa-Kerere-Kanungu-Ifasha-Ikumba; Ishasha-Katunguru; Kabale-Bunyonyi; Kisoro-Mgahinga Gate; Kisoro-Nkuringo/Bwindi.

So, when you sort out of the 27 so clearly, this one backs what hon. Odonga Otto is trying to suggest – (Mr Byandala rose_) - I am done.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I am the author of this document. All that I am showing are feasibility studies not works done. (Interjections) No, it does not mean I have done the work already because this is just a feasibility study. Among these are very few roads on which we are working. Majority of them have only had their feasibility studies done. I was only addressing this document to somebody to show where and how we do feasibility studies. That letter is not complete.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I have listened and looked at the list but when you over-generalise, it is also a problem. I do not know whether you have been to Ntoroko District. It is part of the West but with very difficult terrain. Kamwenge also has very difficult terrain. Kibaale and Kakumiro – I have been to Kagadi but almost failed to return.

So, I think let us not over-generalise. The West is very vast because there is West to mean the Bunyoro sub-region, but there is the Ankole and Kigezi regions. In the East, there are places like Nabumali, Butaleja, Namutumba and so on. Yes, we have taken note of all these but we should not over- generalise. The list covers many parts of the country. Finally, say, your prayer, honourable member. 

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, as I make my prayer, I would like to say that in the last Parliament, we requested the Speaker then, who is now the Vice President of Uganda, to institute a select committee to investigate how money was sent to local governments. This was after we brought here a scientific report that showed that some district leaders then complained that districts in Western Uganda were getting more money from the Central Government than the others.

The Speaker then, in his wisdom, formed a committee that was to carry out this investigation and it was – the first meeting of that committee was all about who would become its chairperson. There were two people – hon. William Okecho and hon. Elijah Okupa upon whom we did not make a decision in terms of selecting the chairperson. There were substantial disagreements as to who would be the chair until the committee collapsed before doing any work.

Therefore, my prayer –(Interjections)– please, we do not need a minister for the reconstruction of Western Uganda. Please, listen to what I am saying if you have ears. I should not be intimidated, Madam Speaker, because we all pay taxes.

Anyway, my prayer is that we set up a select committee of Parliament to investigate how national resources are distributed all over the country in all aspects. That committee should report back to this House. This is important because it is not like we hate the people from the West; we are only saving them from falling into a trap, which everyone is seeing very glaring from a distance.

So, I pray that such a committee be constituted to investigate this issue and report back to Parliament. Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity.

6.22
MR FOX ODOI (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to borrow €55 million for the widening and improvement of the Kampala Northern By-pass and the construction of the Mbarara Bypass. This is for only one reason that every single road constructed in any part of this country is an addition to the infrastructure base of the Republic of Uganda. (Applause) It does not matter whether it is constructed in my or in hon. Odonga Otto’s village. If the road is within the boundaries of the Republic of Uganda, it makes the country better. It is an increase to our national pool of roads.

Madam Speaker, I, however, have a problem with the transport master-plan of the country Uganda. We all know that the cheapest mode of bulky transport is water transport. So, what plans do my colleagues on the other side have to develop the water transport system in Uganda? When shall we ever see vessels on Lake Victoria? You know that this country has very massive water bodies. When shall we ever see vessels transporting cargo say, from Kisumu or Mwanza to Port Bell? Why do we put all the emphasis on roads? Every time you come to borrow, it is in respect of roads. Why?

The second cheapest mode of bulky transport is the railway. What happened to the railway network in Uganda? Madam Speaker, I can inform the House about two things that I think happened. One is that the people that built the railway transformed themselves, by sheer luck, and they are now investors; they now belong to the middle class of Uganda.

The second thing is that the railway lines, due to lack of investment, degenerated into the largest scale of dilapidated pieces of iron. So, you have a contract - the people who built the railway are better off – if you show me any railway line piece of iron today, it has to be a piece that was manufactured in 1788 in Britain. That is the newest piece of such equipment that we have on our railway line.

So, when is the minister coming to borrow money to revamp the railway sector? My sense is that he should be doing this concurrently with the several amounts of money he is borrowing for the road sector.

Every country needs to have a national carrier. That means we need to promote air transport too. It is expensive but there is no way we are going to market Uganda if we do not have a national carrier. 

In the East African region, the only country that does not have a national carrier is Uganda. Rwanda, a small country in the region, has got Air Rwanda. But Uganda has nothing to show when it comes to air transport.

The last time I heard of something like this was that we had a cargo plane that belonged to the UPDF. Again, when is the Minister of Works and Transport coming to ask this Parliament to help him to develop air transport?

Lastly, Madam Speaker, you know that we have Tororo rock in my district. There is Mount Elgon in the neighbouring Mbale District. We also have the Rwenzori Mountains and Mount Kadam in Karamoja. Elsewhere, governments invest in cable cars to promote tourism in terms of rock and mountain climbing. When will the minister come to ask this House for permission to borrow money to finance the purchase of cable cars to promote tourism in these sites? 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. But before hon. Franca Akello comes in, I want to ask the minister; when will he come here to ask for permission to borrow money for inland water transport on Lake Kyoga, River Nile and so on?

6.27
MS FRANCA JUDITH AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the contrary, to the point that hon. Fox Odoi started with, I mind so much about roads being done, but I also mind so much to see tarmacked roads in Agago District. A mistaken drop of a tarmacked road in my district would be a good reward.

Let me make this clear that I do not hate the people of Mbarara neither does any Member of Parliament here hate them. My own blood sister was married to a man from Mbarara. She produced two children there. The husband died and the two children are living in my house and I pay their school fees. They are Banyankole and children of Mbarara but they live in my house. They are my sister’s children; my brother-in-law’s children from Mbarara. 

The point we are talking about is that let there be balance and equity in the resources of this country. What we are trying to say is that the Ministry of Works, Roads and Transport should make sure that the Central Government roads, including those which are not going to be tarmacked, should at least have first class murram roads. This is not the first time I have spoken on this Floor of Parliament that I have been blocked to access my own home and now that the rains have started, I will not be able to access my home and I have complained to the minister. 

The Gulu-Moroto road passes via Agago District. It is a very viable road and that would qualify 100 percent – actually, if feasibility studies were carried out, the return rates of the tariff would be more than 20 percent because Gulu-Moroto road connects Gulu, Pader, Agago, Abim, Kotido and Moroto and we know Kotido, Moroto and Abim are the land of gold. Gulu connecting via Katetwa-Agago is where you find mercury. (Laughter) 

So, let the minister tell us why the Gulu-Moroto road does not qualify to be tarmacked yet there is mercury along the road. As you go to Kotido-Moroto, you will get gold and in Agago, you will find many tourist attractions. So, Madam Speaker, - (Member timed out.)

6.30
MR VINCENT SEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion but I want to say that some of us get confused because recently, we were in the North with my Committee on Agriculture and we really saw what is happening there. In fact, if the people of Lwabenge whom I represent went to that place - we held a meeting there and we saw new powerful power lines and we in Lwabenge have been crying for power. We do not have it but they have it. So, we cannot stand here and talk about these things like nothing is going on all over the place. So, you have power and I do not have it. What do I do? 

In his report, the chairperson emphasised regional and international trade but I want to say something about our small towns where these truckloads pass. I think the designers of these roads that we are talking about have very little concern about the trade that happens or the benefits that our people would get from the transporters who would otherwise stop to sleep or even buy from these – (Mr Ajedra attempts to take leave of the Chamber.)

THE SPEAKER: May I ask the minister who is attempting to leave to come back? This is your loan. Please, come back. 

MR SEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker, the construction does not provide for enough parking space for these towns meaning that we just mind about people who are passing through. I went to Kenya and we found out that they have constructed considerable parking spaces. When passing via Eldoret, they know that some people will stop and buy from those towns, which is not the case here. I one time wrote to the minister about Lukaya, a town which is known to have served this country for so long. There is good food and so on –(Laughter)- but they did not provide for parking space, killing the town completely and the people there are not happy. So, I think the country should also be mindful of the designs. (Member timed out.)

6.25
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the good work they have brought. I do not want to stand to oppose but I am asking you to try to consider the rest of these other parts of the country. The honourable members are saying that let there be equity. Do not neglect us. On the issue where the minister said that Northern Uganda has been considered under PRDP and NUSAF, Madam Speaker, these two were embarrassments. 

We are aware that the PRDP has been brought back. The Office of the Prime Minister should be answerable to the Northerners. We are suffering. We have not seen any benefit of PRDP. The minister is aware that at one time, when issuing seeds, he gave us rotten seeds. This is very embarrassing but - (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, this Parliament had a Committee on Agriculture and that committee was chaired by hon. Bikwasizehi. That committee was sent by this House to Northern Uganda during my time as Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and that committee gave a report to this House. 

The President set up a health team led by the Second Deputy Prime Minister, hon. Kajura, and the PPDA in its own wisdom followed up this matter, particularly, in respect of a plastic panga, which was raised here by hon. Mao and all those reports did not find any truth in the claim that there was a plastic panga or rotten seeds. Is the hon. Member in order to flog a dead horse?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us concentrate on the loan. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for a member, the hon. Minister, to contribute by way of order all the time?  

THE SPEAKER: You know the minister came late for the Ninth Parliament, so, maybe, he is still adjusting.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You know when one talks of Northern Uganda and assumes that we are benefitting, it embarrasses us a lot. One has to be a little careful when handling Northern Uganda. 

If we are to check page two of 10 on this report, we realise that the committee asked the minister when Parliament got involved in the project. They said that procurement of the contractor had already been done following EU procurement guidelines and the contractor selected then is now ready to commence work once the loan is approved.

I am wondering how this can happen because you know most contractors have their own problems. They can change their mind and they complain of variation in prices, valuations and so on. This may cause this Parliament or the Government of Uganda more costs than the ones we are really advocating for. 

So, my question is, who is this contractor in the first place - because they have not mentioned the name of the contractor? Suppose another contractor comes with a slightly lower rate? Wouldn’t it be viable for them to consider a cheaper contractor - because I have seen a list of contractors here? 

If we go to page eight, point number 30, they are saying the same thing that the recommendation for the award of the contract for Mbarara By-pass has been made but no contractual commitments have been made and that there are safeguards in the contract, such that if Parliament were to reject - (Member timed out.)

6.41
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the report and begin almost from where we stopped. At times, when we speak on the Floor of this House, we risk being mistaken for being tribalistic and all that. That would not have been our nature but I have made statements a number of times that we are tired of escorting other parts of the country.

Look at what the ministry is praising, concerning the national road network over the last five years, as indicated in table 7.6 on page 84. They say it has expanded by 7.1 but when we talk about which regions, we are being called to order.

In the next budget speech, we expect the concerned ministry to have other roads from the other parts of this country that we are complaining about. We want to see you smart in the next budget speech and we are going to mark you tightly and see what roads will appear therein as Uganda’s new road network.

When you talk about Lira-Karamoja via Pader-Agago road, this would be another tremendously viable road as most of the agricultural products that feed Kampala come from our regions. When you talk about Katine-Namasale via the Kaberamaido-Amolatar road, this is another very viable road now that we have the ferries preparing to run across Lake Kyoga. When we complain, it is not for nothing. It is because we see a lot of unfairness.

When you talk about Nakasongola going to Zengebe to connect to the ferry, these are some of the roads. They are not even very long but if you took time when we complain - in fact, at the time road construction was going on in Kabale, Masaka-Mbarara and Bundibugyo, which part of the country do you think the people we represent felt they belonged to? Be fair. 

When you talk about the Dokolo-Lira-Soroti road, this is the great Northern road coming all the way from Johannesburg to Cairo. It is the onus of this government to feel proud that you have worked on it. It is even narrow as we speak because the rate of traffic passing there cannot be accommodated. So, be fair to us and try to make us feel that we belong to this country. 

The other road I feel would also be viable would be the road connecting Bukungu to Kamuli. I do not know in which plan it is coming. 

On page 89, would the ministry try to reduce on the extent of technical language that is used? With the exception of those involved in construction and engineering, one gets completely lost because when you are talking about HDM-4 and others, I completely fail to know what you are talking about.

Lastly, I want to comment on the Northern Bypass. When you look at this country, at times one might think that the people planning for this country are in a great slumber waiting to be woken up. It is not long ago that the Northern By-pass was worked on. What has changed about the plan? Where were they? What were they preparing to accommodate that was not there? What population of Uganda and Kampala has somersaulted in less than five years? In fact, people complained about the Northern By-pass and everyone almost cried. The road is very narrow and the contractors took so long. 

Generally, what is it that is going to change in the plans because you keep on planning and at the same time wasting resources on work? (Member timed out.)

6.45
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I need some clarification from the chairperson of the committee on page six; use of funds. We have €128.68 million but when you go to page seven; source, we have €127.67 million. 

Mbarara Municipality is now very congested. When I was the chairman of the district, we requested Government to upgrade Mbarara Municipality to city status as this would help the municipality to be planned properly and avoid what is happening in Kampala now. So, I am saying that the place where the by-pass is going to pass is already congested. I call upon Government to help Mbarara Municipality and upgrade it to city status.

Finally, regarding the Northern By-pass, in my opinion, I do not think it is a bypass now because it is also already congested. What we can do to help Kampala and the Northern corridor route is to have the Capital City relocated from Kampala to some other place so that Kampala remains a commercial city. If the Capital City is relocated to Mbarara, it would be most welcome. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Ms Kwiyucwiny rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Kwiyucwiny comes, I just want to supplement what hon. Yaguma has said. When you are going to Jinja, you take more time between Banda and Mukono than you take between Jinja and Mbale. You spend all your time there. So, there is no decongestion.

6.47
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this road we are talking about as an economic lifeline through Uganda to the neighbouring countries. But also because it was clearly prioritised in the Budget and I did not hear anybody refuting it. Having said that, there are other roads, which are also economic lifelines; if you talk about Vurra-Arua-Koboko Road, that road is not complete without the road connecting Nebbi-Zombo-Vurra. So, my question is; when is the minister putting this in plan so that it can also be constructed?

My other comment is on page 7 of this report. I have seen that there are three different funds – the ADF, which is a grant; and the Government of Uganda counterpart funding and the loan we are talking about. My question is; how readily available is the grant from the ADF and the Government of Uganda Fund? In other words, couldn’t we have started because in this Budget, it is only 30 percent constituting this loan? The others are grants and the Government of Uganda funds; couldn’t we have started already on this road? Or when are we starting? My concern is that it could easily be too late for us to start.

In addition to that, on page 4 of the Annex - in number 13, there is an explanation of a roadmap of activities to be done. My question to the minister is; are we on track as far as this timeline is concerned? This is because I see civil works – which are supposed to commence in May this year but when I see the same Annex on page 9, I see a question, which was raised, that is Question 40. What is the gestation period of the project? And the answer is; it is expected that the civil works will start three months after signing the loan agreement. 

And this is already April; three months will take us to next financial year, in July. What are we borrowing for? Is it for this year or for next year? Won’t it distort our Budget for this year and even for next year? 

6.50
MS FLORENCE NEBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the Minister of Works and Transport, hon. Byandala. When the President visited my district, he addressed the NRM and the people at the headquarters and promised to tarmac the Nabumali-Butaleja-Namutumba Road. When you look at the report entitled “Internal rates of return of selected national roads”, the Nabumali-Butaleja-Namutumba Road has not been designed, financial sources have not been identified and neither has the length been determined. 

Yet, as we speak now, the road is in a very bad state. Moreover, it has so far claimed two children’s lives as they attempted to cross the road to reach school. Also, the Busolwe-Nabiganda Road is completely impassable due to the heavy rains. So, when will the construction start? Thank you. 

6.52
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for this comprehensive report. In some cases, they have even gone beyond what the engineers – they even went into design. So, they have done a very detailed work.

I support the projects and, therefore, I support the borrowing of the loan. I just want to make a few observations. The first one being the issue of the by-passes; these are a necessary ingredient of congested habitations. I am glad that we have some in Tororo, Jinja, Masaka, Ntungamo and even Lyantonde. If you went to Mbarara right now, all the traffic to DRC and Rwanda – (Interjections) - well, that is the same direction. They pass through the narrow street of the business centre in Mbarara and they even pass in the middle of the university. We have had a number of accidents at the university point. Actually, right now, they are trying to put a flyover. Similarly for Mukono; because of UCU, we have to think about Mukono quite quickly because the university has now congested the town. So, let us seriously think about this issue of by-passes. 

Secondly, this is part of the East African transport corridor. Hon. Fox Odoi made a point about something that is done and it is for the benefit of the whole country. For example, there is a suggestion to build a railway line through Gulu. It would be absurd for me to say that I also want a railway line in Sheema. It may not necessarily serve the country as much as the one that passes through Gulu. 

So, I think it is better to think nationally especially in some of these big projects.

I would like to associate myself with the committee’s recommendations on page 9. They say that Government needs to transform the Road Sector Development Programme into a master plan that depicts a national outlook. Secondly, they want Government to develop a national road sector investment plan that will guide future investments. And finally, on page 10, the committee says that Government should have an integrated approach that takes into account all modes of transport, including water – which you, Madam Speaker, have referred to – air – which would promote our tourism and rail. And these are national issues and we should debate them as such. Thank you.

6.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL) (Ms Sarah Ndoboli Kataike): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the proposal to get the loan because we are – (Interjections) - sorry, to borrow. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, stop bullying your colleague.

MS NDOBOLI: This is an opportunity for our country to move to another level since our aim is to transform this country. Currently, as we look at other countries within the region, we seem to be performing badly. Rwanda, which is a smaller country, has a road infrastructure, especially in the city, which is well-lit and well-expanded. I think it would be fair if we invested at the right time and in the right place – first to widen the roads, especially those within the city centre. 

This would help in decongesting our city. But most importantly, I feel that as we work on our roads, we should also look at the opportunities, which are before us. Uganda is strategically positioned in the region and the whole continent. We are investing a lot in our roads; why don’t we look at other opportunities, for instance, introducing the road tolls? I saw in South Africa that the roads from Zimbabwe have road tolls, which raise good funds. This money will also help in road maintenance; we seem to be donating – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we know that the minister was in South Africa for African Parliaments meeting, but there are two types of roads; the public road, which should be free and those where people have invested and there they can put a road toll. 

The road we are talking about is a public road in Uganda; you should not think that you can raise money through it unless you are going to build private roads where people negotiate with Government. Eng. Byandala may have to help you on that because you were in KCCA and you may not know about that - (Laughter)- on how to do private roads where people who use them can pay money and then re-do the public roads to reduce congestion. 

But on lighting, this government has been lazy. We have got more money than Rwanda yet Rwanda has done better than us because of our stealing. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that hon. Nandala does not know or he has failed to know that Rwanda is extremely smaller than Uganda. They can very easily construct a road. They do not even have a road that is more than 100 km. the work we have done in this country is a lot; and we have not institutionalised stealing money here. Those who have attempted to do so have been taken to courts of law. 

So, is hon. Nandala in order to say that things are not being done here because money is being stolen?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think we should discuss the loan and leave the other issues. We shall discuss them in the Public Accounts Committee report. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to inform hon. Byandala that the President was in Rwanda and he said, “H.E Kagame, you are lucky, but for me in Uganda, I am surrounded by thieves” and we can see that some of them are here. (Laughter) 

MS NDOBOLI: I thank the Leader of the Opposition for the first part. But for the second part, you are misinformed. In the first place, on what we should do, we have to come in as the planners and decision-makers. We could as well charge the heavy trucks only. They are too many of them going to Rwanda and Congo. We may not charge the small vehicles because it is the heavy trucks damaging our roads.

Secondly, I concur that we should have a clear strategic plan for the whole country. It would not be fair to continue investing in a few towns. I would also be very happy to see a bypass in Mbale catering for Budaka and other districts in the East. That is enough. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.02
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, for raising the issues. I also thank the committee. I want to air out my views on the issue of roads and particularly, trans-boundary roads, which join us to the border in the North, West and North East. These roads are very important to us as a country and I do not want anybody to be subjective. 

A road in Mbarara is not only used by people from the Western Region. It is used by people from the North, those from Kenya, Rwanda and everywhere. So, as a country, we need to respect each other. (Interruption)

MR ODONGA-OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order in relation to Article 32 of the Constitution, which talks about equitable development all over Uganda. Is the honourable member in order to talk unconstitutionally? (Laughter) In Karamoja, people are walking on foot and yet in Western Uganda, you want to make a bypass for cows. (Laugher) Is that constitutional? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, try not to forget the provisions of the Constitution. 

MS KOMUHANGI: Madam Speaker, I did not talk about what hon. Odonga Otto is talking about. I talked of trans-boundary roads, not the bypass. And even those which connect to tourist destinations; the road in Kotido, the road in Kabale that connects to Bwindi is very important to us as a country and not just the region. I have to emphasise this one.

Let me return to the recommendation of the committee of reviewing the UNRA Act to enable Uganda Road Fund to receive road funds as an independent account. This is very important because for years, our road fund has not been growing. We have put the Ministry of Finance to explain to us why – we have more vehicles imported in the country, but the Road Fund has not been increasing. This has stalled development of our roads. (Member timed out.)

7.06
MR JACOB RICHARDS OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to thank the committee for the work done and also support the loan. Like hon. Fox has said, it is an opportunity to add another piece of infrastructure to our national stock. 

However, I appeal to this House to remember that Uganda is one. When I come from Pallisa and see that the road from Tirinyi through Pallisa to Kumi is bad, it is the people of Pallisa who know how bad it is. That road is not only used by the people of Pallisa; anybody else can use it. But it is me and the people of Pallisa who know the pain we go through. So, listen to us and support us. 

Madam Speaker, when we talk of improving road infrastructure throughout Uganda, I wonder why we get loans in piecemeal. Can’t we get a grand loan to invest in infrastructure so that we boost all areas in the country rather than spending a lot of time here accusing some regions of benefiting more than the others? So, let the minister inform us on the plans he has or on what is wrong with that kind of approach. 

In this report, the committee observes a concern that the road reserve on the Northern By-pass has been encroached on and there is construction being undertaken. 

The land protection unit under UNRA is becoming ineffective. I want to know from the minister; how did people start constructing? Who allocated them the plots and why didn’t they take action before the construction because construction is not a one-day issue?

Finally, I wish to hear from the honourable Minister of Works. Last year, in June, he wrote to some of us letters that our roads Tirinyi- Pallisa- Kumi and Kamonkoli- Pallisa will be worked on effective August. He disturbed our New Year enjoyment by inviting us to brief us that any time the road works would begin. I would like to know when the works are beginning for those roads.

7.09
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Personally, I would not love to in any way frustrate Government plans of developing the country but I must say that I am very hesitant to support the recommendation of the committee to approve the loan request. Why would we start talking of widening, improving when we still have very basic areas not covered?

I am concerned about the roads, some very key roads in Northern Uganda. I appreciate the fact that during the war, not much work could be done on some of these key roads but since 2006/07, when the North started becoming peaceful, we do not see anything taking place on some of these key roads.

These are colonial roads. I am interested in knowing from the minister how many colonial roads in the country are not yet tarmacked. I may not be surprised to find that it is only those ones like Gulu- Moroto, Gulu- Kitigum and Lira- Kitgum road. So, that is why we are raising some of these concerns.

A number of times, some of these roads have been appearing in plans but there is contradicting information that might really make us not see any work starting on these roads. For instance, I have been seeing these roads from Apac- Lira- Kitgum appearing under different categories. This very report also has some contradicting information. There was a report we received recently in our pigeon hole from UNRA. It has contradicting information. 

This gives us a lot of concern. It is not that we are not supporting plans to develop the country but we want things to balance and for Government to understand how we suffer when we move on these roads and we have said this a number of times. There are some portions of roads, for instance, that may be only 20 kilometres but you take like three or four hours moving on that portion alone. What is this?

I also want to seek clarification from the minister or the chairperson of the Committee on information that has been given about some roads that have been rehabilitated because the information here indicates, for instance, that the road Lira- Kamudini- Gulu, the rehabilitation has been completed. But I know that it is only the stretch from Gulu to Kamudini that has been rehabilitated. From Kamudini to Gulu, as we talk, the condition of the road is very bad.

It is also indicated here that Kafu-Karuma has been rehabilitated and the work is complete and yet, it is in a very bad state. I want to tell you that it is really more terrible travelling on a tarmacked road with potholes than travelling on a murram road with potholes.

7.13
MS ROSE IRIAMA (INDEPENDENT, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): I would like to support this request in pain. It is unfortunate when my brother hon. brother Odongo Otto tried to say something he was almost pushed down. I would want to ask the minister now that we are going to support this loan, when are you going to borrow money to finish the roads that have been mentioned, for instance, Moroto road that you have been talking about.

The road is going to be tarmacked from Moroto to Nakapiripirit, when is it going to link to Mbale; isn’t that going to be another kind of scenario where vehicles are going to get stuck? When you reach Nakapiripirit, you cannot come to Mbale. You talked about the internal rate of return when making these roads. For instance, the roads from Karamoja are very many, not only Moroto road. What don’t we have in Karamoja that is economically viable? We have limestone; we have marble, which is being transported to Tororo.

MR LOREM: Thank you very much, my sister. I am a member of the committee and when you check that list, we the two from Karamoja did not sign because on no day has Government come up to say we need money for Karamoja roads. We only sign loans for other places but nothing for Karamoja and yet, during the rainy season, we pass through Kenya.

MR OGWANG: When we talk about Karamoja and when talk about roads linking the country to other international borders, Karamoja links Southern Sudan and Kenya, so, I wonder why we are looking at getting a loan to address issues of congestion - what causes congestion in a Municipality like Mbarara? How can you address congestion when other places of the country are not even at a level of getting congested?

MS IRIAMA: Looking at Kidepo, it is one of the national game parks which still has a variety of species of animals. When you talk about economic viability, then you can see that Kidepo connects Uganda to Sudan. You can use it to go to Congo and then also to Kenya.

I do not understand the criteria on how these roads are being worked out. Each time Karamoja is mentioned, they talk about Moroto- Nakapiripiriti but Moroto to Nakapiripirit cannot connect to Mbale. Sometimes, when we rise and complain, we are mistaken because this is some kind of marginalisation and I am not ashamed to say this.

When are we going to have improved roads in Karamoja? Are we going to bank on Moroto-Nakapiripirit only? This is a very serious issue. 

When you look at the money we are borrowing for this widening of Mbarara highway, look at the work that is going to be done, and were these people blind to know that in future, they would need a wide space of a road? Now, the money is going to be wasted and this money, we are going to approve will go on the same work and yet, this money would have done better on other roads. So, this is also a kind of weakness from the ministry. Do you have technical people? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Namayanja, hon. Chemutai, hon. Wamanga-Wamai.  

7.18
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the concerns of the committee and also the responses by the honourbale minister.

However, when we are planning, there are aspects to take into account. When the Northern By-pass was being constructed during phase 1, if I could recall, Eng. Honourable Abraham Byandala was the city engineer – (Interjections) - and I was the Deputy Mayor. When the designs were made for the construction, he contributed a lot.

When we talk about encroachment on this road and the new designs and the road junctions, some of these are coming in at this time and yet they were planned earlier. The narrowing of the road and the encroachments that are on – some of these are very big investments. I would like to ask the minister; who are the encroachers? How have they come to encroach? There is a very big supermarket by the Northern By-pass and I would like to find out whether this supermarket is not going to be affected by – (Interjections) - and if it is not, then that is good. It is now when we are mentioning UNRA approving an enforcement unit to enforce the encroachers and probably to evict those who have come in. I would like to find out why UNRA has taken all this time to look at this. 

When you look at the Northern By-pass now, the purpose for which it was put, you see the congestion on the Northern By-pass - we have constructed Tula Road which is going to be damaged when we approve this loan - Tula Road is going to be affected. The junction that has just been created on Gayaza Road is going to be affected. 

Now, is the Kampala City Authority planning with the Ministry of Works or the Kampala City Authority is working in isolation and the Ministry of Works is doing its bit and then UNRA, the National Planning Authority – where are all these bodies? (Member timed out.)    

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chemutai, hon. Bagoole, hon. Mugume – I think I had said hon. Wamanga-Wamai. Now, maybe we reduce to two minutes. You know the workers have started knocking the building; the construction people have now come on site and we need to close. Two minutes each.
  
7.22
MS PHYLLIS CHEMUTAI (Independent, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I would like also to support the proposal to borrow the € 55 million. I am supporting it because we one time went to Mbarara as a Committee of Science and Technology and we visited Mbarara University and the complaint was that many of the students are dying because of crossing to the other side of the road. They said that if Government built for them a bypass, they would save the lives of the students and so, I support the Mbarara Bypass and the widening of the Northern Bypass.

I would also like to urge the Minister for Works and Transport to also widen other roads within the country because our road in Kapchorwa is a good road but it was made very narrow. In fact, it has caused many accidents within the town and many vehicles have overturned because the road is very narrow on either side. 

There are big trenches and when you meet a bigger vehicle on the way, it is very easy for a vehicle to overturn because the big trenches are on either side.

One time, hon. Nandala-Mafabi reported here that the money was eaten. I do not know much about it but if the money for making the Kapchorwa road was eaten, must we remain with the narrow road because the money was eaten and yet, our people are dying? I am requesting the minister to do something about the widening of our road. Even within the town, there is no round about and – (Member timed out.)  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Bagoole, two minutes.

7.24
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (INDEPENDENT, Luuka County, Luuka): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  I cannot lie to this honourbale House that I can stand up and support this committee report when it is in such a form. 

During the recently concluded presidential elections, the President was moving around the whole country promising in almost every place that such and such a road would be tarmacked within a few years to come. We have so far moved two years down the road and whenever I go back to my constituency, my voters keep on asking me when the Buwenge-Luuka-Kaliro Road will be tarmacked. 

But when I happen to receive a report like this from the committee and it is talking about widening and deepening of the Northern By-pass –(Laughter)- putting up a dual carriage bypassing Mbarara, I do not think the bypass in Mbarara is a priority kind of arrangement when we have places like Tororo-Soroti going to Northern Sudan. 

Before I joined politics, I used to work with URA in Tororo and just as the Member of Parliament who comes from Karamoja was saying, I very well know that in Karamoja, there is clinker and limestone and those two products are highly valued in the Tororo Cement Industry and as you know that the cement we get from Tororo is largely consumed by almost every – (Member timed out.)
 
7.26
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to talk about this proposal to borrow money. I would like to thank the chairman for the eloquence in presenting his report. 

But when you look at this report, it talks about national – the whole country. I would like to ask Members to look at the issues raised in this report. We are talking about the whole country and not a section. The two minutes are not enough for me to analyse all the issues but I want to go to the issues of the minister.

The minister talked about the economy and the rate of return of about 12 percent. I want to tell the minister that Arabica Coffee that brings in a lot of resources to this country – foreign currency - is from Budadiri. The maize that we are exporting to other parts of Africa comes from Budadiri. 

While opening the Bank of Uganda in Mbale, President Museveni said, I do not know whether the minister got that information or not; I want to repeat here that the President told the Bagisu, “I am going to work on Nalugugu-Mutufu-Budadiri up to Namagumba.” This road is not here. But Mr Minister, if you are talking about economic returns, you can never forget the contribution Bugisu makes to the national economy of this country. If you are talking about agriculture, you will never forget Bugisu, Mr Minister.  

Secondly, when you are talking about tourism, the tourists who climb Mount Elgon every day suffer on that Budadiri Road and yet, they bring in foreign currency. So, when you talk of tourism, Bugisu must be there; Budadiri must be there. When you talk of agriculture, Bugisu is a fertile place that contributes to this country and Budadiri is nowhere to be seen in this report. 

Mr Minister, you are doing bypasses for cattle. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Members, you know the contractors work in the evenings. You can hear they are knocking, so, we shall need to close very shortly. 

7.29
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. I have a problem with this country; with most of the contractors we have; the companies which are working on our roads. There is a statement here where we expect these companies to take three to five years, but you find a company working on a road which was supposed to take five years, taking almost 10 years. And these companies continue to be awarded these contracts. 

We need to get a list of all companies, which are working on these roads in this country. It looks – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague, for giving way. The reason these companies take a lot of time is that one, there is counterpart funding by Government, which money they do not remit. Two, there is the output VAT, which the donor funding does not cover and which is supposed to come from Government but which is not paid to the contractor. 

So, at the end of the day, they fail to operate and it will continue as long as we operate in that style. Thank you.

MR MUGUME: Thank you. Madam Speaker, as I have said, I think we need to get a list of all companies working on these roads in this country. I think we can discover some of the fake companies and after getting this information, we shall tell you that really some of these companies are weak. 

Secondly, I am from Rukungiri. I want to assure hon. Members that this country has almost the same problems. The Mitano Bridge is a national bridge. This is a bridge, which connects Kanungu and Rukungiri. (Member timed out.)

7.31
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thought there was some kind of malice. 

There is a definition of contractor-facilitated financing, which says that it broadly refers to the raising of 100 percent of the funds for road construction by the contractor who is selected to undertake the identified road project. That definition is given in this report.

The Kyetume-Katosi-Kisoga-Nkokonjeru-Nyenga Road has been in the budget. For over five years, we have appropriated funding for that road - not for designing but for construction work - and yet, nothing is actually done. Today, we are being told that it is under this category of contractor-facilitated financing which the contractor must finance 100 percent but of which we have appropriated money five times without work being done. So, what are they talking about?

Would they want to tell me that the monies that we appropriated for financing this construction were placed somewhere or are they going to do certain other roads, which have not been reported in this report? That is all I wanted to say, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, as you can hear the hammers, the contractors are working. They work in the night. So, we have to close. Now, apart from three Members who have outrightly rejected the request, others have painfully supported while others are supporting with reservations. So, I would like to put the question that this loan request be approved. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, Minister, many points have been raised, not relating to the loan but relating to the state of preparedness, construction, planning of many facilities in the country. So, I want you to prepare and answer the issues the Members have raised in this debate. Please, prepare an answer and – are you ready now? 

7.34
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr Abraham Byandala): Madam Speaker - (Interjections) - can you give me a chance to answer. I will prepare a written reply to the issues raised and give them out so that Members can understand and know where misinformation or correct information is. 

I thank the committee for the report and I thank you my colleagues, hon. Members of Parliament. I understand we are human beings; at times, you can become emotional but at the end of the day, we have understood each other. We are all Ugandans. Thank you very much, hon. Members.

7.35
THE MINSITER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (INVESTMENT) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleagues in the House for supporting and approving this loan. I believe that it will go a long way in trying to improve the infrastructure in this country. I would like colleagues to know that these are national roads; they are not regional roads. And it is from that perspective that we should always endeavour to do what is best for this country and not for our individual regions. 

There was only one thing which was raised by a colleague regarding why we are doing funding in piecemeal and why we are not having comprehensive funding for our infrastructure. I am in the process of preparing a Cabinet paper that is going to address exactly the issue that the colleague has talked about because we cannot keep coming here with loan requests for this road or that road. I think there is need for us to look at comprehensive funding for our infrastructure so that it is done once and for all. And, hopefully, at the appropriate time, we will be able to present this to Parliament for consideration. 

I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, I forgot to remind you that on Saturday, two of our colleagues are contracting a marriage. Hon. Akena and hon. Amongi are contracting a traditional marriage in Minakulu, before the passing of the Bill. (Laughter) So, there will be transport to Minakulu at 7 O’clock on Saturday morning. You are invited to come and witness before we complete the Bill. 

Otherwise, the House is adjourned to Tuesday, next week at 2 O’clock. Thank you very much.  

(The House rose at 7.37 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 April 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

