Wednesday, 10 April 2013 

Parliament met at 3.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will adjust the Order Paper on item No.3 to create room for the Minister of Finance to lay the National Budget Framework paper as we agreed a few days ago. 

3.15
MR NELSON SABILA (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance in relation to the co-existence between Uganda Wildlife Authority and the people of Bukwo District. 

I want to report that the relationship is very bad; it has been characterised by killings and injuries, the latest one being yesterday. Yesterday, trigger happy officials of the national park shot and injured one Kibet Pius of Seredet Subcounty. This man is now in a critical condition and he is hospitalised in Kitale, Kenya; we do not know whether he will survive. Last year, we had a serious case where two people were shot, one died instantly and another one was injured. These are unarmed civilians who at times go to the national park for many reasons. 

That side of the national park where there is always conflict is an area which was initially a forest reserve. Before it was a forest reserve, there are people who used to stay inside the national park. They were evicted from the national park and they have been in camps up to today; they have never been resettled. They still derive some livelihood in form of grazing in the national park. 

There is a system that we had put in place between the local government in Bukwo District and the national parks. We came out with a category of people called the friends of nature who are supposed to coordinate at any time to ensure that any cases of conflict are handled harmoniously. It was inaugurated by the board of UWA late last year. We expected this to help us but to date the Uganda National Parks have continued to be very aggressive towards the community.

In one of the areas of Kabeyi Subcounty, there are trees that were planted in the 1940’s – very big trees - demarcating the area between the national park and the community but these people have gone ahead to encroach on the people’s land, putting pillars away from the trees that were planted into people’s gardens and it has become an issue of serious concern.

Now as we talk, the relationship is not good. I call upon this House to come to the rescue of the people of Bukwo and maybe send a committee there to find out exactly what should be done, come out with resolutions so that we can ably ensure good coexistence. Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can we direct our Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry to take an interest in that issue of Bukwo, so that the peasants can live with the national park, and report back to this House.

3.19
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. This morning on NBS TV live talk show, I watched with dismay Col Kulaigye alleging that this institution of Parliament and MPs work with Uganda’s enemies and they were bribed to block the debate on the oil law. I thought that this was a very serious allegation coming from an army officer at the rank of a colonel with no respect at all to the institution of Parliament, leave alone MPs. This is one such example where some army officers do not even have respect, be it protocol or otherwise, for MPs and the institution of Parliament.

I felt sad, Madam Speaker, because I, Reagan Okumu, has never in this House received any bribe in any away or anywhere. I would, therefore, ask that Government responds to this matter very seriously and Col Kulaigye should be brought to order to substantiate and name those MPs, or if the money was given to the institution of Parliament then we should know whether Parliament received money so that we undermine debate on the oil law. He said that these MPs are working with the enemies of Uganda, which also is a treasonable act according to that allegation.

I thought this is a matter of great importance to the institution of Parliament, but it is also important in a sense that we must respect the separation of powers. I know that Col Kulaigye belongs to the other arm of Government, the Executive, but he is very junior in the hierarchy of the Executive. So, for him to come up very strongly on TV and give this kind of allegation, I think this is the highest indiscipline I have seen from an army officer of this kind.

May I, therefore, Madam Speaker, seek the response of the Government on this matter? I would kindly request that Government brings Col Kulaigye to substantiate and clearly explain and name those MPs, where they were paid from, how much money they were given and which country they were working with, which enemies of Uganda they were working with to undermine the state of Uganda? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.21
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Reagan Okumu for articulating a very fundamental issue which I equally heard. As if that was not enough, last year a committee was set up to carry out inquiries into the oil bribery allegations and that committee was headed by hon. Werikhe. We do not know how they wound up their business. We have never received any formal report. We do not know what is going on. So, the people we represent would like to know how you ended that assembly unceremoniously. We would like to know from Government?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you have smuggled in different issues but the chair will let us know. I want to go back to the issue of what hon. Okumu raised; it is a very serious matter. There are 380 of us from the Speaker, the Deputy Speaker, the prime ministers, the ministers; you are all candidates in this allegation. This has come soon after there was a decision to investigate bribery claims. We want to know who of us among the 380 took bribes because now all of us are targets.

3.24
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I am very perturbed to hear what has been narrated. Of course, there is no guarantee of its accuracy. It is only him who heard; I did not hear the news. So this is subject to debate. 

However, the investigative branches of Government could be called upon to investigate this matter and to bring the colonel to answer the allegations that have been made against him because he is still alive. If he appeared on the talk show, he should come and explain so that people will be aware. Also, if he really said this, he should substantiate; if not, the truth will come out. 

Madam Speaker, I am very sorry about what is claimed to have happened. If it is true that it happened, I would still request your office to write to the relevant office against this claim. I think that will carry more weight and it will make everybody at ease because investigations must be done. Thank you.

3.25
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, we may not only focus on the colonel per se but I think we need to go deeper because I have come to believe as a researcher that there is a deliberate effort to soil the image of Parliament. Everywhere I have been going, the dignity of a Member of Parliament is going down the drain. Many of the people who are doing that are within the apparatus of the state. So, we must ask ourselves why and who is behind this move because this is very dangerous.

If we are going to be the vanguard of law in this country, where we are supposed to live by example, every little bit that I see is increasingly making it very difficult. Even when you stand as an honourable, like one member has said, you do not even feel the weight of that title anymore because it is being pushed down the drain. You even get the people at lower levels, all the phone calls that keep coming in when you go to the radio stations, you cannot believe what they say. I do not know whether other members are not experiencing this. You cannot believe how people have started addressing us when you are there - the language, the manner in which people are talking; it is all undermining this position of a Member of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not go into a debate. I think we have to take a decision on what to do about Col Kulaigye and his utterances.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I have strong reasons why I moved broadly because Col Kulaigye could be just a symptom or an indicator of something much bigger. That is why it would not even be prudent for us as Parliament just to focus on Col Kulaigye. We need to constitute a serious team. I do not know what our public relations do in this Parliament; they must have gathered a lot of information. If you look at the press, all the attacks that are made on the institution of Parliament are not simple matters that we can sit and live with. I am of the view that we constitute a strong team that should investigate these matters deeply, including Col Kulaigye.

MR MILTON MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker. One thing I expected from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is a commitment to the House that since he has a Minister of Defence who oversees the operations of the UPDF, he would direct the minister to come either in two or three days time and explain. We should respect systems. Sectors have supervisors but he says through you we write to Col Kulaigye. I do not know under what arrangement we would do that when we have somebody who is accountable and answerable to this House.

I advise that the Prime Minister asks the Minister of Defence, who is in charge of the docket, to come and answer or explain what has been reported or alleged about the institution.

THE SPEAKER: I want to direct that the Minister of Defence comes here urgently to explain to the House and to the country how we, members, were bribed and who bribed us and how much was given to each member. You must do it tomorrow.

We have in the public gallery guests from Amuria, the district chairperson, Mr Oluma; the district speaker, Mr Charles Echemu and all the district councillors. They are represented by hon. Ecweru, hon. Amero and hon. Peter Eriaku. They are here to see what goes on in this Parliament.

MR MICHAEL WERIKHE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise to respond to the concerns of hon. Lukyamuzi. I would like to report that the committee has been handling its work diligently and we have actually considered the first draft and we are now going to handle the second draft. We believe by the end of this month we will be ready with a report. We have never concluded this matter. The report is going to be delivered to this House before we are prorogued.

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item. He has said that he is going to bring the report before this month ends.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you very much for this chance and I wish to thank the chairperson of the committee for the commitment given to this House. I am worried that as the committee waits to report to us, there seems to be a new set of evidence that is coming up and the President is asking for further investigations into the allegations of bribery in the oil sector. 

Madam Speaker, rather than hurry the committee to bring a report that may turn out to be half baked, I would like to seek the indulgence of the House, and your indulgence particularly, whether we as a House could give the committee additional time to look at the evidence before them at the moment and what they intend to report on. That way, I am convinced that the committee will not have to come here the second time or even face bombardment from this House on the basis of new evidence that seems to be flying around in the media.

As Parliament, we cannot afford to ignore this evidence. The right thing to do, in my view, is for us to give the committee more time so that they can review that additional evidence in order for them to present a concrete and complete report to this House. I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, honourable members, first, the inquiry was time bound, but also the terms of reference were so fixed. So, I think we need to examine whether we can come back to make other resolutions or even to alter the terms of reference. We need to think about that. We shall give you a decision tomorrow. 

Let us listen to the Minister of Defence. There is something we will want you to explain to us tomorrow. I understand that on NBS Television today, Col Felix Kulaigye was reported to have said that Members of Parliament were bribed to fight the oil Bills. That, of course, includes you because apart from being a minister, you are also a Member of Parliament. We are so concerned because all of us are now possible suspects. So, please find out the details and report to us tomorrow.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Chripus Kiyonga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Leader of Government Business has briefed me and we shall comply. I had not been aware of this happening, but I promise that we shall check it out and return to this House with a report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you so much. Let us hear from the Minister of Finance.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.36
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Maria Kiwanuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament. Article 156 (2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 4 of the Budget Act, 2001 require H.E the President to prepare and lay before Parliament the medium term macroeconomic plan; two, programmes for economic and social development; and three, the indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework of Government for the next financial year not later than the first day of April. We thank you for your indulgence in this, Madam Speaker. 

Therefore, in accordance with the powers delegated to me by H. E the President, I hereby lay the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2013/2014, which encompasses the following:
    • Section One: Medium term microeconomic outlook and indicative revenue framework;
    • Section Two: Programmes for social and economic development and indicative preliminary revenue and expenditure framework; and
    • Section three: Details of the proposed sector plans and expenditures.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I hope you have brought enough copies for the members. The framework paper is hereby sent to the Committee on the Budget and the rest of you will handle it from there.

3.38
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Florence Namayanja): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay on the Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following local government units: 
1. 	Mitooma District Local Government; 
2. 	Sironko District Local Government; 
3. 	Agago District Local Government;
4. 	Mayuge District Local Government;
5. 	Ibanda District Local Government; 
6. 	Buyende District Local Government; 
7. 	Kapchorwa District Local Government; 
8. 	Aleptong District Local Government; 
9. 	Butaleja District Local Government; 
10. 	Iganga Municipal Council;
11. 	Kitgum Town Council; 
12. 	Buvuma Town Council;
13. 	Rubirizi Town Council;
14. 	Kapchorwa Town Council;
15. 	Mukono Municipal Council; 
16. 	Lyantonde Town Council; 
17. 	Kyarusozi Town Council; 
18. 	Dokolo Town Council; 
19. 	Kyotera Town Council;
20. 	Kyazanga Town Council; 
21. 	Luuka Town Council; 
22. 	Mayuge Town Council; 
23. 	Busembatia Town Council;  
24. 	Kamuli Town Council; 
25. 	Bugiri Town Council; 
26. 	Kalisizo Town Council; and 
27. 	Lukaya Town Council. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the statements on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Chair. We expect the Committee on Local Government Accounts to peruse and report back within the constitutional guidelines.

BILLS
SECOND READING

UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

3.41
THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mrs Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2010” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it is.

MS KYAMBADDE: The object of the Bill is to amend certain provisions of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act, Cap 327, which has been found to be inadequate, and to incorporate new developments in standardization of goods in the East African Community for the better management of standards in Uganda. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can we have the committee report.

3.42
THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Mulimba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to beg that I go straight to the introduction because the Minister has made clear the object of the Bill. In order to save time, I request that I start with the general concerns from the various stakeholders on page 2, paragraph 4.0.

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the committee interfaced with the various stakeholders. During that interaction, the following concerns were raised: 

1. 	There were concerns about the executive director being a member of the standards council as in the case of Section 4 (2) (b) of the principal Act. The stakeholders propose that the provision be deleted so that the executive director is stopped from being a member of the standards council. The executive director should remain secretary as per the provisions of Section 4 (3), thereby attending the council meetings but not voting. 

	This was based on the argument that the principles of good corporate governance dictate that roles of management and the board should be clearly independent of each other, hence no individual should participate in decision making at both levels as the Executive Director of UNBS does under the Act. The practice has been adopted in many statutory bodies formed recently, including the Parliamentary Commission where the Clerk to Parliament is its secretary but not a commissioner. 

2. 	There were concerns about the expiry of the council before the term of the current council expires. Stakeholders were concerned that in order to avoid a power vacuum when the term of the previous council expires, a clause be introduced to permit the minister to appoint a council within three months of the expiry of the old council. 

3. 	Tenure of office of the director: The Bill proposes that the director shall hold office for five years and is eligible for re-appointment for two terms. The stakeholders suggest that the director should hold office for three years and be eligible for re-appointment for two terms to match the current duration of performance contracts of permanent secretaries in Government ministries.
	
4. 	Membership of the National Standards Council: The Bill proposes to reduce membership of the National Standards Council from 15 members to nine members. However, some stakeholders like KACITA propose that the current representation be maintained. 

Committee Observations

The committee observed that there is need to amend the various provisions of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act to incorporate the new developments in standardisation in the East African Community for the better management of standards in Uganda. 

In order to foster and promote the principles of good corporate governance and have roles of management separated from the role of council, it is important to move the executive director from being a member of the council. 

There is need to reduce the membership of council. The committee agreed with the proposal of reducing membership from 15 to a manageable size of nine members for the purpose of easily raising quorum for council meetings and ultimately, quickening decision making. 

There is need to amend quorum required for the council meetings as a consequential amendment arising out of reducing the number of council members. 

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson. Honourable members, the report has been signed by more than the required one third. You are free to make your contributions. Hon. Amuriat, you have three minutes. 

3.50
MR AMURIAT PATRICK (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the committee for this short report. I just have a question to the committee. In their observation on page 3, the committee actually feels that the size of membership should be reduced from 15 to what they call a manageable size of nine members. 

My question is based on the concern brought forward by KACITA

I believe KACITA is one of the organisations that are stakeholders in UNBS. My suspicion is that they brought their objection because there was a feeling that some stakeholders would actually be shut out of participation in the council. I do not know why the committee chooses to reduce the membership from 15 to nine. The reason they give, Madam Speaker, is that it is cumbersome to handle a large committee, it is not easy to raise quorum and, therefore, decision making will be delayed and yet under 5.4, they actually offer a solution to this. They talk about reducing quorum to a size that can be achieved. 

I thought that in the spirit of bringing together all stakeholders, involving all stakeholders, it would have been prudent to maintain the number. I know that from the parent Act, that number was derived out of some reason and the reason being having full representation of all the stakeholders. By reducing the number, you are cutting out some of the stakeholders and I think that is being unreasonable. 

I would like to agree with the committee, Madam Speaker, when they say maybe the matters of quorum can be adjusted so that whenever a smaller number than what was anticipated in the parent Act is realised, meetings can go on. But reducing the number from 15 to nine, which is a whole six members, I think is unfair to the stakeholders and that is slamming the door on the faces of the other stakeholders. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.52
MR JAMES KABAJO (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On page 3 again, about the tenure of office of the director, I am really intrigued by the proposal that the director should hold office for three years and be eligible for reappointment for two terms. Point 4.3 says the Bill proposes that the director should hold office for five years and is eligible for reappointment for two terms. That is what the Bill proposes. Stakeholders however suggested that the director should hold office for three years and be eligible for reappointment for two terms. 

First of all, there are two issues that I need clarified. Does that mean in the first case of the Bill that the director can be in office for a total of 15 years? This is because he would have initially been appointed for five years and is eligible of reappointment for a further two terms. Is that the understanding? In many of the bodies we have been dealing with we have been proposing only two terms, the initial term and a further one term. So, I really need to hear from the chairman of the committee why we would have this situation whereby you would have the executive director possibly serving up to 15 years.

There is also this issue where the stakeholders want to tie the term of office to that of permanent Secretaries. I really think this should not hold. The two are different organisations and the duration of the contract of the permanent secretaries has nothing to do with the duration of contracts for executive directors. The two should be looked at separately and the organisation should be looked at independently. Ideally, the term of office of an executive director should be at least four years. Three years is too short. I would actually say the original five years which is in the Bill is the one we should go with. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

3.53
MR PETER OGWANG(NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is a simple one. Engineer Amuriat tried to talk about a membership of 15; I would like to seek clarification from the chair, who then determines the nine and whom are you going to remove from among the people you are going to cut off? Thank you. 

3.53
MR MILTON MUWUMA(NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. On page 1, they are saying that the Bill intends to, among other things, empower the minister to ban commodities and products that are detrimental to the health and safety of consumers. 

Madam Speaker, I want to applaud the committee for the report but also remind or inform the minister that there may be need for us also to review the Acts that deal with weights and measures because officers and officials from Uganda National Bureau of Standards are robbing people. You find a weighing scale picked from Luuka is brought 24 kilometres to Iganga for verification. When they reach there, they ask the owner to pay Shs 70,000 for his weighing scale to be certified or stamped for one year. A new weighing scale from a shop costs between Shs 70,000 and Shs 80,000 but merely getting an annual stamp costs the same. 

People are not treated in the same way. Somebody can come from Mbulambuti and they are charged Shs 30,000 for an annual licence or stamp. Another one comes from Buwenge and he is charged Shs 40,000. So there is no standard figure that is required for somebody to get a licence for a year. These complaints have been coming and we feel there is a problem in the law or with the enforcement officers. Therefore, reviewing these Acts will solve these problems.

Concerning reduction of the numbers, I want to agree with the proposal of bringing the numbers down to nine. Fifteen is a very big number and as the Luganda adage says, so many rats can never have good output of work and they may end up debating until the animals return home. By reducing the number to nine, this will help –(Interruption) - Hon. Lukyamuzi is wondering about the adage. It states, “Amamese amangi tegesimira bunya.” I want to appeal to the committee to reduce the numbers to nine as this will help to improve the dish. Thank you so much.

3.55
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report and refer honourable members to 4.0 on page 2. I seem to be confused when the committee states that they are excluding the executive director from the council based on the principles of good corporate governance which state that the roles of the council are independent of the role of management. I do not agree with that because I believe they complement each other and they work towards the same cause. I want to think that it matches with what is provided for on page 3, point 5.2, which states, “In order to foster and promote principles of good corporate governance and have the roles of management separated....”, not independent. That is my opinion.

On page 3, point 4.2, the committee is suggesting that we have an amendment to permit the minister to appoint a council within three months of the expiry of the old council. Why not provide for appointing well in advance of the expiry date, since it would be obvious that the council would be expiring, to avoid a vacuum and a situation where the minister, maybe out of incompetence or other unfortunate circumstances, may delay the appointment of the council? This is because it might jeopardise the performance of the organisation.

Finally,  Madam Speaker, I want to agree with the amendment on the tenure of office of the executive director. If we talk of five years and say renewal for two more terms - 15 years is rather long for an executive director. However, if you say three years and the person is allowed two more terms, that brings us to nine years. If one wishes that the five-year term stands, then maybe you can say somebody is entitled to a renewal once, but we cannot have someone entitled to 15 years. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work done. I have two points of concern. 

On page 2, let me start by supporting my colleague, hon. Opolot. When we talk about executive directors in corporate organisations, we are equating them to managing directors. Now, if you say that you remove the executive director from being a member of the national council and he becomes a mere secretary of the meeting, you are reducing him below sea level. First of all, the executive director is a representative of the board members on the ground. If we are talking about principles of good corporate governance, how do most of the- (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to ask the Minister of Sports to take a look at boards of very powerful schools in this country like Budo, Kisubi or Ntare. The headmasters of these schools are secretaries of the boards and these schools have not closed. Why can’t the executive director remain a secretary? I believe that when the ED becomes a secretary, he or she will take note of what is going on and listen very well. I thank you.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I now know why the committee came up with this observation; it is because of that reasoning. We are talking about corporate organisations not schools or how they are run and governed. When my colleague starts bringing in the headmaster and looking at the board council, he is misunderstanding the whole thing. In corporate organisations, a member who is supposed to be a secretary is a different person. An executive director is equivalent to the managing director, so by saying that he should merely attend meetings as the secretary is misleading the whole council.

Secondly, in 5.2 they are saying that in order to foster and promote the principle of good governance and have the roles of managing separated from the roles of the council- How do you separate the role of the executive director, who is the day-to-day permanent person, from that of the council? It becomes very funny. I think my colleagues, members of the committee, need to observe this very seriously.

Madam Speaker, I have heard people talking about reducing the number in 5.3. Honourable members, the number 15 or nine is not guess work. Corporate organisations are sometimes asked to compose a number according to the demands or the different interests that are going to be reflected. So you cannot simply come and say, since 15 is big I think we should reduce it. It is not a matter of reducing. How did we come up with nine or 15? That is what we should be debating. I thank you very much.

4.03
MRS SLYVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for bringing this amendment Bill and also the committee for the good report. I support that this Bill be passed into law.

Madam Speaker, one of the objectives of the Bill is to empower the minister to ban commodities and products that are detrimental to the health and safety of consumers. This Bill comes at a time when the market is flooded with a number of commodities that are harmful to consumers, things like counterfeit milk, counterfeit pampers, mineral water products which are not approved by UNBS and which are fake. So, I want to support the passing of this Bill into law to empower the Minister to be able to confiscate and to ban those commodities. However, I had also proposed that Parliament also passes the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill. These Bills need to move hand in hand if we are to ban such commodities from the market. Thank you.

4.05
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the committee report but before I do this, I want to correct the past impression that was created by the honourable Dr Bitekyerezo. 

Madam Speaker, I joined Parliament having come from an education background where I was a secretary to the board of governors as a head teacher. Actually, the head teacher is the technical advisor to the board and therefore, he acts as the secretary and the executive director. I therefore also support the point that the executive secretary should be a member of the board because he is the technical person who must have a say. Leaving him out would jeopardise the running of the corporation.

Secondly, I want to talk about weights. We appreciate that UNBS is doing good work, taking into account that I come from a fishing community and we use weights in our day-to-day activities. However, it is unfortunate that when these people come to the islands, they pick our weights and take them as far as Jinja. This has become a problem to the fishing community. Also, sometimes those that are certified are rejected by people because in the end, they cheat our people by between half a kilogramme and a kilogramme. Therefore, I call upon the Minister to bring these people to book because sometimes they simply stamp weights without rectifying the problem.

Madam Speaker, I also want to comment on the committee report. Somewhere they mentioned that we should reduce the numbers. I will still give the example of schools. When we are creating school boards, different people come from different bodies - parents choose three, the foundation body brings two and the old students select one and this forms the board. So, I agree that we should have 15 members because these people come from different organisations which must be represented to have their interests catered for on the board. Thank you.

4.07
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the Minister for bringing this Bill and the committee for the good work done. I rise to support the motion but I would like to request that we examine the Bill in view of its objectives and the work we did yesterday. 

Looking at page 1, objective 2.1 of the Bill says, “To harmonise the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act with regional and international instruments.” Yesterday, while discussing the proposed Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill, the Minister made a proposal that the UNBS should administer the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill and that this would certainly impact on their capacity and mandate. The House examined this and recommended that the Minister should harmonise her view with the committee’s recommendations. This is because the committee had proposed that this mandate should be given to the National Registration Services Bureau. The Minister conceded and requested for three months to go back and bring the Bill back to the House.  

Looking at page 3, item 5.1, the committee examined this Bill on our behalf and  now they are observing that there is need to amend the various provisions of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act to incorporate the new developments in standardisation in the East African Community. My understanding is that the East African Community has gone ahead to establish standards that must apply within the region. When I look at the proposed amendments as examined by the committee, I do not see anywhere where the new developments in standardisation in the East African Community have been captured within this Bill. So, I want to be very sure that we are not contradicting the East African Community laws and that the Minister’s commitment yesterday applies. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Minister whether we are able to proceed with this Bill, examine and pass it without clearing UNBS’s role under the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill. Also, are we able to proceed with it without being sure that we are not contradicting the standardisation laws in the East African Community? I need those issues clarified. Thank you.

4.11
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee members for their effort. I wish to comment on point 4.4, concerning the tenure of office. I feel that in this situation, we should encourage the empowering of people. Therefore, I submit that we should reduce the 15 years to 10 years because in this process, you will find that as people become members, others can be empowered.

On a similar note, still on point 4.4, I feel that the committee is very unfair in bringing up the issue that KACITA’s proposal was different and therefore they rejected it. In most cases, these communities are the people we work with; if they have a proposal that you maintain the number, I am sure they have a reason for that. I do not know why we should not think that it should be a give and take relationship. So, KACITA’s issue should be put into consideration if indeed the ministry and the members work for the traders. 

Madam Speaker, you will find that much as we are legislating about the Uganda National Bureau of Standards, we seek that the Minister and the committee put an element of maybe people stationed in regional offices in the Bill. Most traders get surprised; they find people intercepting their goods on the highway or in any shop. So we should ensure that the Bill covers how the standards bureau should operate.

Lastly, recently we read in the press that Uganda had 400 fake body creams. I do not know how this Bill is going to address such issues because that was for creams alone but as hon. Ssinabulya said, you may find many things flooding the Ugandan market in the name of free trade and yet some of them are fake. So, we should support this Bill but it should include tight measures to ensure that UNBS operates thoroughly. Thank you.

4.14
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for the work. However, I have some comments to make. I do not know how a trader in Bufumbira East Constituency can know if this is the standard or not. I do not know whether the ministry has a programme to gazette those standards that are required. I keep wondering how officers impound commodities from the shops yet they were imported. Where do these commodities pass if we have officers at the borders? 

What are we looking at in standards; are we looking at the  quantity in standards or the quality in standards? We have no gazetting of the goods that are tradable and the requirements for standard goods. When we go to shops, we should know whether what we are buying is standard or not and we can even report to the bureau because we would know that what we bought is not standard. 

Madam Speaker, on the executive director, the committee has mixed up issues; on page 3 they are talking about the director in 4.2 and 4.1 they are talking about a director – they need to distinguish here. Which director are you talking about; is it the executive director mentioned in 4.1? Please clarify on that. 

Madam Speaker, it is a governance practice that when you are an executive director, you become a member of the board and you are also an official person. The two terms is too much; to say that he will hold the office for five years and be eligible for reappointment for two more terms is too much. He can be reappointed only for one more term. 

Matching the appointment with that of the PS is irregular because they have different appointment authorities. The PS is appointed by the President while the board is appointed by the Minister. So we should even allow the board to appoint the executive director and not the minister; the minister will delegate that function to the board, so the board would be doing what the minister wants. Thank you very much. 

4.16
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chair of the committee and his members for this report. However, I have some concerns. 

I want to support, first of all, the issue of separating the responsibilities of the executive director and the National Standards Council. The ED cannot be a decision maker at a body that supervises their work. So, he can only be there as secretary but he cannot participate at that body that supervises him. So I thank the committee for this recommendation and I appeal to the House to uphold this recommendation in the spirit of good governance. 

Secondly, on the expiry of the term of the current serving council of the 15 members, I believe this council is full of members picked from various bodies. We are not privy to the current membership but the 15 persons there definitely represent some bodies. Which ones are we going to remove in order to retain nine? The committee has to inform the House on how the 15 were picked and which stakeholder bodies they represent and the proposed nine members and which bodies they represent. 

For the purpose of institutional memory, I request that the minister should appoint some members out of those 15 to be among the nine. Upon the expiry of membership of some members, some members should be reappointed into the council for institutional memory because not all of them expire at the same time and it’s not good to have a totally new council with no institutional memory. Once more, I want to thank the members of the committee and beg Members that on the issue of governance, we really need to support the reasons given here. I thank you. 

4.20
MR AMOS LUGOLOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, I thank you. Under clause 13(24)(c), the power of the minister to ban commodities, products and processes, my proposal is to give the council responsibility to take on such decisions. I make this proposal because the lives of our people are at stake in the hands of a long bureaucracy; first, management has to take a decision then refer their decision to the council and ultimately to the minister. By that time if the commodity is dangerous, we would have lost a number of people. This being a technical exercise, I do not see the need to have the minister involved in taking decisions in banning these dangerous commodities. This should squarely lay on the management and the council. 

My second submission is on the idea of reducing the board from 15 to nine. I want to go by that proposal because I know the budget for this bureau; they survive on a very lean budget. To burden them with an oversized board would be detrimental to their operations. In fact, I would even move further to suggest that we reduce the board to about seven because their budget is very lean and we cannot afford to overload them with an oversized board. It is very important that we look at that critically. However, if we cannot reduce to seven, then let us maintain nine. 

My third observation is about the modern principles of good governance. Modern principles of good governance demand that we separate management from the policy making organs of these corporate bodies. Any school you go to that teaches corporate governance will tell you that that is the modern practice. The management is accountable to the board, therefore you cannot have the management as part of the board; that is total conflict of interest. Who will check the management when they go wrong? It is the board. So if you make the management members part of the council, then there is conflict of interest. So, for the smooth management of the bureau, I strongly agree that the proposal made by the committee be adopted. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.23
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my capacity as Shadow Minister of Environment, I want to commend the words of environmental wisdom exhibited by hon. Bakkabulindi during his presentation. I wish he made that contribution from the Opposition side. 

There are very important issues that I would like to raise here which equally impact on the points raised by hon. Magyezi. While we are praising the committee and the ministry for having found it necessary to amend the standing law, there are fundamental issues that need attention before we pass this amendment. I am not saying that it should not be passed, but you may have to reconsider whether it is appropriate to pass it now in view of what I am going to say. 

The issue raised by hon. Magyezi, for example, should not be left hanging. As we aspire to pass this Bill, we also have in the pipeline the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill which equally impacts on the quality of this Bill we are about to pass. The two are inter-related. As if that is not enough, we also have in the offing the biosafety technological Bill, which is best known as the GMOs Bill. I have been hearing people moved by the proposal that you narrow down the board. That committee is supposed to comprise of experts or some technocrats who will assist the bureau to understand the issues regarding quality and quantity. You need people who are knowledgeable enough, with capacity to know the effects of GMO foods in terms of analysis. 

I would like to advise myself and this honourable House to think twice before rushing into passing this Bill when in the offing we have two fundamental environmentally related Bills – the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Bill and the biosafety technologies Bill which are very important Bills in as far as the environmental impact of what we are trying to pass is concerned. 

In regard to the work which is going to be done by the committee, Madam Speaker, I am one of the people who has always been struggling to ensure that the bureau improves. The bureau will not improve if it is not mandated to increase the number of experts present on the committee to carry out effective analysis in terms of roles. As we speak now, I am worried about the mushrooming water manufacturing plants in Kampala – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the shadow minister.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am worried and yet, Madam Speaker, Uganda has ratified a number of environmentally related protocols where we have obligations to act as a country and a partner. So we should think twice before we decide on this Bill. 

Finally, in so far as the role of the bureau is concerned, in Uganda we have a very big problem. Most of what is produced locally in terms of industrialisation does not qualify to go to the international market. We need to strengthen the status quo of the bureau and council to be able to match with the international standards required in the markets we are pursuing. I thank you very much.      

4.28
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): I thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. 

I have a concern on 4.2 where the stakeholders were concerned that because of a power vacuum, the minister should be allowed to appoint members three months before the expiry of the serving council. I have a concern because once you appoint somebody, that means that the work commences. I propose that instead of saying that the minister appoints, the minister should just nominate the members for appointment. Look at our example here as politicians; we are elected by the voters and that election means that we are nominated for the appointment that will be confirmed after the expiry of, for example, the current Parliament. So, my proposal is that these council members must be nominated by the minister to cater for the power vacuum.

Another concern is on 5.2 where they are saying that the ED should not be part of the council. I entirely agree with the committee because if you put the ED again as part of the council, this is not healthy for the board simply because there will be interferences here and there. Using our example, Madam Speaker, you preside over this Parliament but again you do not turn around and also become a voter when we are voting.  I think this is a very good practice and a practical example. I really ask honourable Members of Parliament that let the ED remain out of the council because you cannot be the one heading the council and then you again turn around and become a voter. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.30
MR PHILLIP WAFULA-OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have issues on 2.7, which empowers the minister to ban commodities. I think that power should be given to the board or council. We have had an experience before where kaveera were banned in this country and the minister was here fighting the ban. So, if it just an individual who is going to oppose what has been decided, it is better that we give the power to the board or to the council.

I was recently horrified to read that this country has got companies making water for our consumption and they are not certified or approved and the minister is incapable of closing these factories. I wonder whether the minister does not have the power to do that, to let us consume bad or dangerous water. I think that is the more reason that we should give this to the council.  

On the creams, there are a lot of creams killing our ladies and yet we can do nothing about them. We let them come into the country but we cannot ban them. We lament about it and we put it in newspapers. I think it is wrong.

On the question of the ED being a member of the council, I think that he should not be. I have a fairly good and long experience in boardrooms. You can have a very effective ED who is not a member of the board or the council but he works. More so, we have a problem here; if you have the board or the council and ED appointed by the minister, sometimes they tend to be big headed. If that ED is a cadre or a relative of the minister, which is very normal and is the case these days, he will be big headed and he will not work. So, I would like to think that it is better for us to separate the ED from the council and he will obey the orders of the council. 

On the question of the terms, definitely we cannot give somebody 15 years in an organisation, even 10 is too much. I would be inclined to give four-year terms and two terms only, making it eight years. If you are heading an organisation and you do not do much, even Government by the way, if you do not do much in eight or 10 years, the other years you are just existing and you are not effective. The example in our country is very clear. 

On the issue of members of council being 15, I think the number is too large. Remember that these people are paid and they take money. The issue of quorum is also difficult when there are very many members. The quorum here would be eight people and that is difficult sometimes to get. Nine is cheaper and more effective. So I would go for nine members of council. Thank you very much.

4.34
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for having done a wonderful job. 

I would like to insist that the executive director should be part of the board. The report is not clear that if he is a member of the board then he should only play the role that some of my colleagues have said - it is either advisory or act as a conduit to resolutions that the board has made. That is what good practice is all about; there needs to be a connection between the implementers and the decision makers. This executive director who represents the executive arm on the board normally acts as that conduit. So, Madam Speaker, he should not be given a voting right, which the report does not make very clear, but he should sit and listen to the deliberations and understand the spirit in which these decisions are made. It is very important for the head of the technical arm to be present.  

On the issue of numbers, again this report is wanting because it has not gone on to tell us, like some of my colleagues have said, who these 15 people are representing. I do not agree with hon. Wafula when he says it is okay to have nine. What is our basis to say nine or seven? What is our basis? These 15 in the previous Act, to the best of my memory, represent various stakeholders. We cannot sit here without having that information and deliberate and pass a ruling that let it be nine. Which organisations are we asking to leave out and which ones are we accepting to be included? All these are stakeholders. Doing business is not one; it is a chain. If you cut off one bit, the whole thing stops. 

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the concerns that some members have raised. We are here, we pass these laws - Somebody mentioned kaveera and hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, the man, talked of the environment. We resolved here that a certain gauge of kaveera shall not be allowed in this country because they are not recyclable. However, even today, goods coming in from India, from China, from Egypt such as bed sheets, shirts and dresses are wrapped in that gauge of kaveera and that kaveera is still entering Uganda. The UNBS does not have the capacity to stop it. So, while we deliberate and make these laws, we must also empower these agencies to enforce these laws because they are good, the intention is good but you are not equipping and arming the executing- (Interruption)  

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: The information I would like to give to the honourable Member from Tororo is that what he is talking about has already been bought by this Parliament. Parliament passed a resolution some years back banning the kaveera he is talking about. I am surprised that up to now this Government has not implemented the resolution.

MR TANNA: Madam Speaker, while the intent of the amendment of the Bill is extremely good, to the minister that is present there, my prayer is that some of these issues need to be taken extremely seriously. 

Our colleagues have talked of weights and measures. Weights and measures are one aspect but when we go to quality of food, recently we found meat of other animals being sold as beef- (Interjections) – Yes, it was there in the papers. So, do we have the capacity, does UNBS have the capacity to regulate, for example, the quality of tyres that are entering this country? So, while we create these laws, are we able to enforce them? My plea to this House is that we are in the budgeting process and in that process we must empower UNBS if we are to protect our population. Thank you.

4.39
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairman for the report. 

In any country, a national bureau of standards is very important because it regulates what comes to the market, because whatever comes to the market has got an effect on our population. However, in Uganda, we find substandard items entering the market. Even the water we are drinking has got lead in it and the Uganda National Bureau of Standards has not been able to monitor and identify some of the minerals in the water we drink. 

The other time I stood on the Floor of Parliament and talked of vehicles coming into this country. This country has become an offloading country where we get substandard vehicles coming in even with radiation. Uganda National Bureau of Standards does not even have the capacity to monitor and check whether these vehicles have items that are dangerous to our people. There are vehicles entering here which are more than 10, 15,  and 20 years old. You cannot talk of East African standards. The Kenyans cannot allow any vehicles coming in which are more than five years old. 

We have talked of the problems where the Uganda National Bureau of Standards has not helped this country, even the simple traders in the countryside, for example the weights. You buy one kilo of sugar but you are buying 800 grams, not even a kilo, and Uganda National Bureau of Standards are quarrelling here and there. 

I want to agree with the committee’s recommendation that the executive director should not be a member of the board - he can only be a secretary - so that the board can monitor and supervise him. They should be able to reprimand the executive director. He should not be a member of the board.

Secondly, 15 members of the board; why? They cannot even raise the quorum and that is why they have been having problems and KACITA has been crying that the members of the board cannot sit. You cannot raise 15 members to make quorum. I agree with the committee that nine members are enough. 

We should give power to the board to take decisions and ban, for example, a substandard item which comes on our market. You do not have to wait for the minister - the minister will one time quarrel with them here and they will say the minister has done something wrong when she has taken a decision. But if a decision is taken by the board, then there is nobody who is going to point fingers at the minister. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.43
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this report. If there are any victims of counterfeit products or fake products, it is the rural areas. Right now as we are here, people are selling counterfeit products in rural areas freely and nobody is minding about them. 

When you look at objective 2.6 - empowering the director to suspend and seize premises - you have tried to do something but it is not strong. Why do we have to seize and close when we have licensed? You must have minimum standards for allowing any company to open and run its businesses. The moment these people get licences, that is where we get problems. 

When you look at the section 2.7 - empowering the minister - let us first see where UNBS and any other relevant bodies can have coherence between themselves before a licence is given out. But the moment someone gets a licence! I want to assure you, Members of Parliament, that people owning the companies that produce these fake items are very strong in the system. So, once you try to close them down, they will call the minister. Let me give you a situation that occurred in Kawempe. There was somebody selling fake oil at some petrol station. When UNBS closed that petrol station, some people came in with pistols, opened the store and business went on normally. So, UNBS was forced to raise some of us, Members, to help it solve this problem.

Lastly, may I get to know more about the issue of these 15 members; how did you arrive at them? When you suggest to reduce on the numbers, there must be reasons. Are they redundant or is there some other reason? I am saying this because  we should actually increase on this number. These are jobs for Ugandans. Why can’t you provide something to say, “not less than or not more than”. 

When you just tell us that KACITA said 15 is enough yet you are saying they should be nine, that is not a justification. What are the reasons for telling us to reduce or increase on this number? Even two members can be better than those 15 but then you just tell us that we just reduce and KACITA says we maintain 15. I think that Government should be able to have a UNBS officer at every district of Uganda. Those are some of the benefits of having a district status in your area. Kalungu one time might become the capital city of Uganda yet my people keep consuming fake goods.

Madam Speaker, before I take leave of the Floor, let the committee tell us – (Interruptions)

MR EKUMA: Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for giving way. When you go to some of the shops selling especially vehicle spare parts, you will find the genuine spare parts labelled while the non-genuine ones are also labelled. So, Uganda National Bureau of Standards currently clears both these categories of goods. Both the non-genuine and genuine spare parts are all on sale and dealers in both pay taxes. After passing this Bill, Uganda National Bureau of Standards should reconsider their position on this; otherwise, why should we have both goods accepted into the same market? That is the information I want to provide. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, let me thank the honourable member for that information. As you know, all those are problems affecting us so, we need to borrow a leaf from Kenya. In Kenya, one cannot move Icon, which is a drug used to spray mosquitoes, out of that country because their system is organised. There is the issue of power vacuum. Whenever you create a power vacuum, you create problems –(Member timed out)

4.47
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the first place, to the honourable member, the former head teacher who talked about a head teacher being a member of the board, you must know that a head teacher is a paid up person. They are also the technical persons who guide members of the board. In that regard, head teachers are just ex-officios and not members to those school boards of management. As a former head teacher, you should have been able to guide us better. I was surprised to hear you give the opinion that the executive director should be a member of the board – (Interjections) – Yes, that was just an opinion but that is all poor governance because there should be checks and balances. That is my view. I also would like to say that in 5 (1) –(Interruptions)

MR OKEYOH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank my colleague for actually misunderstanding me by misrepresenting what I said clearly. I said that a head teacher usually is the technical advisor to the board; I was very clear on that. So, when my colleague says that as a former head teacher I should have known this better, in fact I know that a head teacher is just a technical advisor to the board and not a member, so they do not vote. As a former substantive head teacher, I also played that role very well. So, let me inform my colleague that she is misrepresenting what I said and so misinforming this House too. Thank you.

MS AOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the honourable colleague, unless my ears did not get you right, what I heard you say was that the head teacher is usually a member of the board to which I said no. I hereby apologise for not getting that right –(Interruptions)

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the honourable colleague for giving way. I notice that there is some sort of misunderstanding on this situation. A head teacher is not supposed to be a member of the board in a school where they teach but they can be a member of the board in another school.

MS AOL: That is absolutely right. Madam Speaker, now allow me to comment on clause 5 (1) where it is said that there is need to amend the various provisions of the Uganda National Bureau of Standards Act to incorporate the new developments in standardizing goods within the East African Community.  Yes, that is very important but we must know that at the moment there are a lot of problems. It could be due to corruption, which is also very rampant –(Member timed out_)

4.52
MS FEMIAR WADADA (FDC, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a question. Who funds Uganda National Bureau of Standards? I am asking this because at one time while in a meeting of the Committee on Health, officials of National Drugs Authority revealed that they are not funded by anybody, that they get their funds from their clients. So, if Uganda National Bureau of Standards is also funded by their clients, then we have a problem. That means it is the clients who are their bosses. That could be the reason we have fake commodities on the market. I thank you.

4.53
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (INDEPENDENT, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two brief observations to make on the report. I appreciate the work of the committee. 

On page 3, as members have actually observed, the committee pointed out the fact that there is need to make amendments that are various but not particular on the existing UNBS Act. 
Madam Speaker, I do not know whether this statement is in the future or the present continuous tense. I am saying this because it makes me imagine this report was done in haste. I would have expected the committee to clearly articulate the requisite amendments so that we can bring this amended Act into consonance with the other regional players. We are going to turn the House into –  Yes, our duty is to make laws and amend the existing laws but if we have a chance to amend a  law, why would we simply make a comment on it and simply say, “there is need”?

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the committee, and the minister in particular, whether they should not interest themselves in this particular statement in bullet 5.1 on page 3 because it opens a door for us to even do a better job. If it has no meaning, then we better discard it, but if it has a meaning then I appreciate it and I would rather say that the committee did not complete the job. The job would be have been done better if they were very particular on the kind of amendments they want to see made because we cannot see the same Act come back next year for further amendments. (Interruption) 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to appreciate those concerns from colleagues, particularly the ones made by my colleague holding the Floor. I do not know whether we have the Bill with us, because if you look at that report, I only ended at reading what we observed. When we go to committee stage, we shall be proposing our amendments, which are very clearly covered in the report as well, but if you have the Bill you would interest yourself in clause 8. 

I am just forced to give this information because I have heard this come out severally from members. You could interest yourself in clause 8 in the main Bill. Even in our reports, we do propose that we adopt the proposed amendments in the Bill. Clause 8 talks about adopting the East African Community Standardisation Quality Assurance Metrology and Testing Act once passed into law, and we shall propagate those as Ugandan standards. So, I hope that covers all the concerns which were talked about in our observations and I hope when we get there, everything will be set moving. 

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. You have raised a very serious matter which we talked about earlier and the chairperson is trying to tell us that under clause 8, this is taken care of. However, in 5.1, the statement of the committee is very clear; the committee says there is need to amend the various provisions of this Act to take into account the standardisation in the East African Community. 

Madam Speaker, the purpose of having UNBS is to ensure that the commodities produced in Uganda fit international standards. It is to ensure that we actually produce goods that are worth the East African Community and beyond. We do not want to come out with a law which does not actually ensure this. So, we need really not only to say there is a statement under clause 8, but I think we should do what the committee here has advised, that we look at the various provisions of the Act and we ensure that standardisation in Uganda conforms to standardisation not only in the East African Community but also internationally. Really, we must come out with this and rest assured. Thank you. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, that was advice to the committee. They should go back with the minister and look at this possibility to save Parliament time in trying to amend and amend. 

Lastly, on page 6, the committee makes provision for conditions that would compel a member of council to vacate office. I have no problem with the (a), (b), (c) but I find (d) redundant. I do not know whether it is some form of obsession with power on the part of some people. It says, “is otherwise unable or unfit”. Who determines “otherwise unable or unfit”? It is redundant, subjective and can be easily abused by people who love their power and especially love throwing it around other people’s faces. I think part (d) is very redundant and I think it is subject to abuse. I do not know what the chairman thinks of part (d) but I do not think we need to pass redundant clauses in this Bill. Madam Speaker, I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have almost used up the time allotted for this and we need to go to committee stage. So, other members will speak during committee stage. 

Honourable minister, I want you to take an interest in the processes for clearance or certifying of goods. I have one of my voters who has been trying to get certification for juice and when I saw her on Women’s Day, I asked her whether she had got the licence. She said, “I have given up. I have come here to show you that I am tired.” She said she gone 25 times and they would tell her,  “do this, pay this amount of money”. I think your policy should be enabling people to do work and business rather than constraining them. I wish you could take an interest in them. I do not know whether the chairperson wants to respond first or the minister. Are there areas you want to respond to, honourable minister?

5.01
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES  (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I would like to thank you very much for your contributions. I have realised that there is actually a need to have a stronger and amended Bill according to the presentations you are making on this law. 

On why the committee is reduced to nine, first of all we looked at the practicability. If the numbers are big, then the quorum is very low and yet the quorum allows seven persons in a meeting in a session. Affordability is another issue. As you may recall, here in Parliament we have been advised to reduce on public expenditure. Another is attendance. 

This is a specialised body. Allow me, Madam Speaker, to mention the members of the council and their titles. The chairperson is Dr William Ssali who is a food scientist and consultant; Hajati Sarah Lubega is a lawyer and she also represents the entrepreneurs in this country; Prof. Eriab Lugujjo is an electrical engineer; Prof. Adome odoi is a pharmacist; Mr Dison Okumu is a planner and economist; Mr Sam Ssenkungu is an engineer and an official from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Angela Rwabushomize is a policy analyst and represents the Ministry of Finance; Prof. Kikafunde Joyce is a food nutritionist; Dr Musaazi Moses is an innovator and a scientist in appropriate technology; and then we have the secretary who is an ex-officio, Dr Ben Manyindo – (Interruption)

MR CHEMASWET: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the minister is this; you know, when people are talking about numbers and representation within the same board, they are really sceptical in terms of representation of employment in Uganda. Some communities are more represented than others on some of these boards and that is why when people begin talking about numbers and reducing or increasing them, they think that if they increase, their communities will be represented on those boards. 

We have seen some boards executing business in their local language and this is very serious. If you revisit your list, have you seen any other person with the name “Kip”? (Laughter) This is very serious, by the way.

When it comes to the question of committee consultation, I have never seen it mentioned in a committee report that the people of Mbale Business Association or those of Busoga were consulted. We are only talking of KACITA and some other business organisations within Kampala. Have we talked about business associations at Nimule border, Malaba, Busia, Katuna and all the others? This is very serious. Let us revisit the question of appointment of the board members and emphasise that they should reflect the communities of Uganda. We should appoint very well.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the minister is responding to the issues raised in the debate.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, thank you very much. I have noted the observation but I found the Council in existence and I just reinstated it according to the recommendations of Cabinet. (Mr Katuramu rose_)

The next point is weights and measures -

THE SPEAKER: It seems hon. Katuramu has a burning issue.

MR KATURAMU: Among the people the minister has mentioned, I have heard Prof. Joyce Kikafunda. Prof. Kikafunda is a renowned educationist and food nutritionist in Makerere University. According to me, as a member on the Appointments Committee of Parliament, she is designated to be our Ugandan Commissioner in the UK. May I know how she will perform when she is in London and doesn’t it really have a big cost implication on the ministry and the board?

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Prof. Kikafunda was appointed recently and she has not moved to her station. So, we have a vacancy there. We have another vacancy created by Prof. Lugujjo who has become a principal in Ndejje. There are two vacancies now.

As far as weights and measures are concerned, we have an archaic law of 1963, which we intend to amend. However, this year, we were given only 18 Bills. We are going to amend it next year.

Regarding the exclusion of an Executive Director from the board, the ED is not excluded; he is actually an ex-officio member. He is a secretary but the roles must also be separated because there is a conflict of interest. If this ED is a full member of the council and yet, these people are supposed to take decisions on management, how are they going to manage this gentleman or lady who is also a full member? 

There was another point raised that members of the council should be appointed after the expiry of the old council. But we appoint that person within three months of expiry. 

One honourable member asked a question about anti-counterfeiting and UNBS. When we were looking at the Anti-counterfeiting Bill, we considered intellectual properties, trademarks and copy rights. When we are looking at UNBS, we are looking at the standards of safety. So, these are quite different.

Another issue is on the environment; “Kaveera”. This issue is not under UNBS. Actually, it is under NEMA. However, UNBS could be a stakeholder and could be consulted.

Someone talked about meat on the market. This is a public health and safety issue under Ministry of Health and Local Government but it is still Government.

About salaries and who pays UNBS; it is paid by Government through subvention, through Ministry of Trade but the council is paid by the allowances that are accrued from the Non Tax Revenues.

Madam Speaker, could I ask my chairperson to respond to some of the issues? Thank you very much.

5.20
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr John Mulimba): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. First of all, I would like to thank honourable colleagues –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, why don’t you allow the chairperson to respond?

MR MULIMBA: I would like to thank the honourable colleagues who have given their well-thought out opinions.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, I do not know what is bothering these two Members; hon. Mutyabule and hon. Ssebagala.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to get clarification from the minister. Does she mean to say that she supports the idea that the ED should be part of the board? That is what I want to find out from her because when she was presenting, she said the ED should be part - how is he or she going to implement whatever is decided upon?

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, allow me on your behalf, to remind the minister of what you have asked her because your voters will ask you the same question. You posed a question to the minister and she has not answered it. So, on your behalf, I am asking it again. [Hon. Members: “Which one?”]

THE SPEAKER: The one about the length and process of certification by UNBS. Thank you for taking care of Kamuli.

MS KYAMBADDE: I apologise, Madam Speaker, for that omission. By stating that the ED is a member, I meant an ex-officio member and he is a secretary. About that issue, it is a challenge that we are facing and we are trying to reorganise our system with the UNBS to ensure that we roll out to the region and we have already rolled out to Luweero and another – we have created three offices in the region.

Secondly, we are trying to simplify the documentation. When you look at the standards, they are very complicated. So, we are also looking at simplification of the documents. 

The budget is also another limit but fortunately, the honourable members have observed that we actually have a problem in the UNBS and they will support its budget. (Laughter) I will wind up after the committee chair.

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I once again want to thank the honourable colleagues for the several observations they have put forward. I will start by answering the one on the rationale the committee used in determining nine, not 15 or seven members. I would like Members to address themselves to section 4 of the Principal Act. It outlines what constitutes the standards council. 

In this provision, the areas of speciality – because the Members’ concern was that we should not limit numbers because we shall be closing out some specialisations. The areas of speciality in this provision are only two – industry and commerce. If you look at the others; provision 2(b) talked about a director but in the report - and in the coming amendment – we recommended that the director be removed from being among the council members. If you looked at (c), it talks about six ex-officio members; (d) talks of seven people appointed by the minister. 

So, for us, we wanted to concentrate on the technical bits and that is why we said that if we have a chairperson, a director who is an ex-officio and two other ex-officio members plus the six - that would make nine members. So, that is the rationale we used for arriving at nine. 

The other one, which is obvious – I think we are all struggling to see that we reduce public expenditure in all the agencies and corporations. So, to have 15 members – and also to look at the practical aspect – when we interacted with members of the council who are currently in office, we were told that from the time they were appointed, never at any one time have they had all the members turning up for a council meeting. They have often had between seven and nine members. And we also based on that to say that since the number nine is practical, let us get down to that one. 

The other is about quorum - because the bar had been raised to seven. We had 15 council members but not everyone would turn up for even a single meeting. So, having a total of nine would be reasonable.

The other question was about –(Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_)– can I proceed then we shall – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, allow the committee chair to wind up. You will ask questions later during the committee stage.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi raised a number of issues, which have effects on the environment. He also talked about a number of legislations but I think he ended up mixing counterfeits and standards. He ended up mixing up a counterfeit and a substandard good. But I want to make it categorically clear that not all counterfeits are substandard and not all substandard items are counterfeits. Yesterday, we laid a committee report on this Floor – maybe, that time, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi was out of Parliament – and the committee’s proposals were very clear; we want a very clear law to deal with counterfeit products. 

Counterfeits apply to intellectual property, not to quality. The issues of quality for safety and standards fall under the Uganda National Bureau of Standards. I think you had better get it clearly and distinctly because the two do not mean the same thing.

The other question was about why we chose to recommend that the minister should appoint within three months before the expiry. “Within three months” means that on any date, three months to the expiry, the minister can appoint. The justification was to deal with a vacuum which may be created. Somebody said that when you appoint them, it means they assume office immediately. No, there is a process of assumption of office; the minister will appoint and then these people will be sworn in before being commissioned. So, in order to take care of the vacuum, which would exist if we waited until the expiry of the term of office – we want the appointment to be within three months and then thereafter, this new council would be promulgated. (Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi rose_) I thought I would first finish with this before you come on board. Okay, let me take it.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I think the committee chairperson should have bothered to understand “the Man.” I put across a question, asking if he was aware that the significance of this Bill under UNBS is bound to be confused if we rushed into passing those amendments without knowing what action has been taken about certain defects, which will affect both the Biosafety Technology Bill as well as the Anti-Counterfeit Goods Act. 

I expected you to have briefed this House over what is bound to happen in regard to the two Bills. But you are now meandering around as if –(Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Let the committee chair conclude. Otherwise, we shall not end this.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, with due respect to my senior colleague, I think the line between who is confused is about to be drawn because, like I said, I have clearly put a demarcation between a counterfeit good and a substandard one. But about whether there is another Bill, which is coming and whether it will affect this – that is now debating in anticipation. Should we be held aback from debating this Bill until the other comes?  I think that is now – well, I will leave that to rest.

I will move on to the issue of separating management from the board. A number of arguments have been fronted here but during the review of this Bill, we observed that there must be a clear demarcation between the roles of management and the board because one of them supervises the other. And actually, even in the amendment, we are proposing that the minister appoints the director with the council’s approval. 

Now, just look at that scenario. If you want the council to approve the director and yet the director is also part of the council, aren’t you bound to have a conflict of interest? So, we took care to avoid a conflict of interest and also, like we gave an example, we wanted to adopt good corporate governance practices. And in that regard, we gave a clear example of the Parliamentary Commission, where we have the Clerk to Parliament being a secretary but not a commissioner. 

I was actually surprised when hon. Bakkabulindi was talking about having the executive director being part of the council and yet he is very well aware that in the Act governing universities and other tertiary institutions, this has been made very distinct. And this is actually part of good corporate governance practice.

Therefore, I want Members to appreciate that if you want the council to have a stake in the appointment of the executive director of an agency like UNBS, whom you also want to be part of the council, then you are going to hit a snag –(Interruption)

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for this very good report. I was intrigued by your justification for having the secretary as the executive director. I agree entirely with the argument that the executive director should not be a member of the board; they should be ex-officio. 

Where I have a problem is in designating the executive director as secretary. I have heard you repeatedly talk about principles of good cooperate governance. I am a certified trainer in cooperate governance and I know that for a good cooperate entity to be managed well, there should be a proper professional secretary. Of course, an executive director can be a very professional secretary, but combining the two roles may bring inefficiency. 

My assumption is that this body is a very busy body with a lot of work. It takes decisions, which are routine and many decisions, which have to be managed by a competent person communicated appropriately and in the proper manner. 

I want you to clarify to me whether you thought about the idea of creating a separate office for a secretary to council together with the executive director. 

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, hon. minister. It is good you have said that this is your area of specialisation. I think the secretary we are referring to here is not the corporation secretary; we are referring to a minute secretary. This is not the corporation secretary. It is just a minute secretary for this agency. We cannot hire out somebody on full time basis, someone just to take minutes. I hope that is clear to you. (Interruptions)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the other clarifications will be made during Committee Stage. Please, conclude. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, Members should rest their case because at Committee Stage, we are going to deal with the amendments and we have not even touched the amendments as provided for in our report. The concerns about weights and measures; the Bill is on the way, which is going to address that matter. 

On the issue of the tenure of office of the director, I agree with Members’ concerns and I regret that when we discussed at committee level, we agreed to provide for a four-year term renewable for only one more term. I do not know what our clerks did with our reports. They fundamentally changed the whole provision, but I pray that we correct the provision under 4.3 for the tenure of office to be four years and for reappointment for only one further term. We want that to be very distinct because we do not want to import the confusion in the East African Legislation which brought us a lot of confusion. We said, for only one further term. 

Hon. Magyezi raised the issues of amendments to fit within the East African Standardisation Quality Assurance, Metrology and Testing Act, 2006. We made a small remark in the Bill. In clause 8 of the Bill, it is provided that within six months after declaration of East African standards, the Bureau shall adopt the East African standards as the national standards of Uganda. 

We could not import the whole thing into this report that would have made a very bulky report. The East African Legislative Assembly has already legislated over this. The moment it is accented to, then within six months, Uganda will adopt it. So, putting it in a report here would make the report very bulky. Therefore, we provided an executive summary. When we go to the amendments, it will be taken care of because we have addressed clause 8 in the amendment to fit within the East African Act.  

There were fears expressed by Members about the capacity of UNBS to handle. We have also raised concerns before about the funding gaps. As we speak now, the capacity of UNBS is still lacking about 300 vacancies. UNBS works in partnership with other government agencies in enforcement of their mandates. Unfortunately, when you look at an agency like URA, out of the 56 border points that we have, URA is everywhere while UNBS is only in 19 of them. That probably answers why with UNBS in existence, we still have substandard goods coming into Uganda and that is why they cannot do pre-inspection and they cannot curb entry of all substandard goods. 

Therefore, I pray that Members support the amendment and when it comes to budget, please, support the raising of the budget for Ministry of Trade in order to increase capacity both in terms of technical infrastructure and human resource capacity in order to address the concerns raised by Members. 

Madam Speaker, I tried to capture all. They were quite many but I will clarify as we go on. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Hon. Members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we have an amendment for clause 3. Clause 3 is amended by inserting immediately after paragraph (c)(u) two new paragraphs, (v) and (w) as follows: “(v) to coordinate, declare and keep custody of all national standards and; (w) to do such things necessary or incidental or conducive to the objects of the bureau as maybe prescribed by an Act of Parliament.”

The justification is to give the bureau additional mandate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR MULIMBA: We propose to insert a new paragraph (a) by amending Section 4 of the Principal Act; “(a) delete paragraph (b) of Section 4(2)” The justification is the removal of the executive director as a member of the council ensures adherence to the principle of good governance that dictates that the roles of management and the board should clearly be independent. The executive director shall be the secretary to the council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, is that the only one? 

MR MULIMBA: There is another one.  (b) “Clause 4(b) substitute for //“five” with “six” in the second line of the provision.” The justification is to ensure  that the composition of the council is maintained as an odd number for voting purposes after considering removal of the executive director as a board member as amended in Clause 4(2).” (c) Insert a new paragraph (d) as follows: “Section 4(3) of the Principal Act is amended by substituting for “act as” the word “be”. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment. The director is no longer a member of the council. (d) Insert new sub-clauses after clause 4(3) as follows: 
“(4) A member of the council shall hold office in accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the instrument of appointment.”
(5)  “A member of the council shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for reappointment for only one further term.” 

The justification is to set term limits for the council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The council is three and the ED is four?

MR MULIMBA: No. The four for the ED and the council is three.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Hon. Members, I put the question that clause 4 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR MULIMBA:  Madam Chairperson, we are providing an amendment of section 5 of the Principal Act. (a) “Delete Section 5(1) of the Principal Act.2 The justification is that it is a consequential amendment.(b) Substitute Section 5(2) of the Principal Act with the following: “(2) A member of the council may resign from office in writing to the minister.” The justification is that resignation should be directed to the appointing authority. (c) Substitute Section 5(3) of the Principal Act with the following: “(3) A member of the council shall vacate office, where a member –
    a) Has, without the permission of the Chairperson -
    (i) absented himself or herself from three consecutive meetings of the council; or
    (ii) Been out of Uganda for a consecutive period of twelve    months;
    b) Is convicted of a criminal offence in respect of which a penalty of imprisonment of six months or more is imposed without the option of a fine;
    c)  Is incapacitated by mental or physical illness that renders the person incapable of performing the functions of a member  of the council;
    d) Is otherwise unable or unfit to perform the functions of his or office.” 
	The justification is to include more grounds for removal from or vacation of office. 

(d)	Insert a new sub-clause immediately after clause 5(3): “(4) The minister shall determine that a member vacates office under sub-section (3).” The justification is to provide who determines the vacation of office of a member of the council.

(e) 	Insert a new sub-clause immediately after clause 5(4): “(5) Where any member of the council dies, resigns, is removed from office under this section, the minister shall within three months and in accordance with section (4), appoint another person to replace the member, and to hold office for the remainder of the term of that member.”  The justification is to ensure that at any one time, the council is fully constituted.

MS IBI EKWAU: I thank you very much, Madam Chair. I rise on clause 3 (d), sub-clause 4 – the insertion of a new sub-clause. “The minister shall determine that a member vacates office under sub-section (3).” I am of the view that we use the word “observe” other than “Determine.” Otherwise, the word “Determine” would be as if the – administratively, the minister would be following up and executing the mandate of his or her office, but when you say “Determine” as if everything from the beginning up to the end is the onus of the minister. So, I suggest that the right word would be “Observe”. I thank you.     

MS SANTA ALUM: I thank you, Madam Chair. I have a problem with 3 (d) which says, “(3)(d) A member of the council shall vacate office, where a member is otherwise unable or unfit to perform the functions of his or her office.” Madam Chair, I even think that it is not well written but the problem that I have is that this is a very general statement – unable or unfit – what will be the parameter of determining that someone is unable or unfit? You know that as people go along doing their general work, there is always sometimes stepping on one’s toes in one way or the other. 

It may not imply that somebody is not capable of performing his or her functions – but you know grudges in offices. So, I feel that this one, (d), is a bit vague and we need clarity on this. I thank you and I propose deletion.  

MR MAGAYEZI: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I propose an amendment under the conditions for vacation of office where a member “(a) has without the permission of the chairperson…”  I propose to insert “And without reasonable excuse.” The purpose is to ensure that there is room in case the member may be away without the permission of the chairperson but the excuse is plausible. 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Still on the same issue, it is stated that, “…without the permission of the chairperson,” and we are looking at a member of the council. I presume that even the chairperson is a member of the council. So, what about if the chairperson absents himself for three meetings? It says that “A member of the council shall vacate where a member (a) has without the permission of the chairperson…” What about if it is the chairperson who is absenting himself for three meetings?

MS OTENGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want us to look at page 6 (e) where they are saying that the condition where the minister is given permission within three months to replace a member who has either resigned or has died and they are saying that the person will only serve for the remaining term. But I think in most of the commissions, when you are appointed, you serve for the given term like three years.

Hon. Akol told us that we should look at institutional memory. So, I think like we do in the Public Service Commission, sometimes they bring names and they say, “For this member, the term still remains but the rest have concluded their term.” I was thinking that a person who has been appointed after the death or resignation of a member should serve for the given term not only the remaining term. That is my proposal. Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I was on page 6, there was 3 (c) where they say, “A member of the council shall vacate office where a member is incapacitated by mental or physical illness that renders the person incapable of performing the functions of the member of the council.”

One time, I saw a woman who dragged her husband from Makerere to Butabika claiming that the man was mad. This man almost lost a job. She was trying to formulate some grounds to separate and she was very serious and yet the man was not mad at all. Now, here, I am seeing a scenario where somebody can be convicted and they say the person is mad when he is not. I want to make an amendment here to suggest that we add, “…after full examination by a qualified medical officer from a recognised Government hospital.” Otherwise, anybody is going to start saying that somebody is mad when the person is not mad for purposes of removing the member of the council. I thank you. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. On the same (d), I still want to add on to what my colleague has raised. When you say somebody shall vacate office where the person is otherwise unable or unfit to perform the function of his or her office, I would think what has been provided in (a) up to (c) is still sufficient. My question is what other grounds are under (d)? And can we qualify this by mentioning those grounds and also including the person who is supposed to determine those grounds? 

Otherwise, we shall be making a vague provision, which can be exploited by some unscrupulous people for their selfish interests. Thank you very much. 

MR BAKABULINDI: Mine is just to sort of improve on the same clause 3, “A member of the council shall vacate…” As a representative of the workers and as one person has said, “…has without the permission with reasonable excuse…” that should be incorporated because we have to give audience to that person. But when you look at (c) and (d) I think we can retain (c) and do away with (d) but add, “…must be proven by a qualified person.” We should not leave it hanging. As he rightly said, by the way, when Dr Bitekyerezo was contributing, some people were thinking that he was making fun. It is a true story. About three years ago - that gentleman is at Makerere; he is a senior officer. The wife had ganged up with the in-laws to pretend that the man was mad and he was taken to Jinja Road. I know the whole story. So, we have to take care of such.

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much. Madam Chair, I am commenting on (e) in regard to what hon. Otengo submitted. The issue of institutional memory, well and good, but to me, I would also agree with the committee, where they said the new appointee serves for the remaining term. Otherwise, if you said the newly appointed person serves for the whole term - As these ones are finishing the four years the other one has just finished three years; then he is completing the two remaining years. 

So, I am of the view that when the term elapses, the entire team goes with the term not that one is going and the others are coming. The question of institutional memory at times is good but not in all cases. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I know, from the minister, what you think about the proposals? There is one to include the word “Reasonable” in (a). The others are to amend and describe the infirmity.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Chairperson, in 3(d), we could omit (d) and we just retain (a) to (c) with an amendment on (c).

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Minister, you know, last week, one of our colleagues was arrested. Suppose you are unable for that type of reason. You are in custody. You are not sick but you are in custody. Do you continue being –

MS KYAMBADDE: That is reasonable excuse. We could amend (c). 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we appreciate the observations made in respect to provisions (d) and (c) and we concede that we drop (d). With (a), we can have that amendment, “…with reasonable excuse.” And if one is confined, that is really reasonable excuse. One is confined and not convicted or one has an ailment, which is long term. Then (c) “…incapacitated by mental or physical illness that is proven by a medical board.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Chair. If I remain in custody for two years, is my place still there in the council? That is what I am asking. Do you replace me or you say, “We are waiting for her to come back?”

MR MULIMBA: Madam  Chairperson, issues of being in detention for more than two years without conviction are very rare; unless a conviction has been passed and if a conviction has been passed that is already catered for. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. What I am asking is, if I am there for two years, am I still a member of the council and you do not replace me? Therefore, if you were nine, you remain eight until I come out of custody? 

MR MULIMBA: No, Madam Chairperson. Where a member is convicted - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you can be on remand. 

MR MULIMBA: But I think that is also within reach of reasonable excuse. (Interjections) Yes, because you are just on remand and not convicted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, but are you available to attend the meetings. My question is: if I am there, not yet convicted, but does my place remain vacant or you replace me? Does the minister have the powers to replace me or I remain a member until I come back?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, unless a sentence has been passed. Otherwise, really you cannot replace somebody still serving remand because that person is not yet found guilty by court. That is what I think.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, would you still leave my place vacant and you remain eight instead of nine until you complete your term? That is important because while we need nine members, one will still be somewhere else. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I actually buy the idea of some members who have concerned themselves with the issue of a member of this team being on remand for say, one year - (Interjections) - I am telling you. So, I am of the view that we retain (d), which talks about that member being unable or unfit to perform the functions of his or her office for more than six months.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what are our proposals, Mr Chairman? We are proposing to amend (3) (a) by including the word “Reasonable” but also retaining the rest. Is that fine?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, we propose an amendment on clause 6. The committee proposes the deletion of sub-clause 2 of that clause. The justification is that the provision is ambiguous and leaves room for abuse.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are appointing a board, but also saying that the minister should appoint a director to be the chief executive officer of the bureau. That means you have given all the powers to the minister though you also have the board. I suggest we phrase it to read as follows: “The minister shall appoint a director to be the chief executive officer on the recommendations of the board.” It should be the board to recommend to the minister. Otherwise, when you give all the powers to the minister, you will be causing a crisis.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, I appreciate that suggestion. Actually, I do not know why our clerk did not capture this because it had been included in our original report. We had earlier on alluded to it when we were doing some amendments for the board not to have the executive director as a member. So, the appointment should be by the minister but on the recommendations of the board. The amendment is welcome.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, I am concerned with this part where they are saying we delete clause 6(2) – let me read it for the Members. It reads thus: “The director shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity with relevant qualifications and experience relating to the functions of the bureau.” I just do not understand why you are seeking to delete this sub-clause. Do you want to get somebody from a market and appoint them to this bureau without qualifications or what? Why is this sub-clause being deleted? Which person, who is not qualified for this job, are you trying to keep this job for?
I am of the view and let me propose an amendment that we retain sub-clause 2 of clause 6.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why do you want us to delete this sub-clause?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, we thought this is something that is blind. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You ask Mr Akankwasa. 

MR MULIMBA: Yes, but it is because we have had such provisions as a requirement in the appointments for all boards. Anyway, there is no danger in having it retained. I concede.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I beg to move a further amendment. I want to inform you that Uganda National Bureau of Standards is one of the essential bodies, which are supposed to protect our lives. So, if someone overstays in that institution, they can do harm to Ugandans. They may be good but they can also be bad and may end up doing harm to us. So, a person should be reappointed for only one more term.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, the only amendment we have is the one that was moved by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, which says that the director should be re-appointed on the recommendations of the board. Is that okay? Okay, I put the question that clause 6 –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I have a proposal on clause 6 (3), which talks about the term of office for the director and their eligibility for reappointment. My proposal is that such persons be re-appointed for only one more term.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where will you put the clause on the term of office? Is it under 4? Okay, honourable members, the chairman of the committee having abandoned his proposal, we are now going to deal with the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi in 11 (1). I now put the question that sub-clause 11 (1) be amended as proposed by the Member.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you still want to add something about the five years. Can we move it here?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chair. Let us do this amendment now. My proposal reads as follows: “The director shall hold office for four years and be eligible for reappointment only once.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, is it coming separately? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that Clause 6, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a point of contention on this clause. I am a member of the East African Community Committee and according to the Community’s provisions about the definition of the term “Counterfeit” they look at them – because they are saying that we will adopt the East African standards – but I would like to ask the committee to consider the standards of the goods. I am saying this because the East African Community consideration on counterfeits is only about the label. For example, if I am bottling mineral water called Wava Water – counterfeit is only regarded when another person packs water but also labeling it as Wava Water. So, much as we are considering the issue of the standards of East Africa, where will this idea of people producing goods which we do not want fall under this section? Thank you. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I think I attempted in my submission to make a distinction between this Bill and what it seeks to cure and we disposed of the other one yesterday. The one of yesterday is about counterfeits. Counterfeit is about imitation of trademarks and copyrights that will be covered under there. With this one, we are dealing with quality and standards. So, we shall take care of that under the Bill we disposed of yesterday when it comes back. But

Madam Chairperson, I want to propose amendments for clause 8; I hope that is where we were. Clause 8(1) is amended by deleting the words “Without deviation” in the second line of the provision and words “And withdraw the relevant national standards” at the end of the provision. The justification is that the words are redundant.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean there would be no way that our local bureau would want to do something?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, clause 8 which is 16 (a) “Adoption of East African Standards… (1) Within six months after declaration of the East African standards, the bureau shall adopt…” it goes ahead to say, “without deviation from the East African standards.” So, we are removing the words “without deviation” because the meaning would still be the same. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it means we are locking out the rights of the Uganda Bureau of Standards to make a deviation relevant to this country. That is what it means. We have to take into account the legal circumstances. Otherwise we are tying their hands. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I smell something. When you say the bureau shall adopt without deviation, when we remove the words “without deviation”, it becomes “We shall adopt the East African Standards…” it means we are trying to completely avoid Ugandan standards. I propose that we maintain the words “Without deviation” in the original text. I thank you. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, the statement is debatable but let us examine it further. I stand to be advised. “The bureau shall adopt the East African standards as the national standards of Uganda and withdraw the relevant national standard.” It means the moment the other ones are promulgated, they automatically become Ugandan standards. If you put the words “Without deviation,” then I do not know. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Much as I appreciate the explanation that the chairperson has given, I also want to make him understand that some words are put for emphasis to see all possibilities or loopholes that allow for people to alter and therefore, I do not see any reason as to why he should insist on something that is not acceptable to this House. 

Mr Chairman, I think that since we are emphasising that locally, we must adopt the regional standards without deviation, it does not do any harm in you maintaining the text that is already provided in the Bill unless you have other reasons other than what you have mentioned. 

MR KABAJO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am finding a real problem understanding what it is that the Members want. If it is that we would like as a country to adopt the East African standards but with a possibility that there could be something that we many need to localise to our conditions, then in that case, the words “without deviation” have to be deleted because if you say that we shall adopt without deviation, it means that you will adopt and you will not even change a comma or a full stop or anything. That is what it means. 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, we maintain we leave it as it is because the East African laws supersede Uganda.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Madam Chairperson, I want to give an example. We, in accounting adopt international accounting standards but you can do your own and when making accounts, you may deviate from the international standards but you can state that this is our local standard for a, b, c, d and give reasons. That is why I want to concur with the Chairperson. Suppose we have mushrooms which are not grown in Kenya, we would determine our own standards of those mushrooms and the others may not; unless after determining it we put it on the East African standard and they adopt it, then that can be done. 

So, Madam Chairperson, I want to concur with the chairman that there are some items which will need our own local standard, which are not on the East African mushroom standard. 

MR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under the East African Protocols, this is a negotiated position by all the members of the Community and once we agree on the East African standards, it supersedes all the other national standards which were in existence and indeed if you go further into the text in (2), it says, “The bureau shall publish a text of the adopted East African standards as a national standard in accordance with ISO and the IUC derivative or directive.” So, the way it is as the East African standards is very complex. So, we do not need to have that East African standard and then have other standards, which are national or sub-regional. So, it is perfect the way it is; we should keep the provision in the clause. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have not really understood what the Minister for Trade is saying because he says they will publish it. Publishing is no problem but what we are trying to say is, suppose we have established something different here, the onus would be on us, first of all, having adopted and got it, to take it to the East African Community for adoption. If you want it then you should put a statement here that as soon as we get a standard, which we believe should be adopted by East Africa, then we shall take it there for adoption. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, hon. Minister, we are part of COMESA. Supposing we found the COMESA standard more advantageous than the EAC’s, you mean we cannot get out because it says without deviation? It means we are stuck with the East African standards. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, exactly, what you have said is what we thought to cure because we adopt the East African standards as the Ugandan standards but there could be higher standards, which are not East African standards, which we also need to raise to be part of the standard. We could also have COMESA standards which are not necessarily East African standards. So, if you tie us to say, “without deviation,” that means you are now raising the maximum and yet we thought this would provide for the minimum but for the others where we ratified the protocols like COMESA and WTO, we would include our local ones because we have unique situations. But where we are trying to exclude is because it is restrictive because Uganda is just part of the East African Community. 

So, whatever you want to find there automatically becomes the Ugandan standard but if you say “without deviation”, that is very restrictive. 

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, but the justification the committee put here is not the explanation he has given. The justification is about being redundant and we are saying that it is not redundant. We do want “Deviation” to be there not to dilute the standard. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to be stuck in a strait jacket?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are talking about trade and the National Bureau of Standards will certify that the commodities we have in Uganda are of East African standard. The Principal Act says “without any deviation” meaning that once we adopt a standard, anybody who will look at a commodity from Uganda will know that this has been certified and is fit for the purpose as per the standard. 

When we leave room to deviate, that will cause someone who is dealing with the product to doubt it. I can give an example. When you go to America, our coffee is served at Starbucks but they think that this coffee comes from Rwanda, yet we grow it here. We proceed to send it to Rwanda who then take it to - Whenever we go, they say this is Rwandan coffee. Rwanda does not have coffee but because they know that Rwanda has made the standard, whoever looks at it associates it with Rwanda. We want to create a standard that even our law recognises so that whenever they look at a product, it is associated with the standard. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are suggesting that we do not amend but retain the original text? Okay.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chairperson, regarding 15(a), the chairperson or the minister can tell us that this is an East African law, which is now being domesticated. The words “Without deviation” are part of this East African law, which is intact. As such, removing “Without deviation” from the East African law will mean that you are not adopting it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we also had a proposal on clause 12 to delete the words “notwithstanding any other law”. The justification is that the words are redundant and make the provision appear vague.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The words “Notwithstanding any other law” create a reference that there exists other laws, which relate to what we are dealing with. I propose that we retain it the way it is because these words create awareness that there may be other laws, which relate to the regulation of this commodity. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This argument is the same as clause 8 that we have been talking about. We are not in isolation and the law cannot be in isolation. I think we should leave it the way it is if we are trying to make sure that we meet the highest standards internationally, in East Africa and in Uganda. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, I think this one is strengthening the East African Testing Act. We are saying this is ours. Even if there is another law, the East African Community Standardisation, Quality Assurance, Meteorology and Testing Act is the law applicable. It is ring fencing it.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we concede to that.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that Clause 12 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 13 we provided for the amendment of 24(a) by deleting the words “Pending determination by court” appearing in the head note and the words after the word “Compliance” in the fourth line of the provision. The justification is that this will only be required where an aggrieved party decides to go to court.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you are freeing the director from the court. He can act even when there is no court case. That is what you are saying.

MR MULIMBA: No, Madam Chairperson. This will be tying where we would say “Pending court decision” if the aggrieved party has not chosen to seek court redress -

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is what I am saying. That you are giving the power to act even when there is no court case.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, at an appropriate time, I will recommit Clause 7, which wants to give these people immunity without following rules. If the director is only going to need the recommendation of an inspector to say, close and go to court, that cannot work. What we want to say is that the seizure of premises must be with a court order. 

This is because it will safeguard the inspector and the director. I want to propose that before the director closes a premise, he must get a court order. It is like telling me now that you are closing me out because of the following reasons. The court should be involved.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you mean Jennifer Musisi must go to court every time she wants to close a shop? Really, you are taking away the powers of the bureau.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, like I explained, in the enforcement of this law, UNBS will act in conjunction with other agencies of Government. We also look at the practice in other agencies of Government, take for example URA. When URA realises that there is a shortfall in a tax, they freeze assets. They do not have to go to court but the person whose goods have been seized has the leverage to go to court. Yes, you can go and seek court redress. 

Now, if you subject the inspectors to going to court first to get a court order before seizure, you will not deal with some of the items, which require spontaneous action. We need to empower the inspectors to act, after all, it is a constitutional privilege for anybody who is aggrieved to seek court redress.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I want to thank the chairperson of the committee for being very honest in his statement. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I want you to be open here. There could be a factory that is producing toxic substances that are detrimental to the lives of Ugandans. Do you want this person to wait for the court, which is going to take months? In a situation where we do not have enough lawyers, why don’t we give this man enough mandate to close these so that people can live as we sort out things? So, I support the chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question – 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Chair. I support the committee chairperson’s position but clause 13(24) (b)(ii) says, “Where any goods have been seized under this Act, the goods may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by court order at the cost of the importer of the goods.”

Now, my point here is about – since we are saying here that “to ensure compliance” but we are now deleting it and yet here we are still saying “by court order”. I think we should make it uniform such that we give the authority given this Act such that whoever has not complied will be dealt with without waiting for the court order.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the minister say about that proposal? Let us first hear from hon. Mwiru.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I am a little disturbed. I was almost convinced by the committee chairperson because I was looking at it from a different perspective. For example, in Jinja, we have industries emitting very toxic gases but here we are now looking at someone producing a product and we are considering how much he has invested. If the director has the power, having been briefed by the inspector – this is what the section says – should he just go and suspend a business or court must first confirm as the section says? (Interjections) You see, honourable, you have to first listen in order to appreciate because I listened to you. What I am saying is that what we are analysing – because here it says that after seizing and all that, court must confirm the actions of the director. 

And the committee chair is saying that such a process would fail the enforcement of this Act. But then we are also looking at the way some of these enforcement officers use their powers; what would be the safeguard for the director? How do we check the director’s powers? He could wake up one day, seize property and they give him something. Here, we are bringing in the aspect of court confirming his actions after he has either seized goods or suspended a business because we are looking at people’s livelihood. I do not think that our people originating from our place are the ones who engage in this business – these must be very junior people and they can be harassed by these directors all the time. So, I think – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, what is the period between seizure and destruction; what is the duration?

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, there is no provision for a duration but I think the reason we left this one pending court determination is that there could be areas which require qualified persons to ascertain and prove their case. And that is why with destruction, we wanted ascertainment of the same because you would be dealing with chemistry – this is science. So, experts should ascertain and put their case across. And this is done in order to shield the inspectors from liability in case of further litigation. This was the spirit behind this but with respect to duration – we could probably debate on that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to seek clarification from the committee chairman. Have you seen clause 7? You have said that: “A suit, prosecution or legal proceedings shall not be brought against a director, a member of the council, a member of staff or an inspector or any other official in their capacity for anything done in good faith under this Act.” He will come and say, “I did it in good faith.” But you have no instrument to measure good faith.

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chair, I agree with the committee chairperson; we need to give the inspector authority to act. But it is up to the person against whom action was taken and is complaining to go to court. This does not stop court form applying injunction but the inspector should have taken action. It is then up to the factory owner to go to court to seek for redress or injunction where the inspector will then be asked why he has done whatever he has done - he will have to explain. 

At least, the inspector will have been allowed to act while at the same time, the court will not allow him to “go to heaven” with everything. (Laughter)

MR MWIRU: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the clarification I am seeking from you is – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it is the turn of hon. Opolot to speak.

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am surprised at the way we are looking at this aspect – it is like this is the first time this standard is coming up. I see health inspectors confiscating meat and KCCA law enforcers closing arcades for failure to comply with the existing laws. And, therefore, if you want to tie the inspectors’ hands and require them to first secure a court order, then you will subject Ugandans to hazardous substances simply because you must follow the long and tedious court process. 

Then the other aspect of saying that an inspector or director can act maliciously and then claim that he was acting in good faith – I think there are standards to qualify good faith. And administratively, you can handle someone who has been errant and abused his office while claiming to be acting in good faith. I really think that someone should be allowed to act to protect the citizens. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, the way the section is worded, it leaves room that actually, the inspector may not have the competence to prove that, say, this mineral water is fake. That is why the section proceeds to say “until they have… the products of some health hazard”. I think what we need to do to have parts (a) and (b) – 

MR WAKIKONA: Thank you, Madam Chair. We are bothered by this provision but I know how the inspectors in UNBS work; the council and management have provisions – there are regulations like “if you go to place A, follow the following…” And they follow that and by the time they come to seizure – “seizure” is just closure and then “destruction” is when court decides and then they go and remove and maybe burn or destroy in a different manner. So, this inspector will not wake up one day and go to close some place. 

No, they follow some guidelines as given and these are currently done within 21 days, not a week or a day. Thank you. [Hon. Oguttu: “Hon. Minister…”] I have sat down. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, some of us are in business. Madam Chair, you were happy that guidelines exist but it would have been good if they were like regulations, which should be attached on a law. For example, if you read this part very well, it says, “The director may, on a recommendation of an inspector, suspend production of a commodity or seize premises.” You see, by the time you go to suspend, there must be a reason. 

So, what is the time frame? We want to see something like, “After 21 days, you do X.” By the time you close premises, there must be a reason because you have told him to suspend. 
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: This is not a new law, this is on-going.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, but I have checked and did not see the regulation in the old law. So, put it that, “The Executive Director, may, on the recommendation of the inspector: (a) Suspend production of a commodity,(b) Seize premises, (c) after following laid down procedures – (Interruption)

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chair, we are not seeking to introduce anything new from what has been going on because we have the Principal Acts under which UNBS has been operating. What we are trying to provide for is to cure whatever was not catered for under the law; it is just for clarity. But if you want to put everything in this law, it will be very congested and we shall have no room for regulation. 

Madam Chair, I know there are regulations which attend to these laws and that is the spirit under which we moved to have this amendment and left the others as provided for in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, I put the question that section 24(a) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, we propose to amend section 17 of the Principal Act by substituting for “Twelve” the word “Thirty six”. The justification is that it is serious and costly to apply for a renewal of a permit every year over the same mark – (Interjections) – we are amending section 17 of the Principal Act – (Interjections) – is it not covered in the Bill, but it is a new insertion. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, what is renewal – it is like a trading licence. I am sure inspection should be done every year to confirm that you conform to the standards; it is regulatory. So, you cannot take 36 months without renewal. Supposing nobody inspects that person, they can produce those toxic materials you are talking about. So, it is better that the place is inspected every year like the case is with the butchers and then give them a licence to sell meat or water. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, I want to understand this. Are you introducing a new insertion and numbering it 17? What about the present 17?

MR MULIMBA: Seventeen as it appears in the Bill is alright. This is just an importation of a new provision. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it will be 18. I put the question that Clause 17 do stand part of the Bill. Let me finish the one which they say is okay then he will tell us what he is bringing in. I put the question -

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, the numbering will be a problem in my report but I can deal with that after concluding the Bill because this is a new amendment, which is not covered in the Bill. We are amending section 17 of the Principal Act and the amendment is, Section 17(3) – (Interjections) – it is a new introduction. “A permit granted under this section shall be varied for 12 months and may be reviewed by the council or a person acting under the authority of the council.” So, we want to amend that and instead of 12, we provide for 36. The justification is that it is tedious and costly to apply for renewal of a permit every year over the same mark. 

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, with due respect to the chairman, that is not acceptable. The 12 months is for control. If you leave somebody to do whatever they want to three years, they can produce dangerous things. The 12 months are to ensure inspections that you are making the right products, for which we gave you a right to produce. So, I do not agree with this and the chairman should withdraw it.

THE CHAIPERSON: Hon. Chairperson, why do you want to create this three year period? 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, I had earlier on suggested that I withdraw this and introduce it at the end because it is a totally new inclusion. Let me give the reason. Applying for a standard mark has costs. We wanted to reduce the frequency of applying for a mark and strengthen inspection. Inspection is the most important part and not just having a new mark time and again. There is a cost implication to both the applicant and UNBS – (Interruption) 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Just a few minutes ago, we were talking about the East African standards and the international standards. Again, the chairman is making a U-turn, deviating from the international standards which we want to adopt and creating his own standards, which even the House is not willing to accept.

MR OKEYOH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not agree with the chairperson that it is tedious and expensive. First, it is a source of revenue to the Government. Every year, you renew the licence for the trademark and Government gets money. Secondly, it checks on the people who might lower the standards because they have already captured the market. A loaf of bread that at first was weighing a kilogramme will continue to reduce by grammes for the three years. So, I do not buy the idea to extend it to 36 months. We should maintain the 12 months. 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I raise to associate myself with the submission of hon. Okeyoh that actually that provision would even be unconstitutional because it would be infringing on Article 93. When they renew annually, they pay a certain fee, which forms part of the revenue of this country. If you introduce a Bill, which will affect the revenue, then it becomes unconstitutional. (Laughter)

MR MULIMBA: Madam Chairperson, the payments accruing to these trademarks is not termed as revenue. It is actually intended to regulate. But, Madam Chair, I have listened to many Members’ concerns and because it was not included in the Bill, I withdraw. (Applause) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question that Clause 18 do stand part of the – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, you are talking of penalties and we are saying that penalties, in respect, is only 50 currency points. Just a few minutes ago, we passed a clause talking about exceeding 500 currency points on page 11 (a). For harmony, these penalties should also be increased so that it should be, “not exceeding 500 currency points or imprisonment…” – (Interjections) - 18, because you have to harmonise it with Clause 16. 

16 (a) talks about, “…the offence will be for a fine not more than 500 currency points or imprisonment not less than two years or not exceeding five years.” So, what I want to do with the amendment here is that, “…the fine should not exceed 500 currency points and not exceeding five years.” This is to harmonise the law as you have put it that this is a penalty otherwise somebody can decide to leave this and apply this other one for purposes of people running away.   

MS KABAALE: I thank you, Madam Chair. You see, being half way a trader, I am very interested in this Bill and when you look at 18 (e) we were making amendments previously and so, I do not know but I would like to seek clarification from the Chair on whether we should maintain (e) and yet on the other clauses that we have been passing, we have deleted the involvement of court to avoid court that leads to a delayed process. So, I do not know whether we should still maintain (e).

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. We deleted it for seizure but it remained for destruction. What are you saying about the currency points?

MR MULIMBA: On the currency points, that is okay. We had not provided for an amendment for that but it is a welcome idea.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you restate it so that we take it.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, for purposes of harmonising penalties, here we are saying that, “Penalties in respect of contravention of any regulation is a fine not exceeding 500 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both in the case of a first offender or both.” I do not think that we need to put a first offender, second offender because a crime is a crime.  

Since we have put not exceeding “this” and not exceeding “this”, the judge can decide to give him a day or two – it is discretionary. So, we want to leave the judge to decide on this otherwise –

THE CHAIRPERSON: “…..not exceeding 500 currency points.”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: “… 500 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both…” harmonising it with 16 (a).

MR KABAJO: I have a problem with the harphazard application of penalties. In this area, we are talking about trade and so on and really, there is a reason as to why they assign different penalties for first offender, second and third. So, I think that we should keep it as it is in the recommendations. 

It is also not good to just say that we should have five years without considering what type of crime somebody has committed. There should be some measurement – the crime and the punishment should be measured. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, hon. Members, we have passed clause 16 and in that clause, we have first offenders and second offenders and so, we cannot just do away with it. But also, depending on the breach, you also do not want to destroy the business completely by disabling someone financially so that they walk up on their head again. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is why, Madam Chair, we are saying “not exceeding……” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: You may tempt the judge. The judge may be tempted to go for the highest.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No. He can go for the highest, “not exceeding …” – you can even say you are judging me like this and yet I am a first offender. Surely, I will – but if you do 50 currency points, that is Shs 100,000. They will do it. A man with a turnover of Shs 2 billion per month, that is chicken feed. We know these businesses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there no small operators in this business - the type where – the ones whom you represent? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, it has to be as a deterrent because you are injuring the lives of people. That is what we are trying to suggest. Otherwise, if we make it light, people will be committing offences and because they have their links at the courts, they will be getting out on a daily basis.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you agree to the 500 currency points and the five years?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, hon. Members, I put the question that clause 18 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

The Schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.50
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.51
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I would like to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2010” and passed with amendments on clauses 3, 4, 5, 6, 13 and 18. I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted, as amended. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members - (Laughter) - the minister moved very fast but anyway, I put the question that the report of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2010

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (Amendment) Bill, 2010 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA NATIONAL BUREAU OF STANDARDS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2013”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I want to thank you very much for the work done today. The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow afternoon.

(The House rose at 6.53 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 11 April 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

