Wednesday, 9 April 2014

Parliament met at 2.24 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala 

PRAYERS
 
(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to Order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I welcome you to this sitting, hon. Members. We have received a letter dated 2 April 2014 from the Minister of State for Finance, hon. Aston Kajara, in respect to finalisation of the budget for the financial year 2014/2015. Honourable members, you know that we have been using the Budget Act and it provides for time-lines when certain activities should be completed. 

We also have in this House the Public Finance Bill that is awaiting approval of this House. It also provides a new set of timeframes. The new situation in the Public Finance Bill, if it is passed into law, would have the effect of having to finalise the entire budgeting process by 31st May every year. That would mean that all activities relating to and feeding into the budget process must be completed before that day so that by 31st, the budget is approved. So that when the minister comes to read the budget at the beginning of June, at the commencement of the new Session of Parliament, what is read by the minister is final. There are no more engagements with committees of Parliament and the rest of it so that by 1st July, the approved budget starts running. So, there will be no issues like Vote-On-Account and all these other things that we have been doing in the past. That is the proposal. 

Based on this, the minister has provided a guideline on adjusted deadlines for financial year 2014/2015, harmonising the situation existing now in the Budget Act with what is proposed in the Finance Bill. A new timeframe has been proposed, which will still enable us, if we adhere to it, to complete the budget process by 31st May this year. 

I am directing the Clerk because it is also copied to the Clerk to Parliament, to make this letter and proposed timeframes availed to chairpersons and members of committees so that they try and do their best to comply with these timeframes that are proposed to give some harmony in the budgeting process. I am also directing the Committee on Budget to coordinate this function with the chairpersons of the other committees so that we try as much as possible to hurry up. 

If we are to go by what was initially in the Budget Act, it would mean, by now, we would still have time. What I am saying now is that we do not have time and so, we should act quickly from the sectoral committees to the Budget Committee and this process should be completed within these timeframes that would help us facilitate.

So, Clerk, make sure that the committee chairpersons are aware of these developments and the members are accordingly also made aware and activities commence with vigour so that we can complete those matters within those timeframes. I thank you very much. 

2.27
MS GRACE NAMARA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising on an issue of national importance in regard to the ID registration.

Over the weekend, I had an interaction with the members of the committees that are going to conduct registration in my constituency and there were preliminary issues that were raised. I thought I should bring these issues to the attention of the Minister for Internal Affairs. This concerns birth certificates. They were told in their training that to register, a person must have a birth certificate but they were wondering if those old people who do not have birth certificates and even those in their 40’s and 30’s that do not have birth certificates would miss the registration. 

However, they were given an alternative that if you do not have a birth certificate, you can go to the CAO, pay some money and then get the certificate. But they were wondering how many know who their CAO is; how many know the Office of the CAO. They were also considering transportation from their rural areas – I am talking about communities where the people are poor and can only afford one meal a day and yet, you are now telling them to get about Shs 20,000, travel from a rural sub-county to Lyantonde District. I am talking about Lyantonde District because those are the people I consulted. It would be costly. So, as we were interacting, this looked to be like a problem which I thought that I should bring to the attention of the minister.

Secondly, there is the marriage certificate which is the same case. You have to go to the CAO or Town Clerk to register. But they were wondering how many know the CAO or Town Clerk and these forms are in English. So, there is a dilemma that I thought I should bring to your attention. 

Again, concerning the marriage certificate, if you were married traditionally and you failed to avail the marriage certificate, you are given an opportunity to go and get a chit from the father of your wife. They were saying that if he is dead, where do they get this chit? They were again advised that if you do not give that information or justification, that means you are simply going to fill that you are single. So, I am married traditionally but because I cannot avail the marriage certificate, I am going to fill a form indicating that I am single and my husband also fills that he is single. They thought that this is going to be very hard and they were arguing that how does one declare himself or herself single and yet they were traditionally married. 

These are issues that I thought were cross-cutting; they are not only unique to Lyantonde District. I thought that I would bring them to the attention of the minister since this exercise is commencing on Monday. Mr Speaker, this should be clarified as early as possible.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Government Chief Whip, I had given this information to the Minister of State for Internal Affairs but I do not see him in the House. I informed him that this matter was going to be raised and he should have been here.

2.31
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, I have taken note and the minister is coming. I am sorry that we completed the Cabinet meeting late but he is aware and he is coming. He will make a response.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we give him time to respond to this when he comes. 

2.32
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Pursuant to rule 45(2) of the Rules of Procedure, permit me to raise a matter of significance in protection of the Constitution of Uganda, notably Article 2(1) which reads, “This Constitution is supreme law of Uganda and shall have binding force on all authorities and persons throughout Uganda.”

In Rubaga South, which I represent in Parliament, as I speak now, I am in chains; I cannot hold public meetings. I have been disconnected from my people as Police has intercepted four public rallies in Ndeeba, Kabowa and Wankulukuku, respectively, claiming that the Lord Mayor, Mr Lukwago, could attend them. In case he does, what about it? He is a Ugandan and resident of Rubaga South. So, I am his Member of Parliament.

Has Government issued any decree that Mr Lukwago should not speak to fellow residents in Rubaga South? Is Rubaga South under a state of emergency? I am asking Government this because I cannot be stopped from addressing my people; I was elected to talk to the people and to carry their messages to Parliament. So, there is no explanation in law to stop me from talking to my people.

It goes without saying that the Leader of Government Business should say something about the current constitutional impasse with the leadership in KCCA. There are problems but Government should be able to say something about the impasse; we cannot keep quiet when we see the house burning.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, we had agreed that you restrict yourself to the issues, which are before Parliament; when you go to KCCA, you know those matters are in court and we do not want to get into that. (Laughter)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, finally, as a Member of Parliament representing Rubaga South, which is also part of Kampala, I need clarification as to why the Attorney-General of Uganda has refused to honour the court orders issued by the High Court. 

This is a constitutional matter that I am raising pursuant to Article 126(1) of the Constitution. Today, I came to talk constitutionally. I am a very serious legislator. (Laughter) That provision states that “Judicial power is derived from the people and shall be exercised by the courts established under this Constitution in the name of the people and in conformity with law and with the values, norms and aspirations of the people.”

Is the Attorney-General aware that failure to honour decisions of courts would be in open defiance of Article 126(1) and Article 128(2) and (3) of the Constitution? Article 128(2) reads: “No person or authority shall interfere with the courts or judicial officers in the exercise of their judicial functions.”

Article 128(3) reads: “All organs and agencies of the state shall accord to the courts such assistance as may be required to ensure the effectiveness of the courts.”

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, is Government aware that the Attorney-General’s defiant acts do not only contradict the Constitution; they also offend standing judicial decisions, which have already been taken, like the constitutional petition of Semwogerere & Olum v. the Attorney-General, which was pronounced in the year 2000 and is known by many a lawyer as a locus classicus on matters I have raised. (Laughter) In Semwogerere, Olum and others -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member – 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: This is the last sentence.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, please.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am insisting that Government must operate within the Constitution because it is supreme. Any attempt to side-line the Constitution by the Attorney-General is treasonable. I need an explanation from the government because you, in Government, cannot just watch that man defy the court and the Constitution and you keep quiet. Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, are you making a commitment on this?

2.38
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Kasule Lumumba): Mr Speaker, all the members of Cabinet were informed and they are coming.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sergeant-at-Arms, the clock that guides me seems to be saying that it is 9.00 a.m.; something has got to be done about it. 

2.38
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga County North, Kampala): Mr Speaker, I am rising on a matter of national importance in regard to the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB). The Uganda National Examinations Board has decided to withhold results of about 12 centres of A’ Level schools for last year, claiming that the centres in question defied a directive to compulsorily register for sub-maths and ICT subjects. These centres had registered, in total, about 560 candidates who are now the direct victims of this harsh penalty. In fact, among the centres is St Peter’s College in Tororo, Lango College and Kibibi Parents’ School in Butambala.

Mr Speaker, Parliament should note that much as ICT was – as it is claimed by UNEB – made compulsory, many schools across the country go without any source of reliable power, a necessity for teaching the same. That is in addition to shortage of computer teachers all across the country. There is also another problem of shortage of the computers, which are essential in the teaching of computer lessons. Therefore, I would like the minister responsible to explain why and how Government could enforce a policy on students, which it has failed to implement. Thank you.

2.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (THIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that results of 11 schools were withheld because they had not presented candidates for the requirement to get a certificate. However, it is also not true that there is a shortage of computers because many of these schools have got computers – (Interjections) – Yes, Tororo College has and others have.

The problem was that when we changed the policy, communication was sent to all schools but when it came to registering, these particular schools did not follow the guidelines to the letter. The regulations of UNEB are that if you do not –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister. I have noticed that the minister is just labouring to give an answer to this query yet the situation is bigger than what you are going to tell us today. I am a professional teacher and the minister is a professional teacher – (Interjections) – Mr Speaker, protect me.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are the only one on record; the others are not.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the minister to first go and assess the cause of this problem other than just giving us these answers now, knowing that it is the Ministry of Education and UNEB that registered these students. The students sat the exams and after that, you cannot hold their results.

Mr Speaker, as I said, don’t you think it would be procedurally right for the hon. Minister, who I trust so much because he runs schools, to first go and prepare a comprehensive document or report about this problem? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the issue is: there are examination centres whose results have been detained. What people want to know are the reasons and the solution.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am sure that my brother, hon. Joseph Ssewungu, knows very well that I am also a professional teacher. By the way, I also taught him and the honourable Chief Whip and many others.

As I said, results of 11 schools were not released because the schools did not register students according to the guidelines given by UNEB. I have been to Tororo and realised that they have a computer lab with computers. However, the requirement was that a student was to register for three principals with either sub math or ICT as the fourth one. But what these schools did was to ignore the –(Interruption)

MR MOHAMED KAWUMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The matter that was raised by the hon. Moses Kasibante is very pertinent. I can feel the sentiment of the minister as he labours to respond. Today, we manage affairs digitally to the extent that if students apply to sit for certain subjects –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the point of order? Please, raise the point of order.

MR MOHAMED KAWUMA: Thank you. What I am saying is that we are managing processes or affairs digitally. By policy, if it is a requirement for a student to register for a particular subject, the system would automatically deny registration of this student. Is it, therefore, in order for the honourable minister to continue explaining himself on this matter to students who paid their money, registered, sat exams, assessed and the results are there?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, you are speaking in an analogue way when we now talk in a digital way. Would you like to seek more time to come back here to explain this matter properly?

DR MUYINGO: Mr Speaker, my brothers know very well that we are operating in a digital world and UNEB is using modern methods of registering students. It captured this information in good time. These people were reminded but they did not respond.

Anyway, the good news, Mr Speaker, is that the Board has been asked to look into this matter. They are studying the circumstances that could have led to this error and very soon, they will report back to us with a solution to this problem. Mr Speaker, I will come back after the Board has finalised its investigations and report to this House.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, one of the schools mentioned, Kibibi Parents Secondary School, is found in my constituency. Over the weekend, I went to this school and met both the parents and students. Unfortunately, as we wait for the Board to sit, there are students who sat these exams at Senior Six – you cannot say that there is only going to be a solution only when the Board sits. This is very critical to humble parents in rural areas. When you meet them, you are their leader and they ask you these questions. It feels so painful that somebody sold their cattle, paid for school fees and the child is just there and does not know their results.

To you, this may look simple because you may own a school and get away with it but the poor people have been hurt. So, my appeal is that you do not just leave it to when the Board will sit. It is quite urgent and painful. The parents in those schools need urgent answers.

Mr Speaker, in seeking your guidance, we need a timeline over this issue. Can we talk about next week because universities are about to begin the process of admission.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, come back to the House on Wednesday after the Cabinet meeting and brief the House about what has happened in regard to this matter. It is so ordered.

Yes, Minister for Internal Affairs, there were some issues. Have you been fully briefed?

2.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, I apologise; I came to the House late. I am told by the Government Chief Whip that hon. Namara raised an issue about the registration exercise we are about to embark on.

It is true we are soon starting registration of Ugandan citizens. The target is Ugandan citizens of 16 years and above. One of the requirements is for every Ugandan to give proof of citizenship. Therefore, we request every person to come with any of the following: a birth certificate, if it is there; a baptism certificate, if it is also there; a passport; and a school identity card or school report. These are just some of the documents that we require Ugandan citizens to come with to show proof of citizenship; plus the verification committee, which will be at the parish level, should be able to identify that so and so is a Ugandan. So, these are additional requirements that we have put out in the notices in the announcements for Ugandans to come up with.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for the submission. When you talk about a baptism card, it means even my priest is involved in verifying if there is any area where you are not sure of. I was in my constituency and there is a major problem about this exercise. The LC IIIs and LCVs of the district are not involved in the exercise and I do not know who is going to help you better than those people? So, let the honourable minister help us know how registration is going to take place when the local leaders are not involved. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I wonder whether the minister really is aware of the kind of communities he is talking about. The community I represent is very rural. Now, you are talking of documents like passports, which are made here in Kampala or birth certificates, which in my district cost Shs 5000, which some of my voters are not able to earn even in a whole year. You are talking of baptism certificates; some people are pagans and they do not belong to that kind of faith in order for them to have baptism certificates. What are you really talking about, hon. Minister?

MR KAMARA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister is talking about school identity cards and I clearly know that when you are a student, even if you are not a Ugandan, you are free to get an identity card. You are talking about the marriage certificate; this one may even cause us problems in our families, because when you start agitating for marriage certificates, some of us who have many wives will start quarrelling about who we will wed and who will not.
 
I would wish that the minister clarifies and at least gives an opportunity to the local leaders. These local leaders know their people, with or without documents because not everybody has a document to go and show. Let them give authority to the local leaders to go and say, “We have been living with this person here”; otherwise, the issue of documents like identity cards we are going to register foreigners and leave out our people because not all of them have those marriage certificates and actually, that is very risky. I thank you.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, we are enrolling in the first phase Ugandans of 16 years and above, and the documents indicated are not mandatory but just a guide. In the verification committee in the parishes, there will be an elder, LC1, who should know all the local people in their areas. Those are the ones who will identify who is a citizen or not.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Mr Speaker, I represent Kyadondo East, which is an urban constituency. In that constituency, you will not even know who your neighbours are unlike in rural areas, where you can have elders and committees to identify. 

Is the Minister of Internal Affairs, therefore, in order to suggest that in this country, the responsibility of identifying Ugandans now has been surrendered to elders and some committees of his choice? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I heard the honourable minister saying was to elaborate ways of proving citizenship; for example, LCI, passport to verify that this person is a citizen of Uganda because they are registering citizens of Uganda. That is what I understood.

MR JAMES BABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for coming to my rescue. Now, LCIIIs and the district officials will be involved in the verification exercise. If somebody’s verification is not approved at the parish level, there is a possibility of appeal to the Sub-County level. If that fails, it comes to the district, if that fails it comes to the Immigration Board to the national committee. (Interjections) Everybody is going to be involved and we have produced elaborate guidelines on how this exercise is going to be taken out and we have given enough publicity on these documents.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please, let us have some order.

MR OGUTTU: Some guidance from the minister. This registration- 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is only the Speaker that gives guidance. (Laughter)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I am sorry, Mr Speaker. I need some clarification from the minister. This exercise of identity cards has also got a connection to voting that is why the Electoral Commission is also involved, and that is why we are registering people who are 16 years so that they are 18 when the registration starts in 2016. 

If it is to do with the elections, the law is clear that parties should also be involved. As far as we know, political parties have not been involved in this exercise and they have no formal information from those people who are involved in this exercise. 

I am just seeking clarification; why, when you were setting up the citizen verification committees at the parish level, you chose to involve only people from one party and therefore, rendering loss of credibility to this exercise? In many places, people think this is an NRM thing, which it is not. I know it is a national issue; I have attended a sensitization workshop in Iganga, which was to do with the exercise in Busoga and I thought it was a good exercise but I raised this same matter: Why didn’t you involve other parties in this exercise? You have appointed a PISO; so you will find the chairman is an NRM, the elder is NRM, the PISO is an NRM cadre and they could be good Ugandans and meaning well but it does not auger well for our multiparty politics. So, I need clarification on why you chose that path.

MR AKENA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I listened very intently to the minister and I have two areas of concern. On the list of documents, which he requested, speaking for myself, I think it is only the passport, which I can get hold of. My birth certificate got lost in all of these issues perhaps I can apply for another one, the rest is only a passport. But, in the nature of politics, the first passport I ever held was a Tanzanian passport. As Uganda, we have hosted very many refugees over the years. There are refugees who were born here, went to school here and who have worked in Uganda, who will be able to produce school identification cards; some of them even held passports and high Government jobs. 

If that is the criteria, how are we going to sort out the citizens from the non-citizens? Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please, close this matter.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, this exercise is purely technical. It has nothing to do with political parties at this stage. It is purely technical to verify who Ugandans are for purposes of getting a national identity card-(Interjections)- The documents required -(Interruption)

MS TAAKA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the information he is giving us. He mentioned school IDs but he knows that in Uganda, we have very many students from outside the country and this is especially true for me who represents an area, which is at the border. Are we going to present IDs for this registration? 

Is the minister in order to say that you can present an ID and you are regarded as a Ugandan? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is for the ministry and the technical people from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The Speaker cannot rule them out of order.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some of the authorities the minister is talking about like LCIs and LCIIs who are involved in the verification of the people supposed to be registered do not exist, as far as I know, because court annulled the existence of LCIs and LCIIs. 

So, which LCIs and LCIIs is he talking about because some of those LCs who were supposed to be there died? Have they since been replaced? How are all these irregularities going to help us sort out the issue of registration? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please, wind up now.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, the verification team ideally will be LCIs and elders and they will be configured from situation to situation. (Interjections) In urban areas, the configuration will be different from those in the villages but there will be a verification team. Thank you, sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this House has received very many complaints and reports from committees on this National ID Project. This Parliament has insisted that we need national ID cards for citizens of this country. The process has started. There may be issues coming up because of the process that is starting but the bigger purpose is that Ugandans should be registered and identity cards issued to them. 

I think that is the key point and there should be a process of verifying whether you are a citizen or not. Now, what they have put in place is to try and put some system that will be able to identify or confirm whether somebody is a citizen or not and the exercise begins next week on Monday 14th, if my information is correct and then they will be going on and on. 

There might be issues with these things. What they are suggesting is that there should be a system for confirming whether somebody is a citizen or not. There seems to be issues with that but that is the position; that Ugandans have got to be given national identity cards and that is the process that has commenced. 

So, let us not mix up too many things in this issue, please. So, hon. minister, I need your final word on what is going to happen from Monday. Guide the country on what is going to happen and what needs to be done properly. Let the minister -

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, I undertake to provide every Member of Parliament with guidance on the national enrolment exercise but before that, when we were moving out to the various regions, we informed the honourable Members of Parliament to be present and many of them participated in these exercises. So, they are fully aware of this exercise. On the 14th April, we shall start on this enrolment exercise. 

We seek your support to encourage Ugandan citizens to register so that they can get this National ID Card as the Constitution commands. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, in the Public Gallery, this afternoon, we have the chairperson and councillors from Kiira Town Council. They are here to observe the proceedings of Parliament. They are represented by hon. Daudi Migereko in the case of Butembe and hon. Agnes Nabirye in the case of Jinja District. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

Hon. Members, it is now five minutes past 3 o’clock. Rule 34 commands that we deal with the Prime Minister’s question time. Minister of Internal Affairs, there was a pending issue raised by hon. John Ken-Lukyamuzi about his inability to hold any meeting in his constituency and yet, that is the purpose for which he was elected. So, he needs some answers on that. 

Let us open and for the next 45 minutes, we will deal with the Prime Minister’s question time. The time starts now. Please, keep your questions short so that we can maximise these 45 minutes.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.09
MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is the status of NAADS in the country now?

3.09
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, NAADS is a government institution and remains one. Government has announced a process of reviewing the NAADS programme with a view to the creation of single spine advisory services in the Ministry of Agriculture. So, while NAADS still remains as it does today, the idea is to wind it down and take the experts into the ministry so that we can have single spine extension services to our people. Thank you.

3.10
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, this country is the way it is; relatively peaceful today and respected internationally because of the contribution of our soldiers, some of whom have sacrificed their lives and died in the wars of Uganda and abroad, peace keeping operations inclusive. 

Now, I ask, is there any measure your Government has put in place to remember the soldiers who sacrificed their lives, who died in action in Uganda and who went missing in action in the wars in Uganda and abroad, peace keep inclusive. Now I ask, is your government going to remember the soldiers who sacrificed their lives, who died in action in Uganda, who went missing in action in the wars in Uganda and outside Uganda, similar to the ones of countries that care about their people like the United States of America? 

If you go to Washington DC, in front of the White House, you will find a memorial to remember the soldiers of the United States of America who died in Vietnam and other wars. 

What is your Government doing about remembering soldiers who died or went missing or you just want to forget about them after they made you what you are?

3.12
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Certainly, we do recognise and remember the maximum sacrifice some of our citizens have made in their contribution to pacify this country at a time when Uganda was in turmoil. We do recognise and remember obviously those who have died in action and on duty on behalf of this country and humanity in peace keeping operations and other operations beyond our boundaries.

We have awarded medals and have a series of medals. I invite hon. Fungaroo, whom I have not seen at these functions –(Laughter)– to attend so that he informs himself about how this Government very dearly remembers those that have sacrificed for it. I thank you.

3.13
MRS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about what could be wrong with Ugandan fruits and in particular mangoes. Most companies that are making fruit juice are importing mangoes from Kenya, India and South Africa.

Secondly, what is being done by Government to promote fruit production and how can we really protect our farmers who are producing mangoes and their mangoes are rotting and yet, mangoes are being imported from India and Kenya for producing juice in Uganda?

3.14
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I think that the problem, first of all, has been one of quantity. I do remember, Mr Speaker, that we did market the Ugandan bananas to Libya and the Libyans loved Ugandan bananas. They sent a cargo plane and all the bananas in Nakasero Market were bought, all the bananas within drivable distance of Kampala were bought and the plane filled. 

In spite of our banana’s presentation, the Libyans liked them and they sent a message that they were sending another plane to pick bananas. They were told that they would have to wait for six months before sending the next plane for bananas because we would have to wait for the next harvest. 

It is clear that because, obviously, the demand was low and because we did not have factories that consumed fruits, the production is still low and therefore, we are not able to sustain the supply that is demanded by our factories.

Secondly, these factories would like to maintain certain standards and have particular types of fruits. I understand, for instance, that some of our type of mangoes is not suitable because of too much fibre in it. The good news is that Government has a plan and as you all know, we are beginning to encourage the growth or production of the appropriate raw materials for the factories that are coming up including our fruits. I thank you.

3.16
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Is Government aware that the Inspector-General of Police has abandoned his constitutional duty and is now politicking, dishing out money appropriated by this Parliament to youth, telling them not to campaign for Mbabazi but to campaign for candidate Yoweri Museveni? 

Is Government aware and is it taking the necessary steps? (Applause)

3.17
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): The Government is, of course, very much aware that the Inspector-General of Police is performing his duty as Inspector-General of Police and is not aware that he is campaigning for Mbabazi - [Hon. Members: “Against.”] or even against Mbabazi. (Laughter)

3.18
MRS BEATRICE BARUMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is our Government doing about the persistent decline in milk prices, which is affecting dairy farmers and knowing very well that acaricides and other animal drugs are very expensive? Is Government trying to subsidise the price of drugs for animals and acaricides? I thank you.

3.19
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yes, Government is certainly very much aware that ours is a private sector market-oriented capitalist economy. Prices are determined by market forces, demand and supply. Again, the good news is that whereas in the past, even when the NRM had taken power, we depended on importation of milk from outside Uganda. We got powdered milk from Denmark and places like that. The good news is that Uganda now produces enough milk for its domestic consumption and indeed, has embarked on a large scale marketing programme to export our milk and it is beginning to find market in many places. So, on the basis of the market forces, we expect that with this increase of demand for our milk, the prices will definitely go up. 

The acaricides have been a problem mainly because of quality control. We have been inundated by chemicals that clearly were either fake or were not effective and those of you who have been in the market know. Government has been taking steps to ensure that what comes in is actually what it says it is. I suspect that this has been partly the cause of the rise in the price. 

My expectation is that once the supply becomes steady again, the price should stabilise at a level that is affordable. I thank you.

3.21
MR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I sent you this question a few days ago to give you time to get some information on it and I am going to ask now. How do you explain the rise in poverty in the North and the East and the declining poverty in the Central and West between –(Interjections)- Let me finish - between the years 2009 to 2013, according to Uganda National Household Survey? (Interjections) 

Let me elaborate; according to that survey report, the number of poor people increased in the North and the East over the period of 2009 to 2013 by 0.5 million and 0.6 million persons respectively.

At the same time, the number of poor people declined in Central and the West over the period 2009 to 2013 by 0.4 million and 0.9 million persons respectively. And yet, before that period – that between 2005 and 2009, poverty in all regions had declined. So, can you explain this rise and decline in poverty during this period? 

3.23
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, I had not received hon. Okuonzi’s question. If I had, I would have got the full statistics because I do not have them right now. But I undertake to get that information from UBOS and I will be able to answer you. Thank you.

3.24
MS RITA NINSIIMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, why is Government not coming out clearly on stopping the Comprehensive Nursing Course, aware that the Permanent Secretary has asked the Health Service Commission not to recruit Comprehensive Nurses? 

And aware also that these nurses were meant for Health Centre IIs, which have now been phased out - so that we can save the little money parents are wasting on tuition for these children and yet, they are not going to be employed anywhere?  Thank you.

3.25
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, we did make that point last week. Whereas I do store a lot of information and knowledge about what goes on in Government, obviously, I do not have all the details about everything. I should not be expected to have. So, some of these questions would be best answered if they are given in advance so that I can get answers for them - (Interruption)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, is it in order for us to – because I know we copied this “Question Time” from Britain where the Prime Minister is actually the head of government and ministers work on his behalf. 
Is it, therefore, in order for us to disturb hon. Amama Mbabazi? This is because here, these ministers work on behalf of the President – hon. Mbabazi is not the originator of Government policy and that is why you see this confusion coming up; the Minister is whispering to him perhaps what the President thinks about this matter. 

Is it in order for us to disturb hon. Amama Mbabazi, who is generally a simple minister, by asking him to answer some of these difficult questions, which should have been answered by the Head of State? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is the Leader of Government Business in this House and that is what the Constitution says.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I would also like to raise a point of order: Is it in order for hon. Okumu to lower his standards of debate in this House? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not been able to gauge where the level was before in order to determine where it is now. (Laughter)

3.29
MS CHRISTINE ACAYO (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to know why the National Medical Stores is charging Health Centres IIIs for the Mama Kits, which are being distributed. Condoms, HIV testing kits and Mama Kits are supposed to be delivered to these health centres free of charge because there was an appropriation for them. So, why are they being charged? Thank you.

MR MOHAMED KAWAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. This session of question to the Prime Minister is intended to update us and the whole nation of the affairs in this country. Are we proceeding well when certain pertinent issues are raised and just left hanging? 

Permit me to recap on the issue raised by hon. Ninsiima of where parents and the government are spending money to train Ugandans that are not going to be employed anywhere. Such a pertinent matter has been left hanging; are we procedurally right to do that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are proceeding correctly; questions are being asked and answers are being supplied. As I said last week, it would be better if a general indication of the areas that are going to be covered is supplied to the Government so that it is processed – because that is what happens in other parliaments. Sometimes, when you sit in the House of Commons – And I would expect the member for Mbale Municipality to listen when the Speaker is also speaking. When the Prime Minister’s question time is on, you sometimes see the Prime Minister reading from a prepared text, meaning that some of the questions had been sent in advance. 

And I said that the whips should be able to coordinate this so that we use these 45 minutes productively. Questions are asked where there are clear answers so that we reduce on the time for questions for oral answers that take long time to be processed – this one will give answers immediately. But if they are not processed, that is how this gap comes about. That is what I said last week. 

We are only trying to slowly improve on this so that at one point, we will have the Prime Minister fairly respond to every question that is asked because the question is looked at in advance. So, you ask a question on general area of coverage. For example, you can ask a question on Comprehensive Nursing in Uganda. This will let the Prime Minister provide good answers so that the country gets to know what the situation is. That is the purpose of these 45 minutes. It is not about testing the Prime Minister’s knowledge; it is to ask for information which should be supplied to the House. That is the purpose of this time. So, let us use it properly. 

3.32
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, the question is - Health Centre IIs are being closed – no Health Centre II has been closed and there is no intention by this government to close any Health Centre II. (Applause)

The question of Comprehensive Nursing is a question that is being discussed by Government and by the ministries of Health and that of Education and Sports. And the moment they come up with a position, this House and the country will be informed.

The National Medical Stores, yes, does send health kits to district and the various levels of health care, normally on demand or on the basis of requisitions by the districts. Mama Kits are treated under this arrangement.

To the best of our knowledge, Mama Kits are not sold and none of these medicines are sold. Where it has happened, that is a malpractice that should be reported to authorities for appropriate action. Thank you.

3.35
MR ODO TAYEBWA (FDC, Bushenyi Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we are all aware that this is a rainy season in the whole country and many crops have been destroyed in addition to a number of properties in Western, Eastern and so forth. Recently, while we travelled to Bunyoro, we came across a situation that showed that hailstones had destroyed most of the crops. Also recently, I watched a television news piece where the Rt hon. Speaker was visiting some of the areas that have been destroyed by rains in the East especially in the areas of Busoga and Bududa. The question is: What is Government doing to help the people that have been affected by these calamities?

3.36
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Well, the government does respond to occurrences of disaster. What happened in Kamuli and many other places where there were rainstorms is clearly a disaster. And as the honourable member knows, Government has been responding fairly quickly to provide relief to affected people because that is the best Government could do immediately and anywhere in the world; that is what happens.

In areas where destruction has been extensive, for instance, of crops and things like that, we have a system of distributing relief, meaning some food to eat but also some seeds for the people to plant. I believe that some of the Members of Parliament from some of those areas that have been affected have actually been involved in the distribution of maize seeds.

So, we think that is the best we can do. Of course, the more extensive the damage, the more constraining it is on the part of Government in light of the limited resources that Parliament appropriated for this programme under the Vote of the Office of the Prime Minister. Thank you.

3.38
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the Land Acquisition Act of 1965, Section 20 requires the Minister of Lands to put in place regulations to govern the assessment and payment of compensation to project affected persons. However, to- date, these regulations have not been in place, which has made compensation to project affected persons to remain at the mercy of the valuers. What is the government doing to solve this problem? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.39
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Hon. Michael Mawanda, I will have to check if that Land Acquisition Act of 1965 is still operational. You know, in our 1995 Constitution, it is stated that the Constitution saves all the existing laws as of the date of promulgation of that Constitution. But it says that all the laws would have to be read, to ensure they are in conformity with the Constitution. Our Constitution is very clear on the question of compensation, especially there is compulsory acquisition of land by the State.

Generally, where Government exercises its power to take over land or property, it must carry out compensation on the basis of the market value of that time of the property involved, which means there must be valuation done to show the market value of that particular asset.

Therefore, I am not sure that – I will have to look at the Land Acquisition, if it is still in existence and effective to see whether it conforms to these provisions of our Constitution and find out, indeed, whether it is necessary even to have regulations in light of that. This is because the regulations about compensation generally in Government are indeed provided for under a different law. Thank you 

3.41
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Rt hon. Prime Minister, for the last five years, local governments have failed to pay pension for their workers who have retired. When do you intend to bring a Bill so that the Central Government legally pays because H. E the President directed that they be paid but there is no law?

3.42
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I am reliably informed that indeed, Central Government took over the responsibility of paying pension for retirees of local government and for the last three years, Central Government has been actually paying. Thank you.

3.44
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have a question with two related issues, which I would like the Prime Minister to clarify. According to our labour market, most of the drivers of the earth-moving equipment in the country are foreigners, who come from outside the country. The biggest question is; Where in Uganda do we train the drivers for the earth-moving equipment? I am aware that the Ministry of Agriculture imported equipment and they could not raise drivers. 

The other related issue, is that according to the Auditor- General’s successive reports; the professional staff in our universities is below 50 percent in all national universities. Would this be responsible for the declining quality of standards, given the World Bank report, which equated the Ugandan doctors to the nurses in Kenya? Would that be responsible?

3.46
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): It is true that drivers of earth-moving equipment have in the past been mainly foreigners because of our history and turmoil of this country, we did not have this equipment and there was no demand for that skill of driving heavy earth-moving equipment. But now that Uganda stabilized, we are heavy in construction and therefore, we have usage of earth-moving equipment, the demand has increased and therefore, the necessity to establish institutions to train these people has arisen and a centre is opened in Luwero, for training these people and of course, they are also trained in workshops and generally on the job. 
I am happy with the level the progress in creating this capacity in the country. Thank you.

3.47
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, my question is: Is it a change of policy of Government that those who are recruited in Police are not paid during the time of training? 

If it is not, why is it that those who were recruited around October 2010 and passed out in June 2011 were not paid for all the months that they were on training? Is it corruption in the police? Thank you.

3.48
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Speaker, I was trying to remember if I knew the training of my hon. brother Lubogo, the assumption we make is that when you are recruited and you are taken for training, the process of being taken on as an employee is not complete until you have passed the course and you, therefore, qualify to be taken on in which case you are paid when you are a staff. Those in training are actually paid allowances and that has been the practice not only in the police force but in many other places and obviously, it clearly conforms to logic.

3.49
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale) Thank you very much, Mr speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, does the government have any plan in improving on the road from Mukono via Uganda Christian University to Jokas Hotel and also from Seeta through Namugongo to By-pass, to reduce on the ever increasing heavy traffic, which tries to enter Kampala from all the districts of the East including heavy vehicles to Rwanda, Burundi and Southern Sudan?
 
3.50
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): My answer to the hon. Jack Wamai is yes. (Laughter)

3.50
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman representative, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Recently, the Government called upon ex-soldiers to retrain and re-deploy and many ex-soldiers from Zombo District were taken up. Last month, when I went home, I found that some of them had been sent home without explanation. They do not know why they were sent  home with army uniform. 

I am asking the Rt hon. Prime Minister; are you aware of this? What plans do you have for them? And isn’t it a security risk for ex-soldiers to go home with uniform?

3.51
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I will have to find out the actual reason but the normal reason that I know when people go to train in military establishment, when they are sent home, it is obvious that they have not been able to cope with the demand of the training and therefore, they go home.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I now have the Leader of the Opposition? The time is up.

3.52
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. There are a few policy issues I would like the Prime minister to give this House better answers to. On the question of Health Centre IIs, when the President was delivering the State of the Nation Address last year, he sort of referred to Health Centre IIs while indicating that they were going to be phased out. 

There is no clear policy on Health Centre IIs from the government and they are death-traps in villages. There is no doubt that the villagers want them but they have no personnel and no medicine and the small kiosks, which house them and which were built have cracked and are uncared for. So, we need a policy on Health Centre IIs and the country must know.

On the question of Gen. Kayihura as our IGP, the Prime Minister dismissed it but it is a serious matter for the head of Police to get involved in party politics. Those tapes, which we were listening to on the social media and also in the mainstream media are sending anxiety among the public. There is no doubt that the government owes citizens an explanation. It might not be today but it must be made because Gen. Kayihura has not denied anything. He said those were his tapes and they were stolen.

The other point is on the issue of distribution of seeds and NAADS. Again, we need a clear statement from Government on NAADS. There have been a lot of statements made by the President on NAADS over the years but they have not come here for us to know what Government has decided to do with NAADS. Right now, we have some haphazard way of distributing seeds and we notice that some parts in the countryside are partisan; that seeds are distributed in a partisan way. All Ugandans are farmers and when seeds are distributed, they should be distributed to those who want them, those who have land and those who know how to farm not to those who sing songs of whatever party.

Lastly, on the issue of pension in Uganda, which is a nightmare, getting one’s pension is a nightmare. Inside here, are people who have been civil servants, who have retired but it takes years for somebody to get their pension. Why is it very difficult for Government to ensure that if Wafula is retiring in June, he can automatically get the next salary in July as pension? Why can’t that be done? Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt hon. Prime Minister, as you get up, there was an issue from hon. Dombo about university staff and the quality of output of students and then there was an earlier issue from hon. John Ken- lukyamuzi about his inability to address his people and yet, that is the reason he was elected.

3.56
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I am sorry I was not clear on the Health Centre IIs. Let me be as explicit as I can possibly be. We have made statements; the President has made statements and I have made statements myself that the policy of Government is to consolidate health care mainly primary health care at Sub-County level. We are obviously facing a constraint of resources both human; personnel and financial and it is not possible for us to handle Health Centre IIs at the moment in all the 5000 plus parishes. 

So, the policy is that for those Health Centres IIs, which were built at the parish where you have buildings - and it is true in many of them you do not have supply of either personnel or even of drugs - we will maintain the buildings but certainly, we are not going to build new Health Centre IIs until we have fully equipped, both in terms of staffing and resources, Health Centre IIIs, IVs, the referral hospitals, the national hospital. That is the policy; it is very clear.

Eventually, my expectation is that in order to fulfill our manifesto obligation for which the people of Uganda voted NRM, we will have a health care centre within walking distance of every home. (Interjections) Our policy, our pledge for which the people of Uganda voted the NRM into Government - one of them on health care is that we will have a health care unit or centre within walking distance of every home in Uganda but this is a process. It is not something that can happen overnight. So, that is clear.

On Gen. Kayihura getting involved in party matters, I think I answered that. (Interjections) Yes, I did answer that because the question I answered was in connection with Mbabazi but I can answer this one as a point of principle. The Police is a national institution that must serve all Ugandans irrespective of their political inclination or sectarian identity. This is obvious and our Police must build a reputation where it is respected by all, whether in Government or in the Opposition and it is critical that this is achieved. (Applause)

On the distribution of seeds and NAADS - what decisions have we made on NAADS? I thought I was clear enough. We have taken a decision to create a single spine service in the Ministry of Agriculture to provide extension service for our agricultural production. 

At the moment, we have been having extension service officers in the Ministry of Agriculture and we are having a parallel structure of NAADS. That parallel structure of NAADS has been eliminated and all those who have been experts under NAADS, providing extension service will fall under that single spine arrangement in the Ministry of Agriculture. 

On the distribution of seeds, we actually think that it was an error for NAADS to be involved in distributing seeds, livestock and all those things. You can see some of the shortfalls that were experienced in that.

On pension, I answered the question. I have said that the question of pension is a big challenge in this country as we all know. The Budget Framework Paper that we have presented clearly brings out this. We have already presented this back to Parliament because the Bill is so huge and it is not possible for our economy to accommodate it at once. So, our plan has been to phase it and pay in phases until we have paid it all. We have made a lot of progress because we have paid many who fall under the category of pensioners.

On university staffing, it is true that most of the public universities are not fully staffed. Makerere University,  is staffed up to around 50 percent – [Hon. Members: “45 percent.”] The last time I was at the university, they said 46 percent or something like that. We are fully aware of this but again, it is a budgetary matter, which we have discussed with the authorities. 

In the case of Makerere, I did set up a team of experts led by Prof. Omaswa and now, they submitted a report that I have not yet read. We are going to have to study it to see the best way of addressing this challenge.

Hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi should – [Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi: “Can I just summarise?”] No, just a second. I want to inform hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi in case he did not know that he has the full right to conduct meetings in his constituency as the elected leader of that area in accordance with the law. [Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi: “Do I stop Lukwago from attending my meetings?”] So, if you call meetings of your constituency, nobody should stop you if you do it in accordance with the law. You are entitled to doing that like I do in mine.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Clarification.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No. 

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Clarification, Mr Prime Minister.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, I do not think that it is appropriate, Mr Speaker, to talk about my friend Erias Lukwago because the matters of Lukwago are before court. I have been following through the public media the various orders that the courts have been issuing –

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Clarification, Mr Prime Minister, if you do not mind?

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Yes.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: I am overjoyed that you have accepted. Mr Speaker, the clarification that I am seeking from the Prime Minister is two-fold. Knowing that I am the one representing Lord Mayor Lukwago in Parliament, why should Police insist that he should not attend the meetings that I called, well knowing that Lukwago is a resident of my constituency? Is there any decree that court has issued stopping Mr Lukwago from attending a meeting?

Lastly, I alluded to a very important constitutional point and I said that are you aware, Mr Prime Minister, on several occasions, the Attorney-General of Uganda has come out in the open to defy court orders of the High Court and abuse them. Are you aware that doing so is open defiance of Article 126 (1), Article 128 (2) and (3) of the Constitution? If you are aware, how can you allow such a person to continue masquerading out of law? (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, I really find it difficult to comment on a detail from him on which I do not have a response by those who may have stopped Mr Lukwago from attending your meetings. I do not know if they stopped Lukwago or stopped you and I do not know the reasons that happened. Therefore, I am not in a position to really answer that. 

The only point that I can make and repeat because I have already made it is that hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, my good old friend is entitled to hold meetings in his constituency as the area MP. The only rider is that he must do so in accordance with the law. That is all and nothing stops him.

About the Attorney-General - masquerading as what? (Laughter) [Mr Ken-Lukyamuzi: “Masquerading out of law.”] Masquerading out of law –(Laughter)– I am sorry but I must confess that I need a bit of interpretation to understand exactly what the question means. I do not know how masquerading out of law - 

But let me say this about court orders, generally. This Government fully respects orders of court. We obey them. There is no single time court has issued an order and this Government has not complied. We know very well that when orders are made - if we do not agree with them, we know how to go about challenging them. (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Mr Speaker, I am standing on a point of order pursuant to Article 126 (1) of the Constitution vis-à-vis Article 128 (2) and (3) of the same Constitution. Those three state that institutions or authorities of Government are expected to assist courts of law in putting into implementation the decisions that they have made.

It is on record that in the recent past, the honourable Attorney-General has come out in the open to state, in open defiance of what Justice Nyanzi and Lady Justice Mugambe concerning the Lord Mayor. Is the Prime Minister, who is supposed to know what is going on in Uganda, in order to give an impression that he has never heard anybody saying that the Attorney-General of Uganda has masqueraded with a negative answer that he does not believe that the court order is binding? Is he in order to tell an open lie? And is the Prime Minister an honourable person? And why don’t you speak the truth?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you know that defiance of a court order means you act in spite of the court order – you know that there is an order but you ignore it and continue doing what the court has stopped or you stop what the court has allowed. That would be defiance. Commenting on a court order does not amount to its defiance.

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Much obliged. (Laughter)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: So, I just want to assure my honourable brother, Ken-Lukyamuzi and the country at large that this Government does respect orders of court. At any rate, you could not have a government that is fully responsible for the restoration of the rule of law in this country to act to the contrary. Therefore, please, be assured that we know the rules and even where we disagree with court rulings, we know how to handle them. 

I think those are the points. Thank you very much and see you next time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, I think there is item No.3, which is the laying of papers. Let us defer it and handle it later. Let us go and see – there is an urgent matter that a Member has. Let us go to item No.5.

STATEMENT ON THE REPORTED IMPEACHMENT OF RT HON. MARGARET ZZIWA, SPEAKER OF THE EAST AFRICAN LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Shem Bageine): Mr Speaker, on 26 March 2014, a notice to remove the Speaker of the East African Legislative Assembly was served on the Clerk of the Assembly.

On 1 April 2014, the motion to remove the Speaker of East African Legislative Assembly was tabled in the Assembly but without being discussed. This matter touches on East African Legislative Assembly, which is an independent assembly. And in this regard, the matter has been brought to the attention of the President of Uganda, who has since been consulting with the Members of the Summit with the view to finding a solution.

I wish to inform this House that whatever the outcome of that consultation, Uganda will remain in the seat of the Speaker. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, there have been some issues in the press – some of which I saw – about exchanges between the leadership of the Committee on the East African Affairs and members of East African Legislative Assembly. As I said last week – and I will repeat now for clarity - there seems to be some gaps between our Rules of Procedure and the Treaty. Our Rules of Procedure seem to go beyond what the Treaty anticipates or even allows. So, we might need to find a moment to review our Rules of Procedures so that we are in absolute conformity with what the Treaty says.

For example, I saw that the committee chairperson made a statement that they would begin procedures for the recall – or something like that. That is not part of what is anticipated by the Treaty, let alone our Rules of Procedure. But let us leave it at that; the matters are being handled at the level at which they should be handled. However, we need information and the minister has said that what he has said is the current information. When the final decision is taken, he will be coming back to the House. 

This is because under Article 65 of the Treaty, the minister has audience with the House and can interact with us to supply information. So, let us leave this matter as it is for now until we come back with new information.

STATEMENT ON THE MURDER CASES IN KIRYANDONGO DISTRICT

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr James Baba): Mr Speaker, the statement on the murders in Kiryandongo was comprehensively presented by my senior colleague, the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs to this House and it was also circulated. 

I recall that what remained is maybe for the honourable member who raised the issue to give a response to that statement.

4.20
MR SAM OTADA (Independent, Kibanda County, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to collect the record and say that this was a statement that, first of all, appeared more or less like an addendum to a statement to Parliament on the response to allegations that some political leaders are denied permission to hold public meetings, the conduct of the Police force and the reported murder cases in Kiryandongo.

This caused a bit of a problem because it was the first time that this House was receiving a statement that is a two in one. And remember that the Rt Hon. Madam Speaker made a ruling that we discuss the matters of Police and indeed, we discussed it and it went on until late in the night; actually, most honourable members were not in the House. It went on up to about 9.00 O’clock on Thursday night and what was now left was the report on the murder cases in Kiryandongo. 

Mr Speaker, if you look at this report, honestly speaking, this is not a statement; it is half a page, with bullet points about five or seven lines of bullet points and I think my colleagues hon. Members of Parliament may not - I do not want to attempt to speak on your behalf - but you may not find this a normal report and you may find it very difficult to speak to this report. 

Let me say this, I am also aware that matters of security may not be detailed and I will attempt to pick out probably from the status report, which comes as an annexure (d) of this report. I do not know whether Members have this but for those who have their iPads, it was posted there. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, can you confirm to the House whether the information you gave to the House, the issues you raised, have been confirmed in those statements.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In part and I wanted with your indulgence to raise the issues, which I had raised before and that have not been responded to in this report if you allowed me to proceed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

If you remember, hon. Members, I raised the matter that there was threat to life to the Chairman LC V of Kiryandongo District at a public function in Kiryandongo where a one Maiteke Baitera George who is mentioned in this report as an accomplice to a murder case in this report by the Gen. Aronda where he made a threat to the LC V Chairman threatening his life and the life of other people and this was recorded under CRB 1741/2013. I said, Mr Speaker, that this case did not see the light of day; that was my first complaint. And I wanted the minister to respond to that. 

Two, the minister also alludes in the annexure that an extrajudicial statement was made by a suspect called Musita David Byaruhanga at whose house a scarf of the deceased person was discovered as an exhibit and the minister’s report says that this Byaruhanga Musita made an extrajudicial statement that this Baitera Maiteke – and for purposes of proper disclosure, because there is nothing to hide here, this was the former Member of Parliament, in the Sixth Parliament, whom I replaced. This suspect made an extrajudicial statement that this gentleman, former hon. Member, hired him at a cost of Shs 3.0 million to kill Kulabako Monica who is politically connected to me; it is in this report.

Therefore, I said that the people of Kiryandongo are discontented because you see, what is public opinion becomes a fact born in mind. The people believe that the deaths, which are going on of over ten people within a space of four months - and personally, I am saying that these deaths, for which this former honourable colleague confessed that he was going to kill people under this CRB case for which I want the minister to interest himself, culminated to the death or the murder of my political assistant and that there are seven out of ten cases in this report, that relate to murder through hacking, killing people with sharp objects -

Is there a new terrorist threat in the country so that the mode of killing is the same? Is there something that needs to be dug deep, that the minister did not capture?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you made those statements in the House. The issue I would like to help the House with is, did the response given to the statement comprehensively handle your matters? If it does not, then we take it to another level. Then we would just issue instruction so that the matter is handled comprehensively.

MR OTADA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I complained that very day that there is actually no report because it was very shallow. When the Rt Hon. Speaker on Thursday adjourned the House, I remember the hon. Former Defence Chairman, hon. Muwuma made a request, which was allowed that actually, we should even get to the bottom of the death, for example, of this young lady who was murdered, the 17 year old girl who was murdered; of the murder of a woman whose body was even carnibalised and so on and we required a more comprehensive statement about mysterious killings. 

Therefore, I want to submit that to me, there is no report to debate. I also want to submit to the hon. Minister a list of numbers that were recovered from Byaruhanga Musita, the lead suspect who made that self-extra judicial statement – a list of telephone numbers and out of which telephone numbers there are three different numbers that are all footnoted “Big Boss”, three different numbers and I said that the case, which we are reporting here, that is before the DPP and that former hon. Member made a statement and so on, that case was not properly handled. This was left out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think the best way to handle this is to have the minister go, do more investigations and consultations and come back and inform the House on this specific issue of the killings in Kiryandongo, in a comprehensive way so that we can look at it properly.

MR JAMES BABA: This is a commitment we made in the statement the minister read as to the way forward to these murders. One was that, the team comprising of special investigators and crime squad has been formed to re-enforce investigations and operations in Kiryandongo District; two, Police to extradite and conclude investigations on the reported murders; three, Police to enhance patrol within and along the highway in Kiryandogo District. All these have been put in place, following this report to Parliament.

So, yes, the investigations are not complete but there are going on with the serious they deserve and we will request the hon. Member to avail those telephone numbers to the investigators so that thorough investigations can be done, which could lead to those who did the murders.

Of the ten murder cases, we did highlight, in this report, the categories of the murder, some were clear case robbery cases, some were crimes of passion although they all happened within the same area and within the same vicinity. But these coincidences can happen, it is very unfortunate but the Police are trying to get at the bottom of it. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think then we have a more comprehensive report, a statement that we can debate. Right now, we have noted that the report that has been given is not comprehensive; it does not cover the subject, but the minister has accepted that this should be done and when it is ready he should come back to the House then we can have a discussion on this.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, most obliged. I just have one request; you see, when it is left open-ended and I know this might be difficult for the hon. Minister – you know the capacity of your ministry and your officers in so far as handling cases and pray we give them timelines when you expect them to come back with the matter, which is being investigated.

What time-frame do you want this House to look into, because I can tell you I have shared this with many colleagues; this is not a matter for me. 

Many colleagues share the same concern.

MR JAMES BABA: Mr Speaker, I just hope that the Police can complete this work within one week or within two weeks. But the most important thing is to get to the bottom of this and get the real culprits, and I think this should be your interest. (Interjections) But we can keep updating you. I think what you should be interested in is who are behind these murders.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we have an update in two weeks? 

MR BABA: That is okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In two weeks’ time, we have an update on the processes of investigation and that should now cover general concern of Members that there are mysterious things going on and then it could help us.

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, Kiryandongo is not far from Lira. I think you heard that couple of weeks ago, traders had a very serious strike because of the serial murders that were targeting the traders and it has become wide-spread. Even after the Inspector General of Police went to Lira and addressed more or less a political rally but still, the murders continued.

So, can I seek your guidance, Mr Speaker, if the minister can broaden the report to include Lira as well and generally, Lango sub region? (Interjections) I do not know about Bunyoro, but at least I can speak for Lango sub region because it is not only Lira but we have also heard incidences of such murders in Dokolo and Amolatar. So, can the minister, please, broaden that, while focusing on Kiryandogo but also broaden on other neighbouring regions?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, please, make it as comprehensive as possible in the time-frame given to you. That is two weeks’ time. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PLIGHT OF FORMERLY ABDUCTED CHILDREN AND PERSONS AFFECTED BY THE LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that this motion was presented, debated comprehensively and a smaller committee constituted to process the recommendations or resolutions that would come out of this motion, a signed copy of which has been given to me. 

I now begin to process the resolutions one by one so that we can take decisions. That is how far it had gone. So, this is decision time on the Motion for a Resolution of Parliament on the Plight of Persons Affected by the LRA Rebellion. I will put the question and we will be adopting the clauses as we go along:

“Now, therefore, be it solved by Parliament that:
    1) Continue to closely monitor the recovery, rehabilitation and integration challenges faced by the LRA war victims and communities in Northern Uganda.”
	
I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 2) “Focus at practical measures in collaboration with regional parliaments, civil societies in the affected region and the international community to promote the safe release of all abducted persons from LRA and the repatriation of children and adults who are released or escaped from LRA captivity.”

I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 3) “Urges the Government of Uganda and other international agencies to increase and channel the development assistance and investments directly to communities affected by LRA insurgency in order to counter the development deficit and deplorable humanitarian crisis created by the insurgency.” 

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, the hon. Okumu is not here so he could have helped us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is right behind you.

MR OTADA: I am sorry. I thought that we were talking about a policy that would focus on the rehabilitation of the individuals. Because the way it is, it appears to me as though development assistance like right now we have PRDP, it is general. I thought we were talking about something that is more focused to the victims. That is the clarification I was seeking.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There are a series of others still coming. This is only number 3 of 10. I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 4) “Urges the Government of Uganda to engage the other members of the International Conference of the Great Lakes Region to recognise the LRA as a threat to regional stability, and to lobby the UN to include all LRA affected areas in its current mandate in Central Africa.”
I put the question to that. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 5) “Urges Government of Uganda to establish a gender-sensitive reparation fund and offer reparation to women and men that were affected by the LRA rebellion. Government should provide priority in livelihood, health care, skills training and education for women, children, and victims of the LRA conflict in order for these people to live in dignity.”

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to make an amendment by adding “Persons with Disability”; men, women, PWDs because this war has rendered very many people disabled in Northern Uganda and they are suffering, without any special programme. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I hear from the mover of the motion, do you agree to that amendment?

MR OKUMU: I support the amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The mover of the motion agrees to the motion for amendment. I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 6) “Urges Government to increase the budgetary provision for free health services (health insurance) especially on sexual and health reproductive, fistula, HIV/AIDS, gynaecological problems, orthopaedic support, psycho-social support, as well as ensuring that such services are easily accessible to women and children who were affected by the insurgency.”

I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 7) “Government should put a mechanism with regional governments in the LRA affected areas to identify, integrate and regularise stateless children born in captivity. Government should, therefore, recognise a special unique need of the children born in captivity whose fathers and patrilineal heritage is unknown and have a review of the law that requires information and documentation on paternity to be amended as well.” 

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I remember when we were debating this motion, we did not recognise only the LRA, but we also included the ADF victims. On this one, I would like also to include that the areas, which were affected by the ADF rebels most especially the Rwenzori region should also be catered for in this one, that those victims should be compensated.

THE DEUPTY SPEAKER: Is that okay? The motion is LRA rebellion. Is it - 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I am a bit confused. When you say that anybody who claims to have been produced in the bush belongs to Uganda, it becomes a very big problem. I see a scenario where non-Ugandans are going to claim to have been produced by Ugandans in the bush and they will come and take our country when we are just watching.

I have a conviction that where we have some doubt - because honestly, if the father is not seen, at least the mother should be seen but in an event where the mother and the father are not seen, at least the relatives of the mothers and fathers can be - Can we undertake some DNA tests? Otherwise, all Congolese and Sudanese who are looking forward to staying because their countries are not stable will become Ugandans.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How will you know the relatives?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Genetic studies. You have to do some gene -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That means you pick this child from the bushes and come and test all Ugandans to see - No, that is not practical.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to respond to the amendment as moved by hon. Kafuda. Much as I believe that many people in Kasese were also affected by ADF, when you take the title of the motion, it is a “Resolution of Parliament on the Plight of Persons affected by the Lords’ Resistance Army Rebellion.”

Therefore, that will be a different motion. This one is very specific on LRA and I would say, maybe, in the future, we may have another motion. I believe that these people were also affected but as a seconder of this motion, I wanted this motion to be very specific on LRA.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I support the motion and resolution. However, I just want to inform this House and possibly the country that it is true Northern Uganda suffered for a long time just as it is also true that Rwenzori region also suffered. What is also clear is that these wars were different but at an appropriate time, we should be allowed to also present a similar motion to reflect the circumstances the people of Rwenzori region faced during the ADF war and provide remedies and possibly issues that can help sort the victims of the ADF war. 

At an appropriate time, Mr Speaker, we need to be given time to present this motion. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. I put the question to this.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 8) “Government should identify, integrate and settle child victims of formerly abducted women whose clan, social, tribal and cultural belongings are unknown.” 

I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 9) “Appreciate the UPDF for their resilient contribution towards restoration of peace and rescue of formerly abducted children and their continuous efforts to rescue more. Further urges Government to produce a status report on UPDF in Central African Republic.”

I put the question to that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 10) “Government should table, present progress on this matter to Parliament and also present a comprehensive transitional justice mechanism being worked on by the Ministry of Justice to put national truth and reconciliation as a healing process for the nation.”
 
I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

the DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will now put the question to the whole motion.

MR OTADA: Mr Speaker, just for clarity of mind; I do not know whether it is (5) that talks about urging IGAD to recognise the LRA as a threat. My question is, doesn’t IGAD recognise LRA as a threat? I thought it does. So, I wanted us to think about that because it is not clear.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: it is number four and it is not IGAD but ICGLR (The International Conference on the Great Lakes Region).

MR OTADA: Okay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I now put the question to the whole text of the motion as presented?

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, one of the reasons conflicts keep recurring in this country is that we have not documented the cost of conflict. Would it be an appropriate moment to put, among the resolutions, that Government documents the impact; the people we lost and infrastructure damage so that we do not only look at rehabilitating individuals but we look in terms of a country having documentation that informs our children and those to come the cost of such conflicts as a deterrent, so that in future, people should get to know. 

Civil wars in other countries, including America, are documented but in Uganda, if it gets worse, according to where you belong - I think that is not good for the country. Mr Speaker, if it is allowed, I think we would add that resolution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not heard a proposal. So -

MR MUKITALE: I propose an additional that Parliament urges Government to document the damages, the effects and the cost of the conflict. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have heard the proposal; it can be re-drafted later. Do you agree to the principle? Can we adopt the principle then? I will put the question to the amendment as proposed by the Member for Buliisa.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We agreed in our last discussion that Government puts in place affirmative action specifically for women and children affected by the LRA; specific programmes that target women and children -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Isn’t it there?

MR OLANYA: We should not look at the general programme. There are the general programmes that target women and children as you are saying but we are talking about affirmative action specifically for women and children.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is covered, Member for Kilak. 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, my concern is that whereas we have captured the establishment of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, we have not mentioned anywhere mechanisms for reconciliation to defuse conflicts before they explode into a disaster. I think that there must be mechanisms for reconciliation to deal with conflicts. 

HON. MEMBERS: Propose.

MRS OGWAL: I beg to move that Government puts into place a mechanism for reconciliation in order to effectively deal with conflicts.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would they need to first identify the conflicts?

MRS OGWAL: I beg your pardon.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think it is a prevention issue -

MRS OGWAL: Political or social conflict.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think that it is a prevention issue.

MRS OGWAL: For preventive purposes. Can you help me, Rt Hon. Speaker, as a lawyer? 

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, when you see Resolution No. 10 that Government should present the progress on this matter to Parliament – what the hon. Member is bringing is like one of the recommendations of that reconciliation team that is going to be created under 10 because all those come as a result of this reconciliation; that we have had this but one way of preventing such scenarios happening in future, the following should be done. 

So, when this truth and reconciliation team is in place, those are some of the recommendations that we expect out of that. So, I think that the recommendation of the senior colleague can be catered for in Recommendation No. 10. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Can I put the question to the proposal from the Member for Dokolo that it forms part of the principles to be adopted?

MR OTADA: I thought that I could improve it; that we urge Government to put into place an early warning mechanism to prevent conflicts. The justification is that we should be seen to be being more proactive than reactive when this conflict takes place. So, it is about an early warning mechanism or architecture. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Early warning mechanism for detection of possible conflict and prevention of them occurring. 

MR OKUMU: While I agree with the principle being proposed, I think that the motion is clear; it is on the LRA victims. Therefore, as my colleague, hon. Kiwanda, said, when you look at the last 10, our suggestion is that the Ministry of Justice - which is now actually working on a very comprehensive transitional justice process, which will include all this. We are urging the Ministry of Justice to expeditiously bring this matter to Parliament, where many of these detailed issues now being raised will have to come on board and, therefore, we would have a national healing process that would not only handle the LRA but would handle all the conflicts we have had in this country and settle this country once and for all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Members, the motion whose recommendations and specific prayers we have just processed is for “a Resolution of Parliament on the Plight of Persons affected by the Lord’s Resistance Army Rebellion.” I put the question to the motion now.

(Question out and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think that as a mechanism for us to follow up on this issue that we have just adopted, we should task the people who have shown interest in this matter to do the consultations and checking and if necessary, come back to the House and brief us on how far the processing of this resolution has gone. I am talking about hon. Reagan Okumu, hon. Godfrey Kiwanda and hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro of Sheema. 

Please, take it up and follow up on these matters and where necessary, come back to the House and brief us.

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I thank you very much. I would like to thank honourable colleagues for this. As I was coming, these formally abducted children said that I should bring to Parliament and lay on Table for you to see what they have been struggling with –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did that go through security, from the way it is packaged? (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: They have some bags, which they make and they have their names on them, when they were abducted and what they used the money for. They said this could be good for iPads –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, you are marketing? (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: They are the property of Parliament. They also have some bags. This is really an indication that they are not idle and they need support. I want to lay them on Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That item was not on the Order Paper. (Laughter)

MR OKUMU: Mr Speaker, I have a special one here, which they also said be a property of Parliament to see that the abducted children that have returned are not only asking for help but they are trying to survive and only want to be aided. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to lay these on Table as the property of Parliament. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that is a very good marketing trick that the hon. Member for Aswa has pulled on this House. But thank you very much. 

I congratulate this House upon the conclusion of this motion. It is important and affects many people and many of them are actually crying but when they hear us make a pronouncement of this nature on their behalf, I think they get hope that they have not been forgotten. It is a good and positive thing. I thank you. (Applause)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH ON THE PETITION ON THE OUTBREAK OF HEPATITIS B IN ADJUMANI AND MOYO DISTRICTS

4.59
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I come to present a report of the Committee on Health on the petition on the outbreak of Hepatitis B in Adjumani and Moyo districts. I beg to lay a copy of this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

DR OMONA: This is one of the four petitions that were in my committee. Allow me just say something about one report that is remaining because it has been a big request by this House. We have another report, which is a petition by children living with HIV/AIDS. 

We have done as much as we can and what is now remaining, for the record, is a response by one of the very critical witnesses in this. When this is done, we shall also present it to this House.

On 3 July, 2013, hon. Jesca Ababiku, Woman Member of Parliament Adjumani District, presented to the House a petition by the people of Adjumani and Moyo on the outbreak of Hepatitis B in Madi sub-region. 

It was indicated that in the period between April and July 2013 only, 121 cases had been registered in Adjumani alone and nine patients had died. The prayers of the petitioners were that Parliament should prevail on the Government to -
“
    1. vaccinate the entire population of the two districts;
    2. provide special health education on the importance of vaccination in the two districts;
    3. provide testing kits in the two districts;
    4. provide special support to the affected people; and
    5. intervene quickly to manage the outbreak”

The House referred the petition to the Committee on Health to study. And Mr Speaker, in our line of inquiry, we were guided by the following questions: That whether there was an outbreak of Hepatitis B in Madi sub-region and if yes, what interventions Government made to arrest the situation. And thirdly, that if there were any Government interventions, did the above prayers by the petitioners constitute the package of the intervention?

The source of our data was information from the Ministry of Health, the Director General of Medical Services and other technical officials in the ministry. The committee also conducted field visits to Northern Uganda to, among other things, assess the Hepatitis B intervention.

Our findings on the prevalence of Hepatitis B were that we learnt that a sero-prevalence survey conducted by the Ministry of Health, Uganda Virus Research Institute, and the Centre for Disease Control and WHO in 2009 indicated the prevalence of Hepatitis B as follows:
    (a) In North-eastern Uganda, the prevalence was 23.9 percent.
    (b) In North-central it was 20.7 percent.
    (c) In West Nile it was 18.5 percent.
    (d) In Western at 10 percent.
    (e) In Central at 6.2 percent.
    (f) In East was at 7.1 percent.
    (g) In East-central at 6 percent.
    (h) In Kampala at 5.3 percent.
    (i) In South-western at 3.8 percent.

It is also estimated that nationally, about 10 percent of the population has chronic infection of Hepatitis B virus. 

As you can see, Mr Speaker, the most affected places are North-eastern, North-central and West Nile sub-regions. This confirms that there was/or is Hepatitis B in Moyo and Adjumani districts as the petitioners indicated.

Mr Speaker, look at the greatest-at-risk population in Uganda; we were informed that the following categories of the population are more susceptible to contracting Hepatitis B virus: 
    (a) Children whose immune system is not yet well developed to fight the virus.
    (b) Health workers because it is reported that Hepatitis B prevalence in health workers is 10 times higher than in the general population. And that persons whose work or occupation exposes them to blood and body fluids from other persons, for example, health workers, humanitarian workers, care-givers among others.

The committee was informed by the health officials that up to 95 percent of the infected adults are able to clear Hepatitis from the body and become immune.

Government Intervention in the Elimination of Hepatitis B

The committee found that on the identification of the virus transmission, the Health Ministry was able to identify how the virus is transmitted –(Interruption)

MR KAFUDA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not know if it is the problem of the new technology – the iPad era – but we have not found the report on the iPad. So we are not following.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let someone else help you with that. Please, committee chairperson, proceed.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Health was able to identify how the virus is transmitted namely, coming into contact with the blood and body fluids. It was also established that the commonest mode of transmission of Hepatitis B was through: 

(a) 	Sexual contact with an infected person
(b) 	Sharing sharp objects like needles, razorblades and any skin-cutting or –piercing instrument
(c) 	Vertical transmission from an infected mother to the new born baby
(d) 	Blood transfusion and then 
(e) 	Child-to-child horizontal transmission, which tends to occur before five years of age in an era and area with a very high burden of infection.

The committee noted that the transmission mode of Hepatitis B is similar to that of HIV. However, the committee was informed by the area Members of Parliament that there is always an outbreak of Hepatitis B between the months of October and December each year. This suggests that further research is needed to establish the exact carrier for the virus and why it is only attacking during the October-December period, if the assertion of the area members of Parliament is correct.

Mr Speaker, on intervention of Government to contain Hepatitis B virus, we noted that Government’s interventions were or are global and thus do not focus on the petitioners’ geographic area only. The reported interventions include:
    (a) Health education and promotion: This is through sensitising communities on ways of preventing the spread of Hepatitis B through the media like local radios and TVs, among others.
    (b) Routine immunisation, which started in 2002. In 2002, the Hepatitis B vaccine was introduced through the pentavalent DPTBHIB combination in the Uganda National Expanded Programme on Immunisation (UNEPI). The vaccine is given to children in three doses at the age of six, 10 and 14 weeks and provides a life-long protection.

The committee was informed that to-date 8,897,343 children have been vaccinated. This is about 26 percent of our population, Mr Speaker.

On the vaccination of health workers; in July 2011, the exercise to vaccinate health workers was launched with vaccines that had been donated to Uganda by UNICEF. The committee was informed that the vaccines were not adequate to cover all health workers. However, in the Budget of the financial year 2013/2014, Government has procured adequate quantities of the vaccines for all health workers in public health facilities. The National Medical Stores was in the process of delivering the vaccines to the most affected regions.

The committee noted that the intervention by Government with regard to health workers was limited to those employed in public health facilities and excluded those in private health facilities, mission hospitals, school clinics, sickbays and others.

On the vaccination of other vulnerable groups, the committee was informed that apart from the children and health workers in public health facilities who are catered for under routine immunisation and vaccination campaign, a population of about 46 percent who are at risk are not catered for. The committee was informed that the cost of vaccinating this population is estimated at $29,533,353. (Looking at this is the attached computation.)It is indicated that the cost of vaccinating the vulnerable groups at risk in the districts of Adjumani and Moyo is about $315,880 and $432,100 respectively.

Mr Speaker, on the use of auto-destruct inject materials as a way of prevention of spread of Hepatitis B. In 2004, in a bid to control the spread of Hepatitis B and also HIV, Government introduced a policy of auto-destruct injection materials and completely stopped the use of re-usable syringes and needles in the country. This has reduced the spread of the virus.

Blood Screening

Mr Speaker, all blood for transfusion in hospitals and health facilities in Uganda are screened for Hepatitis B, C and HIV. There is also the advocacy for A, B, C Strategy and Advocacy as applied to the HIV/AIDS response has also been adopted for Hepatitis B prevention.

Mr Speaker, Hepatitis B screening services are available from Health Centre IV to the national level. The committee was assured that the plans are underway to expand the services up to health centres III.

Health Education Materials

The committee was informed that the Ministry of Health had developed health education materials which were due for print and would be ready for use in the first quarter of this year.

Mr Speaker, when we looked at Government intervention visa-avis the prayers by the petitioners, as seen above, the intervention by Government has been at the global level with no specific package or programme especially designed for the districts of Adjumani and Moyo. 

On the prayer that the entire population of the two districts be vaccinated, the committee observed that it was the best option of addressing the outbreak. However, the challenge was the cost involved. The committee recommends that given the budgetary constraints involved in vaccinating the entire population, Government should at least earmark and secure funds to vaccinate all the vulnerable groups such as the children and health workers.

On the prayer that Government should provide special health education on the importance of vaccination in the two districts, the committee was informed that the materials for health education were developed and were to be printed early this year. The state of this is still unknown.

The committee recommends that all efforts including research should be undertaken to understand the carrier of Hepatitis B virus with a view to stopping its spread. In addition, mass sensitization should be done by the central and local Government on the importance of vaccination against Hepatitis B. The sensitization should also be extended to the health workers.

During its field visits to Northern Uganda in January 2014, our committee was informed that some health workers in the Gulu Regional Referral Hospital had not shown interest in carrying out Hepatitis B vaccination. This suggested that health workers needed to be counselled and sensitised on the importance of vaccination.

On the prayer that Government should provide test kits to the health facilities in the two districts, the committee observed that the provision of medicines, vaccines and other medical supplies such as test kits is the responsibility of the National Medical Stores. The committee therefore recommends that the National Medical Stores should urgently procure and supply test kits to all health facilities to facilitate the tests for HIV/AIDS and Hepatitis B.

While on a visit to Northern Uganda, the committee found that most health facilities were complaining of inadequate test kits. Mr Speaker, in our next report about our visit to Northern Uganda, we hope to bring out these complaints very clearly.

On the prayer that Government should provide special support to the affected people, the committee observed that a number of communities are affected by this Hepatitis B Virus as indicated above. The committee therefore recommends that Government interests itself in investing in special programmes to target a few people, for example, only in Adjumani and Moyo, Government should be encouraged to design a comprehensive national strategy to deal with the Hepatitis B virus to address prevention, treatment and care of those infected and affected.

Mr Speaker, as the committee considered this petition about Hepatitis B in Moyo, we also received reports about the outbreak of Hepatitis E in Napak District. Hepatitis E is very different from Hepatitis B though they damage the same organ, the liver. The committee summoned the Minister of Health to outline the measures designed to address the new Hepatitis E, in Napak District.

The committee was informed that Hepatitis E had a lot to do with poor sanitation and hygiene. Through environmental sanitation, use of latrines, hand washing, improved hygiene, behaviour and community sensitisation, Hepatitis E should be managed. 
The committee therefore recommends that comprehensive water and sanitation programmes be designed for Karamoja and other water stressed areas to forestall the spread of that virus.

Mr Speaker, this is what our committee came out with in response to this petition. I pray that the report be adopted. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members, you will recall that this was a petition and the matters were urgent. It has taken time. What I haven’t heard is what is happening as of now because this was in July last year and they are reporting today. I don’t know whether there have been some changes, which the House ought to have been told but that is what we get into when these matters delay. But now that it has come in, let us try to have a short debate of about 15 minutes and that means each Member will take two minutes – yes, this is a straightforward matter.

5.17
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for presenting this report. It is true that Hepatitis B is a very serious disease that has emerged but I am also aware that from 2002 to date, children that have been born have been vaccinated. It is among the programmes running but the people who were born from 2001 backward like me are potential victims of this disease because we did not get vaccinated - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Were you born in 2001? (Laughter)

MS OLERU: No, I said people like me born from 2001 backwards. It is unfortunate that some of us didn’t get vaccinated, this being a new vaccine that has just been introduced. Government must know that such children have to be looked after by the parents. Therefore, if you only vaccinate the children and leave out their parents, then you are not doing a good service. You are bound to have very many orphans who may even die of other effects. Therefore, Government has to take up the responsibility of vaccinating all adults in that area.

Mr Speaker, I am also aware that this disease has not only affected Adjumani and Moyo; it almost affected the entire country but it is worse in West Nile, Lango, Acholi, Teso and Karamoja. The biggest challenge I have seen is the stigma and trauma that patients suffering from this disease are going through – (Member timed out.)

5.19
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to begin by thanking the committee for going to the field and coming up with this elaborate report.
I would also like to thank the donors and all our development partners for the work they have done because this is a very expensive disease to manage. And as this House maybe aware, Northern Uganda and the north-east areas are not doing well as far as poverty levels are concerned. And because of this, much as the donors are doing this, I would like to urge Government to come up immediately and within a timeframe and prioritise this issue because we are suffering in many ways and if you add the problem of Hepatitis B, I don’t know where the poverty levels will go.

Mr Speaker, I would like to re-echo what my colleague, the Member from Yumbe, said that much as the petition focused on the West Nile Region, Lango Sub Region and many parts of the country are also affected by this disease. And for that matter, I further urge Government to also focus on Lango Sub Region and aware of the fact that regions don’t have the money because I remember there was a time when one of my people asked me for Shs 300,000 to handle this particular case. If I have about 10 of them, as a Member of Parliament, I cannot handle this kind of problem. 

Finally, we have many problems as far as the health sector is concerned. We should not wait for a petition to come to this Parliament to handle this kind of –(Member timed out.)

5.22
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for bringing this report to the House. As my colleagues have said, this is a disease that I also fear because much as the petition touches Northern Uganda, we have isolated cases in our areas. Recently, I was contacted by one of my people in the region and he told me that he was found with viral Hepatitis. I didn’t know whether this was Hepatitis A, B or E. When I contacted Dr Bitekyerezo, he said that even though you have a lot of money, this disease cannot be cured. 

This is someone who is scrambling. He went to Mbarara Referral Hospital and that is where they detected the disease. Then I asked Dr Bitekyerezo, “Is this disease sexually transmitted? Is it contagious? What is it? “Because this person lives with people, enjoys everything with the community members and I cannot tell people that don’t interact with the person. So, I am in a dilemma. What do we do to that community? The community is not sensitized, the person is worried, I am also worried because the members of the community may be infected by the same disease.

They told him that the medicine cannot be accessed anywhere in any of the hospitals in western Uganda. I thought I would access it in these expensive pharmacies. When I asked they said no, may be that patient can go to Nsambya. So, I am really in a dilemma. If we are going to continue like this, hon. Minister, what do we tell our people to do with –(Interruption) 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, once you get the Hepatitis B virus, it does not have definitive treatment. Secondly, it is worse than HIV because HIV can be treated and you can contain somebody for some time. The trials that have been done as far as drugs are concerned; you combine anti HIV drugs plus drugs called interferons. Interferons are not in Uganda here, I found them in 2004 in Britain but they were very expensive, an ordinary Ugandan even an MP may not manage. That is why we are talking about vaccination of those who are not yet affected. That is why we are interested in vaccinating the health workers and children. 

Mr Speaker, I still want to emphasise that there is no definitive treatment, prevention is the way to go and it is sexually transmitted. Promiscuous people are in trouble. (Laughter)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you so much, Dr Bitekyerezo. Can this vaccination exercise roll out to the rest of the people in the country who are at risk because if you are saying that there is no medicine for those people who already have it, what about those people at risk –(Member timed out.)

5.26
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to support those who have contributed but I think the Ministry of Health should try very hard to sensitise the public. As someone mentioned, always this disease comes from poor hygiene especially during the rainy season. Cattle corridors are faced with Hepatitis B because when the rains come, people drink water containing faeces of these animals and when there are no toilets or latrines, what happens – (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I want to sort out this gentleman, hon. Kakooza. We are dealing with the Hepatitis B virus, not Hepatitis C or A. Is he in order for him to go on about Hepatitis A when we are on Hepatitis B and what I talked was real medical? Is he in order not to listen to me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member shall be relevant to the subject.

MR KAKOOZA: I think I have been quoted out of context, Mr Speaker. I said that most of these diseases like Hepatitis B, A and C that they are talking about - the Ministry of Health have it in their records that most rainy seasons come with those diseases. And the problem is that the Ministry of Health does not come out openly to inform the public –
 
DR BITEKYEREZO: Mr Speaker, I think I was very clear and I said that we are dealing with Hepatitis B. It can get you during the dry season or in the rainy season, so long as you have gotten into contact with blood of somebody who is infected or when you have sexual relationship with somebody who is infected and you are not protected. Is hon. Kakooza in order to continuously refuse to listen to me as a physician and he keeps bringing in Hepatitis B that it can affect you during the wet season? Is he in order to refuse to listen to me?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this matter has no rain or sun. So please stop dealing with your rainy seasons in those places.

MR KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, in the report that is on the Hansard, the chairperson mentioned about hygiene. This is what I am echoing. In the report he said that some parts in the area -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean in the dry season you don’t have to be hygienic?

MR KAKOOZA: Of course when it rains, Mr Speaker, what happens to people who in those areas – (Member timed out.)

5.29
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of Hepatitis B is not only in Adjumani. I remember when we first came to Parliament, we had a sensitisation meeting organised by the Ministry of Health and they gave out the statistics. Actually Hepatitis B is higher than the spread of HIV. They said the whole of Northern Uganda ranges between 23-25 percent in all regions of West Nile, Acholi, Lango, Teso and Karamoja. 

Just about a month ago, I read about the oil scientist who could have helped people with Hepatitis B; he was about to graduate with his PHD in oil engineering and he succumbed to Hepatitis B, from the central region. So, it is not only in Adjumani, Acholi sub region or the East; it is country wide. My appeal to Government is, we shouldn’t only focus on HIV/AIDS; let us also focus on Hepatitis B since there is vaccination for it. Why can’t a country take a bold step and have everybody vaccinated other than leaving only the children and yet we have big people also getting the disease. My appeal is that Government should take it up; they should at least have everybody vaccinated.

Mr Speaker, in my constituency when they were undertaking recruitment in the Army, one of the conditions was that you must not have Hepatitis B and because of that, out of the eight slots that were given to my district, they only managed to get four – (Member timed out.)

5.31
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I want to appreciate the committee for the report and to appreciate Government for at least taking the action of ensuring that the nurses or the health providers are vaccinated. I remember when we were fighting Ebola as a country, and a senior doctor in this country succumbed to Ebola, some people did say, including media houses who were reporting, that that was an occupational hazard. I want to appeal and remind Government that all health workers need to be protected. They need to be vaccinated so that they are not prone to such repeats. That is one of the key prayers I would like to put on record.

The other issue is that last month we were making ward rounds and when we reached Lacor Hospital in Gulu, we found a new phenomenon that was developing. It is not a virus that could call for a vaccine but there are drugs that the Ministry of Health is not looking at. They had over 60 cases of snakebites and the doctors were complaining of lack of anti-venom drugs, which cannot be accessed in the country. 

They are just gambling to see people recover yet some minutes ago, we were encouraging people to settle back but as they clear the bushes and settle in, they are being bitten by snakes and there are no drugs. There are so many cases upcountry that we need to address. So, let us not discuss piecemeal. I want to appeal to Government to address these issues squarely instead of acting piecemeal. Hon. Minister, I am an ally but kindly take up this issue as one of national concern. I thank you.

3.34
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would like to thank the Committee of Health for their good report about Hepatitis B. This disease is a general disease, which is caused by an infection with a Hepatitis B virus. So, everybody can get that disease; not only workers or those from the North, East, West or Central parts. As we make recommendations, they should be general. We are recommending that Government should carry out countrywide vaccinations and the key should be at each and every health centre in this country.

It is a very dangerous disease and it spreads very fast. It can spread through sexual contact, through sharing needles and equipment and even through work tasks. Everybody can get that disease. 

Mr Speaker, we should make these general recommendations for their national importance and make sure that the Ministry of Health takes them up to make sure that all health centres get specific kits and vaccines.

It is good that we got some statistics from the committee and I saw south-west getting 3.8 percent but to my knowledge, I know south-west because that is where my district of Kasese is and this disease is very prevalent there. So, we need a lot of research about this - (Member timed out.)

5.37
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I want to thank the committee for coming up with this report. As you can see from the report, this disease is very dangerous and deadly and we realise that Government has got to be very serious about Hepatitis B because our population is not aware of this disease. 

As the hon. Member has just said, we were sensitised about this disease way back in 2012 but we also asked the Ministry of Health to go down to the population and sensitise them on the dangers of Hepatitis B. You will see from the report that they are still compiling which means that the Ministry of Education has not yet sensitised the population on the dangers of Hepatitis B.

Mr Speaker, it was only last week that one of our people in Aromo sub-county died of Hepatitis B and very many are affected and infected. Three months ago, we went with Dr Elioda to Lira Regional Referral Hospital on ward rounds and he said, majority of the patients in Lira are anaemic and this is as a result of this disease. What beats my understanding here is that Government says that the drugs or vaccines for Hepatitis B are very expensive. Does the government value the lives of the people of Uganda because we have never put any budget allocation for Hepatitis B? The lives of our people should be valued – (Member timed out.)

5.39
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for having accepted this item to be debated today. I am very happy about it. I have one observation on the prevalence rate and I think the committee has not captured it well. The data you have is of 2009 but by the time I was presenting this, I put it clearly that there was an epidemic. That means that this report cannot adequately advise Government in which direction to move. There are a lot of inadequacies.

Two, the statement mentioned that some health workers in Adjumani District got vaccinated. However, for the few who got the chance to receive a dose, instead of getting three injections they were only injected once. That is since last year so there is no health worker in Adjumani - this morning I was in touch with my staff who got a full dose against it. 

Mr Speaker, I think that based on the gravity of the effects of Hepatitis B on the population, which constitutes Ugandans, we must prioritise it. It is even worse than HIV/AIDS and that is a fact. I am happy that the minister is here –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I felt at this point that I should supply my sister with this information that I got from the Commissioner for Clinical Services, Dr Ochama who has specialised in this field. What is going on at the moment – actually, we are breaching the law. There is a law that prohibits a health worker and a medical student from touching a patient if that person is not vaccinated –(Interjections)– yes, there is a law but unfortunately, I cannot recall the law. But this information was disclosed to us when we visited Arua Comprehensive School of Nursing and we were told that all the students in the nursing school and another private school we found in Maracha, the students were complaining of being exposed to patients who would actually render them vulnerable to this disease. 

So, Mr Speaker, the situation in Uganda is that dire that our health workers and medical students who are practicing on patients are breaching the law and, therefore, the minister should take it very seriously.

MS ABABIKU: I have got the information and thank you for that. In summary - (Member timed out.)

5.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for presenting the report and the committee for the report. I also want to thank colleagues for their comments and really say that it is true as indicated by hon. Bitekyerezo that there is no definite treatment for Hepatitis B. Hepatitis B has been with us in Uganda for a long time. I want to assure my sister from Lira that Government values the lives of the people of Uganda and that is why we are committed to providing quality health care amidst all the challenges that we face. 

The Ministry of Health has distributed Hepatitis B vaccines to vaccinate health workers countrywide. Mr Speaker, it is true that while they were supposed to receive all the three doses, some of them did not receive all the three. We have procured additional vaccines for the most-at-risk population and of course this includes the health workers, the pregnant mothers, the patients receiving blood transfusion and we hope that all the health workers and pregnant mothers that go to the health facilities will receive the vaccine.

The Ministry of Health has also come up with a budget to conduct massive vaccination of the first 11 districts with the highest prevalence in the country and this will cost us a total of US$11.5 million which is approximately Shs 25 billion. Of course our plan is to roll out to the entire country but we are constrained by resources. We will need US$30 million to roll this to the entire country. 

The districts with the highest prevalence, just for your information, include Moroto, Katakwi and Kumi with 23.9 percent. The second on the list is Gulu, Kitgum and Lira at 20.7 percent and then we have Arua, Adjumani, Yumbe and Moyo at 18.5 percent and then we have Kasese, Ngora, Bukedea and Amuria.

The National Medical Stores has procured testing kits that have been distributed to all the districts for testing for Hepatitis B. But I want to inform you that these tests are for the surface antibodies that indicate exposure of a person to Hepatitis B but not the active infection because if we are to go in for the active infection, which looks at the viral load of the Hepatitis B in your body, we shall need Shs 300,000 to test a person. So, it is quite costly and this is why –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Minister. Now when we talk of viral load machines, how many machines do we have in the hospitals to test the load of all those people who have tested positive? We have been told that those who have been tested positive travel all the way to Kampala. But you can imagine these are poor people without any money, and these machines are not there in the hospitals. So, what is Government or your ministry doing about this so that you acquire viral load testing machines in all hospitals for those who have tested positive to know the viral load of the patients?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, hon. Minister. Much as you have read the names of those districts, I would like to bring it to your attention that last week, a very serious outbreak occurred at the border of South Sudan and Amuru District. The medical personnel took very serious steps to rescue those people who are affected. I would like to urge you to include Amuru District on the list since our district borders – I thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, colleagues. Just like I indicated, it is quite costly for us to go into investing in machines for the viral load and this is why we are saying that we shall do the surface – the Hepatitis B chips that are available can actually detect whether you have Hepatitis or not. 

We are going into mass vaccination of all those who do not have the Hepatitis B. It is easier to do that than to go into this active infection tests. The routine immunisation of children using the pentavalent will continue at the health facilities and I want to urge Members of Parliament to complement our effort as the Ministry of Health in ensuring that the pregnant mothers go for antenatal care and also ensure that the children are all vaccinated so that they can be protected –(Interjections)–   I will take clarification from hon. Baba Diri for obvious reason.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to find clarification from the minister on what criteria you use for selecting these districts. Take a district like Koboko which is at the border of Congo and Sudan where you find Hepatitis B is highest and people are suffering; what criteria have you used? Why don’t we include Koboko as it has the biggest risk for your information? I thank you, very much.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much. We are forgetting a very important tool in this struggle because we have realised that the whole exercise of immunisation is very expensive. We should also take on serious mass sensitisation of the public, which is much cheaper, so that people are recruited on your side to fight this disease. So, I hope that you can further clarify on this point of mass mobilisation.

MS SARAH OPENDI: Thank you. I wish you would allow me conclude because that is part of what I was going to say. 

Hon. Baba Diri wanted to know what the criterion was. We are actually using the prevalence rate, so we selected the district with the highest prevalence. Even when you look at the 2009 report by the World Health Organisation (WHO), these still remain the same districts with the highest prevalence rate at that time. 

The on-going immunisation of infants will now be supported by the upcoming policy. We are coming up with an immunisation policy, which has already been submitted to Cabinet and very soon we hope to discuss it and then we shall let you know what it entails.

Community mobilisation, health education and sensitisation on the danger of hepatitis B were specifically carried out in West Nile in December 2013, and we are continuing with health education on radio and wherever we can. So, Members of Parliament, we hope to equip you with adequate information so that you can also complement our effort as you meet your constituents and inform them about this disease. It is important for people to test not only for HIV but also for hepatitis B before having sexual contact with their partners.

The Ministry of Health has also introduced the usage of auto-disabling syringes. This was reported by the committee chairperson in his report. Of course, it is one way of ensuring that we minimise infection.

Vaccines are actually available in the country; they are also available in private facilities at Shs 90,000 for three doses. So, Members of Parliament please test yourselves; if you do not have hepatitis B, you can vaccinate yourself so that you can be protected.

Mr Speaker, the point raised by hon. Muwuma about the snake bites is noted and I will take this up. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (Dr Kenneth Omona): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Colleagues, thank you for supporting this motion, particularly because our committee looked at this issue in a broad sense; we looked at it at national level. 

In conclusion, I would like to give you this to carry home: First of all, hepatitis B virus is highly infectious – almost 100 times more infectious than HIV. You can acquire it even through contact with skin. Secondly, it can be prevented, and that is the message. Its prevention, just like with any other disease, should not be associated with promiscuity because this does not exist in the prevention. Thirdly, even adults can be vaccinated, just like the Minister has said. Yes, the cost is high but I think it is worth it – Shs 90,000 for the three doses; whoever can acquire it in your communities should be able to - (Interruption)

MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, honourable colleague. You see, when you talk of Shs 90,000, as a Member of Parliament you can afford it but we are here to legislate for our people. The majority of our people cannot afford Shs 90,000, and that is what I wanted to ask the Minister about. 

You know that hepatitis B is more dangerous than HIV and this country is known for asking for support across the world for HIV. Now we also know that Government is only vaccinating children who are below the age of five. When you are six years old and above, you are supposed to fork out Shs 90,000, which the Minister is asking the Members of Parliament to do in order to get vaccinated; what about the ordinary people in Tororo?

MS SARAH OPENDI: Mr Speaker, I think I was clear when I said that we are constrained by funds. We are going to do this in a phased manner. In the first phase, we need US$ 11.5 million – that is about Shs 25 billion – and we are ready to move on this. In the second phase, for the entire country we have estimated US$ 30 million, which could be about Shs 80 billion. So we only need the money and we shall move. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Bring the bill here on the Floor of Parliament.

DR OMONA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, my senior colleague. The information I was giving was just for general knowledge about what happens in the medicine market. However, I seriously take –(Interjection)– I agree with you in the real sense that if Government has not done that, any person who can afford should. However, Government should indeed do this, as the Minister has said, and I think we shall be waiting for this since the Minister has committed herself.

I also want to emphasise this for our good and for the good of the communities we come from. Many times, hepatitis B has been mismanaged in communities which we have visited. When somebody develops symptoms like yellow pigmentation in the eyes, for example, some people begin to call it yellow fever and the patient is given herbs, but some of these herbs are dangerous to the liver.

I also want to say that a bigger percentage of people who get infected with the hepatitis B virus actually recover naturally, mount immunity and they just remain as carriers. A very high number of people recover, but you need to go to a health facility so that the personnel there manage you to ensure you do not develop complications.

Turning to my sister who brought this issue to Parliament; about the data used, it is true that the data we quoted here is that of 2009 but also as you may know, scientific data should be credible and should have been reviewed. We used this data in particular because it was from the Ministry of Health, Uganda; Centre for Disease Control, Atlanta; and WHO. So it was very credible data. However, this can also be used to project what the situation is now - (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: There is one thing we must bring out because if we do not do it, people might not understand us. You can have your own immunity and remain in a carrier state but remember you can develop liver cirrhosis and later on you can end up developing hepatocellular carcinoma, which is not treatable. 

On top of that, if the condition becomes self-limited and you become clear and remain a carrier, you will transmit the disease to others. That is the problem. That is why we are saying that vaccination for the people who are not affected is the way to go. 

The other point is that we do conservative management of those who are infected so that they do not infect others. That is why are calling for massive sensitisation of those who are affected because they are transmitting it to others. Thank you.

DR OMONA: Thank you, colleague. Mr Speaker, we want to emphasise this, just like we have done in our report; everywhere we go, people talk about lack of knowledge about this disease and leaders all over the country are begging for information. So sensitisation, honourable minister, should be the biggest way to help prevent the spread of this disease. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members, for your great concern on this matter. We have come to the conclusion and I will now put the question that we adopt the committee report and the recommendations therein.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE PETITION BY THE PEOPLE OF KILAYI PARISH, MBALE DISTRICT

6.01
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Mabel Bakeine): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the petition by the people of Kilayi Parish, Mbale District. Before I read it, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Kilayi Parish petition.

THE SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you.

MS BAKEINE: Mr Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Kilayi Parish petition.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MS BAKEINE: Mr Speaker, a petition was presented to the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda on 21 May 2007 regarding the wish of the people of Kilayi Parish to secede from Bufumbo Sub-County in Mbale to Buteza Sub-County in Sironko. The Committee on Public Service and Local Government of the Eighth Parliament travelled to Mbale and Sironko districts to assess the matters pertaining to the Kilayi Parish petition. However, the term of the Eighth Parliament ended before the report could be signed and tabled.

Following continued reminders from the petitioners, the Speaker recommitted the petition to the current committee for consideration and disposal. The Committee on Public Service and Local Government in the Ninth Parliament travelled to Kilayi Parish in Mbale District once again with the following objectives:

1. 	To understand the current situation in Kilayi Parish in relation to the issues raised in the petition to secede from Mbale to Sironko District;

2. 	To analyse accessibility to health, roads, water, education services as well as social amenities like recreation services, to the people of Kilayi; and

3. 	To make observations and recommendations on the way forward.

Mr Speaker, this petition has a background that we need to listen to. The people in Kilayi Parish are mostly migrants from Sironko and Bududa districts and history tells us that they migrated before Uganda attained her independence. Kilayi is inhabited by many clans and one of the clans is called Bamasasiro, whose cultural leaders are the people behind this petition. They have clan relatives in Buteza Sub-County in Sironko. 

Kilayi is one of five parishes in Bufumbo Sub-County in Mbale District. However, in 2009 Bubyango Parish became a Sub-County curved out of Bufumbo Sub-County, Mbale District, with 10 parishes including Kilayi. These parishes are: Bunamoli, Bubyangu, Bumadanda, Bukikoso, Bunawozi, Lusameta, Bunabuloli, Bunabigubo and Madenge. Kilayi Parish now has four villages: Bumotoka, Kilayi, Bumuduli and Wanaswa.

In 2003, a group of people started to agitate for Kilayi Parish to secede from Bufumbo Sub-County in Mbale District to join Buteza Sub-County in Sironko District. Their main reason was that they were not accessing social services from Bufumbo Sub-County in Mbale District. However, Bufumbo Sub-County has since been subdivided into two sub counties namely, Bufumbo and Bubyangu respectively. Presently, Kilayi Parish is in Bubyangu Sub-County, Mbale District.

On 4 August 2003, seven local council chairpersons in Kilayi Parish, in the then Bufumbo Sub-County in Mbale District, wrote to the Chairman LC III Buteza Sub-County in Sironko District seeking to secede Kilayi Parish from Bufumbo Sub-County to Buteza Sub-County in Sironko District. The village LC I chairpersons were seeking permission to alter the district boundaries as per Article 179 (1) (a) of the Constitution. The letter was signed by seven LC I chairpersons as follows:
1. 	Mr Masaba of Bumudoma village;
2. 	Mr Bulamu Mukone of Bumotoka village;
3. 	Mr Manana Ali of Bumuduli village;
4. 	Mr Woduwa Andrew of Waneswa village;
5. 	Mr Namusoso Ali of Namakolo village;
6.	 Mr Anthony Madangi of Majenga village; and 
7. 	Mr Wolimbwa Fred of Bawanga village.

On 25 August 2003, the LC II of Kilayi Parish wrote to the chairman LC III of Buteza Sub-County forwarding the LC II Kilayi Parish council resolutions, which had been arrived at in a meeting held on the same day, for his consideration. See copies attached. In the said meeting, it was resolved that Kilayi Parish be constitutionally allowed to secede from Bufumbo Sub-County in Mbale District to Buteza Sub-County in Sironko District due to the following reasons:

1. 	Geographical location – the geographical location of Kilayi Parish in relation to the rest of Bufumbo Sub-County makes the delivery of social services very difficult and hampers the development of the parish. River Namufumbolo serves as a natural boundary between Kilayi Parish and Bufumbo and there is no bridge to connect the two parishes. In addition, Mt Elgon National Park which is between Kilayi Parish and Bufumbo makes it difficult for Kilayi people to easily access Bufumbo Sub-County headquarters.

2. Communication facilities – communication between Kilayi Parish and Bufumbo Sub-County headquarters is extremely difficult and very expensive for the Kilayi people. This is because they have to go through three constituencies namely, Budadiri West, Mbale Municipality, Bungokho North or travel through seven sub counties namely, Buteza, Buyobo, Buwalasi, Namanyonyi, Northern Division, Wanale Division and Bukonde to be able to reach Bufumbo Sub-County headquarters.

3. 	Social services – there are no roads that immediately connect Kilayi Parish to Bufumbo Sub-County and as a result, Kilayi people depend on the Buteza road network to access the markets.

4. 	Health – Kilayi people depend on Buteza Sub-County health centres.

5. 	School – Kilayi school-going children depend on Buteza Sub-County school facilities and programmes.

6. 	Political will – because of many years of neglect and lack of services in Kilayi Parish, the people therefore felt that their fundamental rights and interests would be better served if they were allowed to secede to Buteza in Sironko, which is more accessible to them and to which they are naturally attached.

On 22 August 2007, four LC I chairpersons from Kilayi Parish wrote to the RDC of Mbale about the insecurity in the parish. In their letter, it was stated that following the visit of the chairman LC V of Mbale District to the parish, some people from the Bamasasiro Batonga clan ordered the youth to kill all the non-Bamasasiro Batonga. The same group went to Bumasifa village at a one Ludete’s home, beat him badly before robbing his property. On 20 March 2007, they announced over Radio Open Gate that they were ready to pour blood of non-Bamasasiro Batonga clan people. They warned Kilayi residents that if they followed the government policy, they should expect the worst repercussions and they ordered the people who were non-Bamasasiro Batonga to vacate the land in Kilayi.

Some of the people who claim to be cultural leaders of the Bamasasiro Batonga clan were named and these included: the former Bishop, Nathan Muhombi; former LC V councillor, Mr Womusitu Ahmed; and former MP, Muduku Stephen. Others included: Namisi Godfrey, Woniala Ismail Mashungu, Wodoboka Hamza, Muhamadi Wamanga, Woyiya Mudyakobe, Mafabi Wodya, Mukone Ali, Madoyi George and Giwumi Namasa. These people were said to come from Buteza Sub-County, Sironko District. This letter was concluded by an appeal to the RDC of Mbale to intervene and provide security to the people of Kilayi. It was signed by Manana Ali, chairman LCI Bumuduli village; Namusoso Ali, chairman LCI Bumasifa village; Wogibuzu Stephen, chairman LCI Bunamoli; and Masaba Difasi, chairman LCI Kilayi village. See the attached copies. 

On 18 May 2008, the four LCI chairmen from Kilayi Parish, some of whom had supported the petition for Kilayi Parish to secede to Sironko, wrote to the Speaker of Parliament refuting the Kilayi Parish petition. In this letter it was stated thus: “We have never held any official meeting and decided to cross to Sironko District. Kilayi Parish is constitutionally administered under Mbale District Local Government. The petitioners are acting illegally and are not residents of Kilayi Parish.” The letter was signed by Manana Ali, chairman LCI, Bumuduli village; Masaba Difas, chairman LC II Kilayi village; Gibaba Moses, chairman LC I Bumasifa village; and Gibuzu Stephen, chairman LC I Bunamoli village. They asserted that the majority of the Kilayi population had no problem anymore in living in Mbale District. See copies attached. 

The Committee on Public Service and Local Government during the Eighth Parliament had considered the petition by the people of Kilayi Parish. The committee had produced a draft report by the time the Eighth Parliament was dissolved. During the term of the Ninth Parliament, a letter was retrieved from the petitioners dated 2 April 2013 addressed to the Speaker requesting to find out the resolution reached by Parliament and seeking an appointment with the Speaker for only 14 petitioners. It was on this basis, and the fact that the report of the committee during the Eighth Parliament was never signed and tabled before Parliament, that the Speaker recommitted the petition of the people of Kilayi Parish to the public service and local government committee. 

The committee members, therefore, found it appropriate to travel to Mbale and interact with local leadership and the petitioners and update themselves with the issues of the petition. 

Methodology

i) 	The committee reviewed the following documents: draft reports on the petition to the Eighth Parliament (appendix 1); the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda; the Local Government Act; and the Mbale District Development Plan.

ii) 	The committee held meetings and discussions with the following: the petitioners and their leadership headed by Hajji Womusitu Ahmed; the area Member of Parliament, hon. Gudoyi Yahaya, MP Bungokho County North, Mbale District; district political and technical leaders and key resource persons of Kilayi Parish; and residents of Kilayi Parish. 

Findings and Observations

On arrival, the committee was met with hostility from the group that was pro-secession. They forced the committee to Kilayi Church instead of Kilayi Primary School, the venue planned for the meeting. This is the area where the pro-petition people were mobilised and assembled. The committee noted that many of the pro-secession leaders own homes in both Bubyangu and Buteza sub counties and even vote more from Buteza Sub-County than from Kilayi Parish. They are the ones who did not want to meet the committee at the official venue arranged at Kilayi Primary School. 

This is a group whose leadership include: the former Bishop, Nathan Muhombi; the former councillor LC V, Womusitu Ahmed; the former MP, Muduku Stephen; and 11 others. It seems this group is motivated to secede to Buteza Sub-County in Sironko District for other hidden reasons, which the committee could not readily establish, other than accessing social services. 

It was established that a group of people, especially the Bamasasiro Batoga clan, who want to secede to Sironko are not cooperative to development activities. They have made the area ungovernable and difficult for the technocrats to provide social services to the people. This is exhibited by the insecurity threats to which the four LCI chairmen from Kilayi Parish wrote to the RDC of Mbale District about in March 2007 and the hostility with which the Parliament committee was met. 

The committee further observed haphazard and uncoordinated creation of administrative units without approval and without elected leaders. This has made governance complicated. Party flag bearers have assumed official government positions and assumed full responsibility of these administrative units, though the district leadership asserts that there is no interim leadership. 

Article 179(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and section 7 of the Local Government Act empower a higher local council to alter the boundaries or create a new local council or administrative units within its area of jurisdiction with approval of the minister and at the request of or in consultation with relevant local government or administrative units. Further, Article 179 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda requires that the alteration of boundaries or the creation of districts or administrative units shall be based on the necessity for effective administration and the need to bring services closer to the people, and may take into account means of communication, geographical features, density of population, economic viability and the wishes of the people concerned. 

It was not clear to the committee why the newly created Bubyangu Sub-County and the subsequent subdivision of the administrative units within the Sub-County had not been approved nor gazetted and no election for the Sub-County levels had been held. The committee observed that there is a cultural site in Buteza Sub-County used for cultural rights such as male circumcision, commonly known as imbalu, by the Bateza people found in both Buteza Sub-County in Sironko District and Kilayi Parish. Bubyangu Sub-County of Mbale District – 

The Bateza people feel more culturally attached to the cultural site and that is their main reason for the move to secede to Sironko. However, this reasoning is a diversion from the original gist of the petition cited as marginalisation and lack of social services to the people of Kilayi Parish. The committee noted that those agitating to secede are a small group in Bumotoka village in Mbale District, and they do not recognise the leadership of Mbale District since most of them live in Buteza and even vote in Buteza Sub-County.

The committee noted that Mbale District local government has constructed a 20-kilometre feeder road and bridges on rivers Namufumbolo and Namatala, connecting Kilayi Parish to other parishes in Bubyangu Sub-County and Sironko District. There is also a primary school - Kilayi - with permanent classroom blocks. It was further noted that government provides other services such as National Agriculture Advisory Services (NAADS), Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), and Peace Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP). 

The majority of the people of Kilayi Parish do not want to secede to Sironko because they feel that their social service demands are being met. However, next on the list of their demands is the construction of a health centre facility. Mbale District leadership has indicated in their plans the intention to provide a health facility, additional primary schools and other feeder roads to Kilayi Parish. 

The district leadership asserts that it does not deny any group of people the chance to carry out their cultural activities from Sironko District.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that:
1. 	There is need to enhance service delivery in Kilayi Parish in form of roads, bridges and schools. A health centre III should be constructed in Bubyangu Sub-County so as to improve on service delivery and enhance accessibility by the people of Kilayi Parish.

2. 	Inter-district programmes between Sironko and Mbale should be put in place to enhance provision of social services in Kilayi Parish, Bubyangu Sub-County, Mbale District and Buteza Sub-County, Sironko District. The administrative boundaries should not in any way hinder cross-border service delivery to Ugandans.

3. 	Government should ensure that the creation of local governments and other administrative units’ boundaries should not be based on clan, tribal and cultural wishes. This is in order to foster cohesion and unity. Besides, political/administrative boundaries do not affect cultural or social activities.

4. 	Leaders should sensitise their people to co-exist with those perceived to belong to different cultural beliefs. The Ministry of Local Government in conjunction with local government leadership should carry out this sensitisation and encourage people to support government policies and programmes.

5. 	The Police should investigate the Bamasasiro Batogo clan and its cultural leaders who incite people against democratic governance and deny people access to social services. This is abuse of human rights.

6. 	The Electoral Commission should urgently hold elections for vacant positions at Sub-County level and for LC I and LC II countrywide.

7. 	The Ministry of Local Government should approve and gazette all administrative units and recommend them to the Electoral Commission such that elections are carried out as required by law.

8. 	Kilayi Parish should stay part of Bubyangu Sub-County, Mbale District. The creation of Bubyangu Sub-County headquarters means that it is closer and more accessible to the people of Kilayi.

Conclusion

In spite of the fact that there are the minority Bateza who want to secede to Sironko District, the committee establishes that there is a greater good for them to remain in Mbale District. Most of the issues raised during the initial petition have been attended to especially the creation of a new Sub-County which improved accessibility to social services. The most urgent service demanded currently is a health centre facility.

In the event that Kilayi Parish secedes to Buteza Sub-County in Sironko District, it would send a bad precedent on creation of administrative units based on clan, cultural or tribal lines causing division and disunity among the people of Uganda. The committee, therefore, supports the recommendations of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government of the Eighth Parliament herein integrated in our recommendations and strongly recommends that Kilayi Parish remains in Bubyangu Sub-County, Mbale District.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for this report. Honourable members, this petition was made in 2007 but suffice it to note that the people still feel affected up to today. They have been pushing for this matter to come back to the House, and indeed it has come back to the House, and I am glad the committee has been able to work on it. We will have a discussion. The motion is for adoption of this report, which is based on a petition from the affected people. They are waiting, so we should act on this. We shall have two minutes each.

6.29
MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee has done its work. 

I happen to live in Sironko and sometimes in Mbale and from 2000, the people of Kilayi Parish protested when Sironko District was created. This parish’s terrain is very hilly and it falls on the Sironko side of the mountain slope. Despite the fact that administratively they were put under Mbale, all the services they get, right from education, transportation, social services and even their cultural gatherings and sites are from Sironko. The cost of transportation for somebody from Kilayi Parish to Mbale District local government for services is so high; so, they feel they are more comfortable going to Sironko than to Mbale. 

Personally, I do not have any problem; they could belong to Mbale or Sironko. However, for purposes of humanity and service delivery for these people, it would be prudent for them to access services from Sironko instead of crossing over and going to the Mbale side as that would be very costly for them. 

I know the protests may continue because since 2000, they have never rested up to now. Over 50 people have died because of this; one time, they cut each other with pangas. Those in leadership positions do not want the ordinary people to access services in Sironko. They may love to be there, as the chairperson said, – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, one minute.

MR SSASAGA: They know that the political setting has favoured them and that they are in leadership under the Mbale administrative unit. However, for the local people who are the beneficiaries of these services, it is their humble cry and request that they benefit from the services of Sironko. Moreover, you know that clans are very important in the African setting and when you divide members of the same clan by getting one parish out of their clan and pushing it to the other side of Mbale and the remaining 80 per cent of the members of the clan are within Buteza in Sironko, this also affects them. 

My view is that this House considers the cry of the people of Kilayi; they could benefit more from this Government and its programmes if they access them from Sironko other than crossing over for miles to go and benefit from Mbale. You know that this is a mountainous area and they must cross Bufumbo, up to Wanale and after climbing the mountains, they slope to the other side to access the route to Mbale whereas Sironko is nearer for them and would help them more. That is why the leadership of Sironko has always come in even if it is not their mandate; they have always made sure that they come in and support the people of Kilayi so that they benefit from government services. I thank you.

6.32
MS OLIVIA KAABALE: (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chair. I would also like to make some observations. 

We would really benefit if most of the Members from that area, especially hon. Yahaya Gudoi, were here. He would tell us how terrible the situation is because in the report, the committee observed that there was no problem and they were refuting the aspect – (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_)  - Is it information or clarification, because I want to be very particular?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Clarification, from you.

MS KAABALE: Okay.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want clarification from the honourable colleague who said that hon. Yahaya Gudoi is not here. The committee did their work, so I wonder why you are bringing in the issue of hon. Yahaya Gudoi’s absence in the House. Do you mean the House should not proceed because hon. Yahaya Gudoi is not here?

MS KAABALE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I know English very well and I said that I observed that he was not here. I did not propose that the House should not continue because of his absence; it was just an observation. I have three observations about service delivery. 
I think we were here just a few minutes ago when they were talking about how the health centres III or how health centres provision should be. We would like to know from the committee whether, from the distance between this place and the next health centre, this is really a hard-to-reach place.

Secondly, you find that there are criteria for forming administrative units; we would like the committee to comment on whether it is aware of the criteria for forming administrative units. If we follow clans, it means that I will also come after three months and seek that my clan gets a parish or a Sub-County. Thank you.

6.35
MR WAMAKUYU MUDIMI (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I also thank the committee members for the report. 

I appeared before this committee in the last Parliament for this discussion but because of timing, its work was saved for this Parliament. 

The issue of these people from Kilayi moving to Buteza in Sironko has been on-going. Kilayi is in Mbale and Mbale is in Bugisu; in my opinion - I even told the committee - we should not divide people along tribal lines, clans and so on. My suggestion, therefore, to my colleagues from the region that are here is to try as much as possible to avoid this. This is because if we explore this, other people will use it as a means of trying to divide people further and yet all these are Bagisu.

The initial problem was service delivery. Now that they have fixed the roads, they have put up a health centre and there is a school, I think that they should stay where they are. If we keep on telling people that this should go here because of their clan members – I am here and I have a big clan in Kampala here but I am from the other side and I cannot say that you better be part of it. I think that as leaders, let us try to avoid using such avenues to divide people. Let the Bagisu remain where they are. They are in Bugisu and not Sebei. 

We have cases in another report coming about the Bagisu and some community in Bulambuli but I do not want to pre-empt this. It is also about division. We should try as much as possible as leaders to tell people to live in harmony. People should remain together. That is my submission, and I support the committee’s recommendation that the people of Kilayi should remain in Bubyangu in Mbale District.

6.38
MRS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for a report well-presented and I thank her for going down to the people.

The reason as to why people have been asking for these small units – the reason that has always been advanced - is services closer to the people. I would imagine that it would be prudent for these people to be put where they think they will access services easily other than putting them in a cocoon saying that they belong to these people and therefore they should belong there. It would be wrong to put them in a district where they will not easily access services. The committee could maybe recommend that for purposes of proper service delivery, these people should be associated with a district that is closer to them.  

In the report, something that is very serious came up; they said that flag bearers are masquerading and doing jobs on behalf of the leadership. This is quite unfortunate. However, I can say that this has come up time and again, where we have official government programmes and then we include, when a policy is being made, that the NRM chairperson should also be on a committee of this kind of group. We know that these are fully-fledged Government programmes with fully-fledged staff of Government who are supposed to run a project but we also provide for some structure of the party. It is really making work complicated and we are not making headway.

The other issue is about creating other smaller administrative units when we are advocating for a bigger issue. We are advocating for the integration of the East African countries into one country – the East African Community - but we still go ahead to chop our own country. Sometimes districts have been given based on matters of tribe and then people start clashing on matters of clans - that is how far we are going. I suggest that we look at the bigger picture of the African Union and the East African Community instead of going back to our tribes and going back to create structures because some clans are demanding – (Member timed out.)

6.40
MR VINCENT SSEMPIJJA (Independent, Kalungu County East, Kalungu): Thank you very much. I want to thank the chairperson for that extensive report. However, I would like to say two things: service tied to clan is really something that one would not want to hear about during this era. It is really out-dated. I think that we missed a lot at independence; Uganda did not unite. I would like to request the Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Minister who is here to take this issue to Cabinet - even up to now, Ugandans are not united. 

I listened very attentively to the report and you can see that we really lack a lot. Madam Chairperson, I imagine that you would have recommended serious education and sensitisation of Ugandans to put emphasis on things that unite us. Now, which clan is not supposed to get services from Government? Everybody is supposed to get services. (Interruption) 

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, my honourable colleague. Even though Kilayi is in Bubyangu, this parish falls on the other side. There is a very thick forest when you cross from this parish to connect to the Sub-County and the other parishes of the Sub-County. So, much as there is the clan issue,  – because the other clan belongs this way – there is also a big problem of service delivery. Cutting across those thick forests to access the other parishes in that Sub-County is a big problem.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you for that information. I would like to say that we need to think about how we provide these services that people need, other than tying them to clans and these other things. At one time these islands will be joined by bridges. Now, some Bagisu clans are in Kenya; what are you going to do? Some Ugandan clans are in DR Congo; what are we going to do? – (Member timed out)

6.43
MRS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. 

I think some of these petitions are now coming to Parliament because of Government’s decision to create these districts. If Sironko was not created out of Mbale, I do not think this challenge would have risen. Now that we have created the problem ourselves, we must look for the solution. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I will give you the example of my district, Yumbe. Yumbe was created from Arua and now we have two parishes which Yumbe and Arua are fighting for in terms of political coverage, and in terms of services, those two parishes are really suffering. Arua is not giving services to Rigbo and Ewanga and similarly Yumbe is not doing the same. They have almost become an island. Therefore, it is now Government’s responsibility to clearly demarcate boundaries to define which parishes belong to which district. 

For Rigbo and Ewanga in Yumbe District, we even do not know where they are going to vote from because in the electoral process, they have not appeared anywhere; they do not have any polling stations where they are going to vote from either in Arua or Yumbe. So, Government should take the responsibility of reorganising these people. 

The reason for creating these new districts was to take services nearer to the people. If some people say that they are not receiving the services for which the districts were created and they want to join a district where they think they can easily receive the services, as Parliament we must not block their aspirations. That is why they think it is Parliament that can be able to solve their problem. Thank you.

6.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report and I would also like to make a comment. 

It is quite disappointing to note that something that can be solved locally by the leaders, if they are really active on the ground, is being discussed here. Mr Speaker, I strongly believe that there is a district councillor representing this area where this parish belongs. If these people sat down in the council and presented this matter of services to this parish, I believe something could have been done. You are all aware that Government put a moratorium on the creation of administrative units and until we have clearly discussed these matters and have come up with clear boundaries for areas where we have conflicts, we are not able to proceed to create any more administrative units.

So, I encourage leaders from this area – Government sends funds to the district and we expect the district local government to serve the population. If there is a forest that is hindering people to move easily, I am sure there must be a road somewhere. Why don’t we engage the district leadership to have roads created? We provided tractors to these districts so that roads can be opened up and people can access services. We have health facilities –(Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving me the opportunity to make you understand the plight of the people who live in mountainous areas. The tractors you are talking about cannot work for us who live in those areas. For this particular area they are talking about, the tractor would be of no use because, according to information, there is a big cliff between the Sub-County headquarters and this specific parish that the people are talking about. So as you plan in Cabinet, have in mind that in areas like Sironko, Mbale and Kasese, the terrain cannot allow your tractors to be of good use. Thank you.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, hon. Kiiza. I listened attentively and what I heard was the forest, not the mountain, and that is why I was proceeding the way I did. Even the chairperson whispered to me that there is actually no mountain there.

Mr Speaker, the other thing that I wanted to – (Mr Wamanga-Wamai rose_) - No, I will not take your information; let me conclude. Mr Speaker, the other information I wanted to give is that these administrative units that we have are just for convenience and this cannot stop somebody. I might belong to another district, like we have Paya Sub-County which is closer to Butaleja and most of those people cross over to Butaleja to access health services and other services. It does not mean that because they belong to Tororo, they can only access services in their district. As long as you are near to any health facility or school, you can always access services. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.50
MR GODFREY LUBEGA (Independent, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. 

My emphasis is on the issue of creating districts without considering hard-to-reach areas, which differ – some may be mountainous, others could be rocky or something of that nature. When you are chopping districts, put into consideration such areas because the people cannot access Government services when they are very far. 

In Kassanda North, I have an issue where Kiboga is nearer than Mubende but then the government said that both are districts, not considering areas which may be very hard for the population to go to when they want services. I think as we consider this issue, let us consider the interests of the population. There is the issue of production - what cash crops do they have to sustain their wealth? We should also think about facilities like health centres because when you say that Kiboga is well facilitated yet the areas near it have no health facilities at all, then we are pushing the problems to Mubende because automatically what is in Mubende and all the other crops are sold in Kampala –(Member timed out.)

6.52
MS SARAH LANYERO OCHIENG (NRM, Woman Representative, Lamwo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I want to thank the committee for their report; it is good and I support some of their recommendations. 

In the committee’s findings, at the end of point 4.0, they say that this group is motivated to secede to Buteza Sub-County in Sironko for other hidden reasons that the committee could not readily establish other than accessing social services. What are these hidden reasons? Are they political? It seems the committee did not put its finger on the real reasons why these people want to transfer from Mbale to Sironko. 

We have a problem of clans and culture in Uganda. I may look at this as a marginalized group, especially considering the geography that surrounds them. It seems they really have a problem, but can the committee clarify to us these hidden reasons so that if they are political, the leaders in these districts can be told to come together to find a solution to save the situation?

Finally, this is an example to all Ugandans. Can we start to teach civic education in our primary schools so that people can be taught to first think of Uganda before they think of Lamwo or – (Member timed out.)

6.5
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto South, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. 

In this age, for us Members of Parliament to stand here and support a group that thinks they would like to live in such an area because of their culture and clans is not proper. I think as leaders, we have to think twice. I know politically, there are certain hidden reasons, which the honourable member just alluded to. Sironko District, as you know, is either 70 or 90 per cent FDC-dominated and that is a fact that you all know. Mbale District on other hand is NRM –(Interjections)– okay, there is my colleague, Wamanga-Wamai here –(Laughter)

The political connotation that I see is about this parish belonging to Sironko – the Mbale leadership thinks that giving services to this group that is FDC dominated is undermining them. As leaders, why can’t we, even if it means forcing them– I was in Koboko some time and I met people from the DRC drinking and trading in Uganda but can you say that they will one day opt to be Ugandans? We need to solve this matter that seems to be a political issue; it is not a service issue and if it is a service delivery issue, can we handle it as Parliament –(Interruption)

MR SASSAGA: Thank you very much. The information I would like to give is that Sironko District gives better services to the people; that is a fact. In the recent local government performance rating, Sironko was ranked one of the best despite it being opposition-dominated. However, that is not the reason. 

In Bugisu, one needs to understand the aspect of culture. In their report, they talked about the cultural site of the Kilayi people being in Buteza Sub-County. In Bugisu, circumcision is organised on the basis of sub counties. So, to put these people of Kilayi together with the people of Bubyangu or Bufumbo on circumcision day is where the problem is. That is one of the hidden reasons the committee did not dig out. So, until such issues are addressed, I do not see the end to some of the problems.

MR BIREKERAAWO NSUBUGA: Thank you very much for that information. With due respect to culture, in Buganda, there is no area where the Bagisu have been stopped from carrying out their imbalu when that year comes –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this is one such petition that should have been referred to the ministry. I think that the time it was received by the House, we did not carefully look at the implications. It would have been a shorter process if it had been sent to the ministry to handle and report to Parliament on how it would have been resolved. 

Creation of administrative units at the lower levels is a responsibility of these local councils before it comes here. At district level, it is Parliament but at the local council it is by the Local Government Act through those administrative units. So, it would have been better handled by the ministry. All those hidden reasons that Parliament by its structure was not able to establish could have been easily established by the ministry officials using its mechanisms. 

However, we are faced with it now and going by the debate, there are two strong positions. The committee says these people should remain where they are but there are strong arguments from people from there that these people are better off if taken to the nearest district. That brings in a bigger question: at the time of separating Sironko from Mbale, they went through the existing administrative structures. So, it is just the Sub-County that was taken to Sironko but that Sub-County had part of its parishes in Mbale. Those are the issues that might require deeper analysis. Otherwise, from the way we are proceeding, we might not find a good solution as Parliament.

7.00
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Mr Speaker, before I say what I want to say, let me agree with you that these are human beings whose fate we are discussing here. Yes, they have representatives here, but local government has been charged with the responsibility to create the smaller administrative units and they have criteria to do it. In most cases, they even go there physically. So, I agree with you entirely, and I want to say it is not too late to still involve the Ministry of Local Government. 

Secondly, there are many things that have been said here but I want to say that boundaries, be it parish, Sub-County, county or district boundaries, have always existed and will be there even tomorrow. Before or immediately after independence, there had been fewer districts with bigger counties; West Nile, for example, had only one district commissioner in Arua but the entire place up to Adjumani was West Nile and the boundary has not changed. So, when independence came and the population increased, of course the districts changed and the number of districts increased. 

When we talk of creating districts, there are pros and cons. You are not going to point fingers at one particular person saying, “You created many districts”.  You approved it - the Parliament did approve it – (Interjection) – Yes, it was wrong but all the same you did approve. Notwithstanding the many districts, the borders have not changed; it is only that the districts have now reduced in size. Instead of so many counties in one district, we now have even one-county districts; Adjumani is an example and there are very many more. The purpose is to bring services nearer. 

We wanted a district in Adjumani because for district services, people had to go across the Nile. The district hospital was in Moyo and our expectant women had to cross the Nile. If the battery failed or there was no fuel, the women would give birth there, if they could. So, there were reasons why we had to have a district with services and this applies to many. District boundaries have, therefore, not changed - county by county, Sub-County by Sub-County; they are there and nothing has changed. It is only people’s purpose and intention to create situations which are not favourable. 

Therefore, I want to thank the chairperson and everybody who contributed. This country, Uganda, is happy to be what it is now but we have come from very far. We never became a country at once; there were pieces, with time, from 1900. It is important that we appreciate this and we live together and we must promote the patriotism we are talking about. 

What is happening in the young society to our citizens is very fundamental; people intermarry, which is very important. In 40 years’ time or so, I think Uganda will be different and we must encourage that. Education has brought people together. The new faith - we used to have different gods but now that we have Christianity and we have Islam, these are the new faiths that have come among us and brought us together. So, let us minimise what divides us. These people in Kilayi, their views must be respected and they must be given what they think is good for them. Yes, they have petitioned but what are they thinking? Patriotism will come with time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are thinking that they should be part of Sironko. They have been part of Mbale and they want to be part of Sironko. That is what they are saying.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: With these new changes now, what was the border? Where was this parish before?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It was in Mbale.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: Mbale was a bigger umbrella at that time before Sironko was created.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When they created the sub counties that went into Mbale, this parish was part of that Sub-County.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: But where was Sironko together with this parish? Where was Sironko before? I think service delivery must determine - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am saying this, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, because you are the Leader of Government Business and the people of Kilayi currently belong to Mbale District. They are saying service delivery from Mbale District is difficult; they would rather be part of Sironko, which is nearer to them and because of rivers, forests, mountains, things like that. So if you now say their wishes should be granted, then they will go to Sironko and it will not serve the earlier part of your argument. That is why as Leader of Government Business, I would like you to be clear on what you want to say to this House.

MS BAKEINE: Mr Speaker, if you had listened well to the observations, the initial number of LC chairmen that signed the petition was seven; later on, four of them wrote to the Speaker saying that that petition was fraudulent, that it was a forgery. They said they had not been consulted. We have all the documentation; the report is there and you can read the attachments. 

When we went on the ground, we interacted with everybody and we said those who signed, the seven of you, come here. The four came and the three disappeared. It also came to our knowledge that from the villages that signed, some of them were non-existent. That is the information I wanted to give to the hon. Prime Minister.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. The information I want to give is that some of the groups that had preferred to go to Buteza in Sironko District actually confessed that when they went to Buteza, they were chased away. They did not accept them on the other side of Sironko so, they had to come back and reconsider living in Mbale District in Kilayi Parish. Since then, Bubyangu Sub-County has been created from Bufumbo Sub-County which takes services nearer to the people. Actually, we saw a road which was recently made from Mbale to Kilayi but we could not follow that road because of a mudslide that day as it had rained, so we still followed the longer route but the road is there. A land slide is just one incident. That is the information I wanted to give.

GEN. (RTD) ALI: As I was coming to contribute, I made a quick consultation and got information from the Prime Minister that this matter is being handled by the Minister for Local Government. This coincided with your opinion. 

As I said, it does not mean we are withdrawing or removing this petition from Parliament; I would ask Parliament to refer the matter back to the minister and the minister comes back finally with the findings. I think that will be doing justice to these people. Thank you.

MR BIHANDE: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Parliament is not going to run away from this matter. The petitioners wanted a parish to move from one district to another and the mandate of altering the boundaries of a district lie in this House. So, we cannot throw it back to local government.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you need to be careful concerning what you are saying. The mandate of Parliament acting on issues of demarcation of districts is clear. The resolutions have to come from district councils and not this kind of petition, and you know that. So, please do not bring that argument because it can be misleading. The mandate of this House as a determinant of district boundaries and the procedure thereto is known. The request has to come by district council resolution and should be supported. When it comes in this way, it does not invoke that authority under the Constitution for Parliament to act on it. So, let us make that distinction, please.

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I sit on the Committee of Public Service and Local Government and as a committee we have very many petitions of this nature. We really try to give time and attention to some of these problems that come to this Parliament through our committee. As a committee, we went down and the people said they wanted to be in Mbale. Some others changed their minds while others were claiming that they did not sign the petition. 

One honourable member has made a submission that they are to come with a similar petition to this Parliament. That means that we have wasted a lot of time to come up with this report and yet another report is at the doorway of this Parliament. I suggest that the Ministry of Local Government should also try and handle some bit of this other petition which is coming. 

How are we going to proceed? First, the committee spent a lot of time, putting other issues aside and working on this petition and then we come to the Floor of this Parliament and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister tells us that Government is handling it. I do not know how we should go along with some of these problems. It looks as if we are wasting time, setting aside other business and coming here and then we are told this. I do not feel very good about this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue is not that you have spent time doing this. The question is: was the time you spent able to resolve this issue conclusively? If it cannot resolve it conclusively, then that means we missed a step somewhere. Even in the rules about petitions, under rule 29(6), the Speaker may refer a petition to a particular minister where he or she is of the view that such a petition would be better handled by such a minister and the minister shall report back to Parliament within 45 days. That is why I said at the beginning that if it had been processed properly, this matter should have been sent to the minister straightaway to handle and get back to the House. Thereafter, based on the report of the minister in briefing the House, this Parliament would then take a decision. 

Parliament does not have the infrastructure to deal with those kinds of details that the ministry would have to handle that kind of situation. You went there for two days or maybe a day but the ministry is there permanently; so it might be better placed to handle this. However, we have gone this far, so the question we should be asking is: Yes, Parliament has gone this far and the committee has gone this far, is the recommendation they are making conclusive? I think that is the spirit in which we should carry out this debate. 

We should be honest about what we are going to do because whichever way we vote will it solve this issue? If we say, okay let them stay in Mbale, will it solve the problem? If we say let them be moved to Sironko, will it solve the problem? What route will solve this problem conclusively? That is how we should process this.

MR SSASAGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided the House well because even in the submission of the member of the committee, she clearly said that much as they saw a road going to Kilayi, they never used that road. That means the people of Kilayi do not use it as well; they use the road from Sironko. I would concur with the Prime Minister and the Speaker that this issue needs a complex and technical approach. The ministry can sit with the two local governments of Mbale and Sironko, get their input, come to a conclusion and report back to us and then we take action. I beg that Members second me and we move by that. Thank you.

7.19
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker, and I thank the honourable members. In line with the discussions and the debate on the Floor of Parliament, I want to move a motion that this House refers this report being debated now to the Minister of Local Government and reports in 30 days from today -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it is 45 days.

MR MUWUMA: Mr Speaker, the rules talk of “within 45 days” but I thought that as a Parliament-

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member, we should not create too many benchmarks; the rules say 45 days.

MR MUWUMA: Fine. Mr Speaker, I take your word and I move that within 45 days, the Minister of Local Government comes to this Floor of Parliament and reports thereto.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that a motion that is acceptable to the House? It is seconded by Budadiri East, Kasese, Busia Municipality, Bukoto South, Kapchorwa, Kaberamaido, Bunyole West and Arua Municipality. Can I have any Member who does not support this?

MS ALUM: Thank you, Mr Speaker. A petition to this Parliament normally takes 45 days, so I support hon. Muwuma that we take the 30 days because this is a report of a committee and not a petition. I support the proposal that he first made. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thirty days? Is that fair? 

MRS BAKEINE: Mr Speaker, I think that we move as you have ruled, but there is one thing that I wanted to make clear: the initial reason that prompted the movers of the petition was based on marginalisation and lack of social services in their place. By the time we went back, it was no longer an issue as services were in place. Their main concern this time was about their cultural beliefs and the convenience. So, I thought this needed to come out clearly and that they had even shifted in their cause to have moved this petition. 

We went there and interacted with the people. It is quite a hilly place and accessibility at that time was not easy because of the landslides. We even had to change course from the normal direct route because there was a landslide in that direction –(Interjections)- it is a motion but I wanted say something on behalf of my committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, can I process the motion now?

MRS BAKEINE: Yes but I wanted –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you are done and you are on record on that, Madam Chairperson.

Honourable members, we should not take it that the committee has acted in vain. The committee has done its work but for it to be conclusive, there is something that we need to do, and I think that is what has been moved in this motion by hon. Muwuma as amended to take 30 days. So, can I put the question that the report we have discussed should be referred to the Minister for Local Government to handle, going into other details of what is on the ground, and come back to this House within 30 days as what this House should take as a decision. Will that be alright?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I will put the question then to that proposition and motion.

(Question out and agreed to.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE REPORT OF THE DELEGATION FROM PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TO THE ACP-EU JOINT PARLIAMENTARY ASSEMBLY WHICH WAS HELD IN STRASBOURG, FRANCE IN MARCH, 2014

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the honourable member for the ACP-U here? These documents seem to be coming from one particular area and place. (Laughter)

7.25
MR YOKASI BWAMBALE-BIHANDE (FDC, Bukonjo County East, Kasese): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am standing in for my colleague, hon. Rose Akol, who was supposed to lay this report. Unfortunately, she left early for the burial of the late Okurut.

In accordance with rule 32, I wish to lay the report of the Parliamentary delegation to the 27th ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the 35th African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States Parliamentary Assembly held in Strasbourg, France between 12th and 19th March the Year of Our Lord 2014. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much. There seems to be a request from the members that you can sit on the Front Bench. (Laughter)

MR BWAMBALE-BIHANDE: Mr Speaker, after 2016, I will be on the Front Bench but on the other side. (Laughter)

LAYING OF PAPERS

TOWN COUNCILS’ FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think that you will read the documents and then I will pronounce myself at the end of it. 

7.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to present and lay on the Table a report of the Auditor-General highlighting the financial statements of Kanara Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table the Auditor-General’s report on Kyegegwa Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on Table the Auditor-General’s report on Binyiny Town Council financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and the opinion thereof by the Auditor-General. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Bukomansimbi Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012 and the Auditor-General’s opinion therein. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You could now just read the specific town councils.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table Lwengo Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Katooke Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Kiko Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Bundibugyo Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Butunduzi Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table Kigumba Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Mubende Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Lyantonde Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Ssembabule Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. 

I beg to lay on the Table Kalisizo Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Butaleja Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Lukaya Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Nakaseke-Butalangu Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Migeera Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Kyotera Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay on the Table Kanoni Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012.

I beg to lay on the Table Nakasongola Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012.
I beg to lay on the Table Nakaseke Town Council accounts for the year ended 30 June 2012.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the 22 financial statements and report and opinion of the Auditor-General for those town councils. They are accordingly referred to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling.
 
LAYING OF PAPERS

SUB-COUNTIES FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2011 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

7.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2011 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General of the following sub counties:
i) 	Bubiita Sub-County, Bududa District
ii) 	Bududa Sub-County, Bududa District
iii) 	Bukigai Sub-County, Bududa District
iv) 	Bumayoka Sub-County, Bududa District
v) 	Bulucheke Sub-County, Bududa District
vi) 	Kichwamba Sub-County, Rubirizi District
vii) 	Kyabakara Sub-County, Rubirizi District
viii) Kakoro Sub-County, Pallisa District
ix)	Agule Sub-County, Pallisa District
x) 	Kameke Sub-County, Pallisa District
xi) 	Putiputi Sub-County, Pallisa District
xii) 	Myene Sub-County, Yumbe District

MRS HUDA OLERU: Mr Speaker, we do not have any Sub-County called “Myene” in Yumbe district; so I do not know which one this is. That is why I am asking for clarification; I am not going to debate. (Laughter)

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, we can correct it later – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But the document says it is Myene Sub-County in Yumbe District. That is what is going to be laid on the Table. The clarification can be made later.

MS KIIZA: Mr Speaker, I am laying on Table reports from the Office of the Auditor-General -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the mistake came from the Auditor-General because the stamp from the Sub-County chief says, “Myene Sub-County, Oyam District.” (Laughter)

MS KIIZA: Then the record should be corrected to read, “Myene Sub-County, Oyam District.”
Mr Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the following:
xiii) 	Ariwa Sub-County, Yumbe District
xiv)	Drajini Sub-County, Yumbe District
xv)	Kuru Sub-County, Yumbe District
xvi)	Kalamba Sub-County, Butambala District
xvii) 	Bulo Sub-County, Butambala District
xviii) 	Ngando Sub-County, Butambala District
xix)	Bulegeni Sub-County, Bulambuli District
xx)	Panyangara Sub-County, Kotido District
xxi)	Busamizi Sub-County, Buvuma District
xxii) 	Kashare Sub-County, Mbarara District
xxiii) 	Kagongi Sub-County, Mbarara District
xxiv) 	Bukiro Sub-County, Mbarara District
xxv)	Rugando Sub-County, Mbarara District
xxvi) 	Kityerera Sub-County, Mayuge District
xxvii) 	Malongo Sub-County, Mayuge District
xxviii) 	Buwaya Sub-County, Mayuge District
Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the 28 sub counties’ financial statements and report and opinion thereon of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2011. They stand accordingly committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious handling. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, thank you very much for staying this long. Let me announce that the Anglican Chaplaincy has organised Easter carols tomorrow, Thursday 10 April 2014 at the Parliamentary Conference Hall beginning at 5.00 p.m. You are all invited, so please, attend.

Honourable members, as you are aware, tomorrow we will be burying the late Okurut of whom we made speeches in the motion that paid tribute to him yesterday. The burial is tomorrow. The late honourable member was husband to one of our colleagues, who is a minister in government. For that reason, the House will not be sitting tomorrow in his honour. So, I encourage as many members who can make it to the burial ground to go. This House is adjourned to Tuesday, 2 O’clock.

(The House rose at 7.40 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 15 April 2014 at 2.00 p.m.)
