Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Thursday, 25 April 2019

Parliament met at 11.05 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have not sat in the morning for a long time but now the situation demands that this time, we use every hour that we have, to finish the task that is before us.

I will cause an alteration of the Order Paper to accommodate in the laying of Addendum No.4 to the Supplementary Schedule No.2, for Financial Year 2018/2019, which the minister is going to be doing, so that they are both captured and sent to the appropriate committee.

I think we have four reports ready, which we should be able to deal with. I hope that by this afternoon, we will have more reports coming in so that we finish these matters on time. I was actually looking at a possibility of us finishing all the available reports today, in which case, we may not have to meet tomorrow. If all reports are ready and there are no other reports ready for tomorrow, we will see if we can finish all the business today, so that we do not meet tomorrow.

However, if there is business ready for tomorrow, we will have to come back in the morning and deal with it, for at least two hours. I remind you that the timeline is Tuesday, 30th April, which is the last day, when we should be examining these reports of the committees on the ministerial policy statements.

Honourable members, as I said, if we run out of time when some committees have not yet submitted their reports, they will have to find another way of sending their figures to the Committee on Budget because we will not exceed the 30th, not even by a second; we will finish everything according to the law. 

Let us bear that in mind as we do our work as committees because we need to use this time to catch up on the budget programme. We need to give the Committee on Budget sufficient time to do its harmonisation. Otherwise, a lot of work will go into that and we would like to give some time for that debate since it will be the actual debate on the budget. Thank you.   

LAYING OF PAPERS

ADDENDUM NO.3 TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/2019

11.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, Addendum No. 3 to the Supplementary Schedule No. 2, for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

ADDENDUM NO.4 TO SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2018/ 2019

11.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONIMC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table, Addendum No. 4 to the Supplementary Schedule No. 2, for the Financial Year 2018/2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records capture that. Both Addendum No. 3 and No. 4 to the Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for the Financial Year 2018/2019 are referred to our Committee on Budget to look at. Actually, they have a few days before we go back although these are supplementary issues which, can be dealt with at any time. Anyhow, the time is tight; let us see how to handle it. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INTERNATIONAL LABOUR DAY – 1ST MAY 2019

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not see the minister. Let us get onto the next item.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $104.0 MILLION FROM STANDARD CHARTERED BANK TO FINANCE THE NATIONAL CCTV NETWORK EXPANSION PROJECT

11.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a Resolution of Parliament to approve the proposal by Government to borrow up to $104.0 million from Standard Chartered Bank to finance the national CCTV network expansion project.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? No, secondment cannot come from the Frontbench. I want secondment from - you will handle it in Cabinet. I see secondment from members for Bukhooli Islands, Igara, Mpigi District, Mukono South, Nakaseke, Nakapiripirit, and Kween County. Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

(Motion seconded.)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no information on our iPads about this motion. Actually, even the Order Paper is not on the iPad. I do not know whether the system is down. I think Members can bear me witness. How are we going to move? Can we get some hard copies? Otherwise, there is nothing – not even the Order Paper. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Clerk, this Order Paper was approved yesterday and so, it should have come. Please check again - I am told it is there. There was an early problem with the network in the morning but now it should be there. If it is not there, we will proceed the way we always do. We will proceed by listening and debating based on the - I know it is not fair but please confirm that the reports of the committees are there.

Clerk, I think in view of this challenge with network, we need to at least have a few hard copies for some of these things so that Members can share just in case we have difficulties with the network again. Honourable minister, would you like to justify your motion?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, Government took a decision to start this project in a wake of what was happening in the country regarding security and crime.

We decided to start this project in a phased manner, to install CCTV cameras on our main roads in the city. This will continue to cover the entire country in the short and medium term, which will take us close to three years.

The work started and Government put in some little money but it was not possible to complete it on time and so we decided to go and borrow money. 

The reason we went to Standard Chartered Bank unlike in other projects is that it is not possible for other development partners to support a project of this nature. World Bank focuses on socio-economic development; EXIM Bank also focuses more on infrastructure so it was appropriate for us to look at an institution that can come to our rescue and this was a commercial bank - Standard Chartered Bank.

It offered us good terms to finance this and the project is ongoing. Actually, they are more than 30 per cent in implementation. Many of you who have moved in Kampala have seen these cameras but the installation is still going on. So, it is an important project that we seek Parliament to approve, for the sake of our security but also the security of our country, the property of Ugandans and the security of our people.

The little that we have installed – as the Minister of Internal Affairs can speak to – has actually helped in curbing the rate of crime, especially in the city. So, Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, I can ask the Minister of Internal Affairs, who has been at the centre of this, to update the House on how far we have gone in terms of installation and the benefits – even in the short time – that we have been able to derive in securing this project so far.

Therefore, colleagues, this project is about security of Ugandans and their property. It is a project that all of us should support and I seek your support for approval of this loan so that we can complete the implementation of installation of these cameras across the city and also progressively across the country. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Internal Affairs, I was actually going to request you to update us on how far we are on this matter before I call our committee chairperson to report.

11.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This project, as the honourable minister for finance has said, is essentially to cover our security gaps, in terms of fighting crime and ensuring security generally in the country.

Our focal start point has been the city, partly because there has been more concentration of criminal activities and criminal sources from the city itself, rather than elsewhere. Most of the other crimes that you see or which you notice being committed in other parts of the country are actually planned and sometimes mostly originated from the city. Therefore, we thought this was a central point to start.
   
In terms of coverage, we have already covered places like Katwe, Old Kampala, Wandegeya, Nansana, Kajansi, Jinja Road, Central; Police Station, Entebbe, Wakiso, Kawempe, Kira Division and Kakiri. We have installed a total number of 1,756 out of 3,233 cameras which we plan to install in the city and its environs in the areas that I have stated.

Most of these have already been activated; they are on air. In fact, the cameras which are already on air are 1,310. Although we have installed 1,756, we have 1,310 functional because of different factors, including power from the nearest centres of connectivity and other factors - but in the shortest possible time and also because of money. The contractor requires a certain amount of money because he can move with this. However, once we have done this by the end of August, we should have connected all these 3,233 centres and they will be functional.

There are many different types of cameras. Some are fixed; some are rotational and some are able to recognise number plates automatically. I will not necessarily say where these are but all that I want to say is the 1,756 that I have mentioned are functional. In fact, in the last two weeks, I have got reports from three Members of Parliament whose cars were vandalised and knocked and the people tried to escape. When we asked where this was done, the cameras helped us to trace who exactly did that and we have been able to arrest them.

Overall, the number of petty crimes that have been reported to our police stations in Kampala has also declined, reason being that many of the criminals have become aware. Of course, we are not saying they are totally eliminated. They are aware that they are being watched. That means they are now going to look for other means of facilitating their criminality than invisibility, which they thought was a factor that they could use.

The point I would like to make is that this is a real project which is already working. There are a few defects which, like in any other project, are being corrected. Once these are corrected, we should be able to finish and achieve our objectives.

One of the immediate challenges we have now is the issue of the payment. Like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said, this project is security based and not many international organisations are able to finance it. However, the current contractor is moving slowly because according to the agreement we made with him, we should have paid him some money but because of this delay of the loan, we have been unable to pay and therefore, he is going slow. 

We would like to appeal to you, therefore, to accept our request and approve this loan so that he can step up his operations and we complete the project. I thought this is the brief I could share at the moment. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable ministers, for this motion’s justification and explanation and the support given by the Minister of Internal Affairs. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the proposal by Government to borrow up to USD 104 million from the Standard Chartered Bank to finance the national CCTV network expansion project be approved.

That is the motion I propose for your debate. To start off the debate, we will listen to the chairperson of the committee to guide what their findings are.

11.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Following the tradition, I would like to, first of all, thank my colleagues whom I worked with in scrutinising this loan request. We scrutinised it through meetings. We visited the command centres and operational centres and we had documentary reviews.

The background has been given. I would like to lay on the Table the following documents before I proceed.

    1. A report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal;
    2. A brief to Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development concerning the loan;
    3. The Certificate of Financial Implication;
    4. The project profile;
    5. The project proposal;
    6. The CCTV Implementation Plan phases I and II and
    7. The loan facility Agreement for $104 million and the Facility Agreement for the $86 million dollars and 
    8. The minutes of the meetings which were held to consider the proposal. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, the background has been ably covered by the two ministers. I would like to move straight to the terms of the loan.

The Loan Terms

This is a facility which is syndicated by different lenders. Although Standard chartered Bank is mentioned, it is the lead party in this. The total facility required is $104.022 million and it is going to be supplemented by Government contribution of $20.47 million. The maturity time is 12 years including the grace period of three years. This facility is non-concessional as the minister has already indicated because its grand element is below the threshold of 35 per cent.

On the budget implications, we were informed by the minister that the local counterpart funds have been provided in the current Budget and the Budget can - and of course the debt situation is known. We are at 42 per cent of GDP still away from the 50 per cent threshold.

On the law governing the loan, it will be the English law and the place of arbitration will be the UK. On adherence to the guidelines, this proposal adheres to the guidelines up to only 50 per cent. This is because the biggest part of it is classified. Therefore, we could not access all the documents and that is why the score is only 50 per cent. It was based on what we could access.

I would like to move to the observations and recommendation; the Committee observed that CCTV national project expansion intervention in management of law and order in the country is timely. I would like to congratulate Government for the little that we have seen.

However, the 5,552 cameras to be implemented by the project may not be sufficient to cover all crime prone areas and highways in the country. Government considers that all crimes are committed in towns but there are gross centres in the rural areas which are also prone to criminal activities and need to be covered.

The Committee recommends that: 

    1. The gap be bridged by having a clear framework policy in place to tap into CCTV facilities by the private sector and other government institutions like KCCA, and other growing centres which already have CCTV systems running. 

    2. With the policy in place, Government should come up with deliberate measures to promote installation of CCTV systems especially to the private sector like waivers on taxation and other incentives because they reduce on Government’s burden.
 
    3. Government should come up with a legal framework regarding the CCTV systems to ensure their proper management. Some people are worried that these cameras are going to zoom in their bedrooms and bathrooms. Therefore there is need to have a law to regulate the use and installation.

The committee observes that the loan request is highly non-concessional, which is expensive and the interest rate is high. Government should ensure macroeconomic stability while at the same time should rejuvenate economic activities to restore the economy to its historical annual growth of 6 per cent if domestic revenues are raised.

In the absence of private sector participation, Government needs to participate in markets to increase productive assets that can create wealth for the country to repay her debt obligations especially for highly non-concessional loans which fall due in the short and medium terms.

In order to cushion the country against foreign exchange risks, Government should increase the level of export revenue by directly providing incentives which require cheaper credits including capitalising UDB which can give out cheap credit to export oriented domestic enterprises to attract FDI to boost its reserves in the short and medium term.

The committee goes further to recommend that: 

    1. The insurance be procured locally as a means of promoting local content in government projects, since some of the local insurance companies have the capacity to syndicate and reinsure from external sources. 

    2. The committee further recommends that the Government should renegotiate with the insurance service provider to ensure that the cost of the insurance policy is commensurate with the risk associated with the facility. 

    3. Government should make deliberate effort to support the insurance sector to grow as a potential employer and active player in the active market. In many economies, insurance companies play a very big role in especially long term financing but our insurance companies here have not come to that level and there is therefore need for Government to come up and support this industry to grow.

Mr Speaker, after scrutinising the loan and with the observations made, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to $104 million from Standard Chartered Bank to finance the national CCTV network expansion project be approved exceptionally, subject to the recommendations herein, due to its security nature and the urgency to curb crime, which is on the rise especially in the capital city.

Mr Speaker, I wish to thank you and I would like to commend this report for colleagues to approve the loan request. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the committee for this work. Debate starts now. Can we agree on the time - three minutes and we limit it also; it is not going to go open ended. 

11.33
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The issue of security is of great concern to all of us. I believe that this initiative would have been done long time ago. However, since it is now that it has been proposed and some of the cameras have been installed; I would like to get some clarifications from the minister and the chairperson of the committee on National Economy.

When we borrow $104 million domestically, what does it mean to the local borrowers? If you are borrowing from Standard Chartered Bank Uganda branch, what is the impact on the local borrowers?

Secondly, the minister has stated that out of about 1,700 cameras, only about 1,300 are functional. I would like him to clarify –(Interjections)– I believe that when the installation has been made, they must work immediately. The other issue he has raised is that the service provider needs more money, I believe when you have the money to install the cameras you have installed, and then those cameras that have been installed must work as a way to get more money to install more. However, having 1,700 - when you look at them you may believe that they are working but 400 cameras are not working and must be worked on immediately as we go to another phase.

I would like to know because usually projects are being done but when it comes to maintenance, do we have any clause that states that these cameras are going to be looked after by the service provider and for what period of time?

Of course, Government cannot provide cameras in every corner but I will suggest that as we try to install them in various parts, let us give incentive to private individuals - we have many homes, shops and arcades with cameras.

We must introduce an incentive that encourages people to import these cameras for their own security. At the end of the day, when something happens, then the Government can tap information from those privately-owned cameras.
I request that there is a reduction in taxes when it comes to cameras so that even in rural areas, people are encouraged to install these cameras. 

Mr Speaker, installing private cameras even in homesteads, one has to have a minimum of Shs 10 million. If the Government reduces taxes, we may see many business facilities and homesteads acquire them.

Finally, ever since these cameras were installed, especially here in Kampala, we have seen some videos of petty thefts and even yesterday, we saw the accident on Kiira Road because the video was on various social media. I would like the minister to inform us about the impact after the installation of these cameras, in as far as hard core crimes. Do we have empirical evidence that we have tried to curb criminal cases to some magnitude? Of course, even the petty - the “kifeesi” - those who snatch phones. But the reason behind the installation of these cameras was murder. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is three minutes only for each. 

11.39
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the project of investing in CCTV cameras. According to yesterday’s incident at Kiira Road, we were able to see how everything started and ended. If the cameras were not there, we would not be able to know exactly what might have happened. Our only worry is that we have some “weevils” who want to misuse the cameras. For instance, in Kampala here where the cameras have been installed, cars are stolen and they cannot be traced. When they try to find out how the car might have been stolen, they will always say that the cameras were off.

We need maintenance of the cameras to help security agencies to do their work well because when the cameras are on and off, criminals will take advantage of the situation. Thank you.

11.43
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the installation of cameras. As the honourable Member has just said, this would have done a long time ago because they help a lot as everybody knows. We cannot say that these cameras cannot work in some other areas because some people can connive with thieves to do their work. I have been to many arcades. At times they would connive with people at night to switch off electricity and the thieves steal.

As Members of Parliament, let us talk about reducing taxes of cameras so that many people can access cameras even on their farms. Even the security agencies whom you employ to guard your homes or gardens of vanilla are the ones who turn out to be good thieves.

If you install cameras, which have a non-sleeping eye, which can be connected even on the cars of Members of Parliament, we would have helped Mr Ochola the Inspector General of Police. When you are going home you can help people - who can attack you the way they attacked and killed our honourable colleague because there were no cameras on the cars. If there were cameras in our cars and homes, we shall act like policemen and help the police to do the right thing.

The project in place is a very good one because when you go to other countries like Saudi Arabia, some things are put somewhere like magazines or other goods to be sold, you come and pay faithfully when there is nobody but just the camera. However, once you are caught stealing, you will be killed. 

I support the project, however much money we put in, so that our economy can run very well. Thank you very much.

11.46
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion for the borrowing of that amount of money. I heard the chairperson say that they need to put a law to regulate this. I would like her to clarify later whether the law on Data Protection and Privacy Act, 2019 that we passed recently in this House could not be applicable since it is mostly about data. 

People zooming into other people’s homes - I mean using the cameras beyond what it is supposed to do. This project is a very good project. I remember the first days when I had just joined this Parliament, whenever we would travel out of the county, we would see cameras in the streets and I would wonder, “What is wrong with Uganda?” I would like to thank Government for this proposal that finally, we are there. God bless you for that. 

Like my honourable colleagues have mentioned, it is important that once installed, these cameras should be maintained. Today, we are borrowing money to install them but I do not know whether the honourable minister will clarify to us how you intend to maintain them. The weather will affect them over time and therefore, they will need constant maintenance and repair. 

I did not hear the chairperson talk about the interest rate at which we are borrowing this money. I am interested in knowing this. 

Finally, it is good that Government is coming up with such initiatives; to install and put in place projects that are important. However, because we are cash constrained as an economy, we may not have the resources to do the things we may want. I put this across to hon. Bahati; don’t you think that as a country, we are over borrowing? Don’t you, as Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have other plans of how to raise local revenue that would otherwise be used to implement some of these programmes? The rate at which these things are happening is too high. Thank you.

11.47
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not simply support anything for the sake of pleasing Members. As the honourable member has said, the borrowing is too much. I am praying for a day when we shall have the Committee on National Economy coming here to stop some borrowing. 

The issue of cameras started from Bukomansimbi where the President pronounced it after the killing of a certain policeman who had retired. Up to now, Bukomansimbi has never got camera. 

I will be happy to support this borrowing if they are also going to include money for procuring sniffer dogs. In Kalungu where there is no electricity, we do not want cameras but sniffer dogs. I was talking to the District Police Commander; he wants Shs 5 million to construct a standard kennel for a sniffer dog. Unfortunately, Government cannot provide money to construct a modern kennel, which will help us monitor thieves in the rural areas.

While talking about these cameras, you are talking about Kampala alone. In the villages, there are problems. Before you get this money, let us instruct the Auditor-General to carry out an audit on those cameras that were installed so that we know how they are performing.

You should not think that some of us do not know people in your security agencies. We went to school with some of these policemen and they tell us what is happening with these cameras. However, you want to borrow more without evaluating the performance of the cameras in place. 

I live along Salaama Road. How often have you cleaned these cameras, which are full of dust in Kampala? By the way, our rural roads are better than those in Kampala because in the rural areas, once it rains, there is no dust. However, there is a lot of dust in Kampala. How are these cameras maintained?

Secondly, I still insist - Can I make an amendment on the loan so that we also procure dogs? We can get someone to breed sniffer dogs so that I can get them in Kalungu and Bukomansimbi. 

Honourable members from the rural areas, nobody should mislead you that they are going to install cameras in your villages. The Ministry of Internal Affairs has refused to install cameras along highways. Along Masaka Road, there are areas where they stop people from driving very fast but there is nothing. These cameras should be along those roads so that you arrest drivers who drive recklessly.

Of course, you will make people happy seeing those cameras. (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member has raised a very interesting point. Usually, when we are drafting legislation and a particular item needs definition, you try to capture as widely as possible. I was beginning to imagine where we define “cameras” to include dogs. (Laughter) That will be very complicated.

MR SSEWUNGU: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the distinguished visitors’ gallery this morning, we have a delegation of staff from the Department of Clerks in the Parliament of Zambia. They include:

    1. Mr Tennyson Nyangu  – Principal Clerk of Journals
    2. Mr Misael Fitzgerald  – Ag. Clerk, Budget Office
    3. Ms Clare Musonda  – Principal Clerk of Committees

They are here to observe the proceedings, please, join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

This morning, we also have pupils and teachers of Compass Infant School in Namugongo represented by hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda and hon. Rosemary Seninde. Please join me in welcoming them. You are very welcome.

11.51
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am also not in support of approval of this loan. First of all, we are not sure of the quality of the cameras that they are going to procure. As of now, they are telling us that almost 400 cameras are not working for a project, which has just started. It is better for the committee to ascertain the quality of the cameras they are going to procure. 

In the report, they are telling us that they have visited the command centres of these cameras. However, has the committee taken the initiative of visiting or even examining the quality of cameras they are going to use? This is an expensive venture; we are paying the loan in 12 years. What will happen if a year is gone and almost half of the cameras are not working? Therefore, it is better for the committee to also ascertain the quality of the cameras before we approve this loan.

Secondly, the loan is proving to be very expensive for the country because we are going to approve $ 104 million but in actual sense, we are going to spend $ 86 million, after the deductions, which have been mentioned in the report regarding the loan terms. That is too much for the country. We are losing almost $ 20 million. When you put it in terms of shillings, these are billions for our country. We are to pay eight per cent interest of this loan. By the end of the 12 years, it will be even more money to be spent by the country than the loan itself.

Mr Speaker, that is why I am against getting this loan because it is very expensive for the country, going by its terms. Secondly, the quality issues must be ascertained by the committee of Parliament before we approve this loan. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, does the Committee on National Economy have the technical competence to check the quality of cameras? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, please. When they are doing procurements, there are specifications and technical reports that are prepared. I would not want to overburden my committee of Parliament to say that they can also have the competence to check the quality of cameras. That would be asking a bit much.

11.55
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, this is work in progress, so, I have to support the loan. However, I would like to say that certain precautions must be taken. Ministry of Internal Affairs, we want loan guarantees on maintenance at least for some time as our people are being trained.

Most of my area has been sparsely covered; for example, on Bombo Road - however, when I look at the installation, I do not know whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs is working with other stakeholders like the Ministry of Works. The cameras are too near the road, yet, we have big trucks and reckless drivers plying these roads. Therefore, we are wondering because near the cameras there are no humps to enable people reduce speed to avoid running into these cameras. Therefore, that stakeholder involvement must be worked on. 

Further, even with Local Government, the way the lines are being dug - you find some lines passing through people’s compounds and others almost in the road yet there are other systems like sewers and communication lines passing in the same areas where you are digging these lines.

Mr Speaker, we have areas in Kampala where one cannot pass beyond 8.00 p.m. for example, along the Northern Bypass. There are no security lights and no cameras. I think the thugs rule that area. When you pass there after midnight and you have nothing, be sure you you will be punished for having nothing in your pockets. I urge Ministry of Internal Affairs to take note. And when the thugs try to steal from you and you refuse, you will also be punished for refusing to be stolen from. 

My prayer is that Ministry of Internal Affairs should at least concentrate on those areas, which have very high insecurity levels.

Lastly, Mr Speaker, I think there should be private involvement. Here in Parliament, the only way we can help is by appealing to Government to either waive the taxes to make the cameras cheap for the private people to install cameras by themselves because Government will not cover all areas. We just recently lost a doctor –(Member timed out.)
 
11.58
MS BETTY AWOR (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Anything to do with the security of Ugandans cannot be taken for granted. Taking East Africa as a block, Uganda has managed its security situation better compared to the other countries.

I wish to applaud Government for its efforts towards consolidating peace and security in the country. Now that we are moving into this project of installing CCTV cameras, we are all aware that Uganda has played a very big role in contributing to the regional and international peace and stability in other countries. If Government can do that, why not do it here? We say charity begins at home. Therefore, I see no harm in supporting this proposal to borrow $104 million. I support the project and the loan. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.00
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the loan to procure the cameras. We have all shed tears here and asked ourselves “who did it” but we could not get the right answer.

However, as we support this, I would like to request the minister to seriously look at this project to avoid unnecessary losses. We need to understand the fate of the 400 cameras, which are not working at the moment. Is the warranty taking care of that and are they going to be replaced in the immediate time or the country is going to lose all that money?

Secondly, we need to understand if these security cameras have been integrated into the entire security network. For instance, if we have Police in Lugazi and a criminal has committed crime in Kampala, how do those people get to know and track the movements of that criminal? Can we get these system integrated even within the private owners of security cameras?

Thirdly, it is important to also give some waivers to individuals who can afford to have cameras in place to cover some areas where the Government may not be in position to go and in a similar manner integrate those cameras into the entire security network such that signals can be captured from whatever security camera may exist so that we are able to track these people.

These people are not always moving on highways where these cameras are stationed, after committing those crimes. However, even many of the highways running out of the city are not covered at the moment. Therefore, we need to have an elaborate plan of having appropriate coverage that can capture as much space as possible in order to do away with crime. Otherwise, I am in full support of this programme as long as serious thought is put at how best it can achieve the desired results. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

12.03
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the loan but have observations that the Ministry of Internal Affairs should take note of. This Government is one of the governments in East Africa that has many police patrols but when you look at their misuse, it brings fear that even the CCTV cameras might be misused. You have failed to clean the Police department as you had promised. 

When you look at the way traffic lights are being abused by patrols when they escort individuals, it brings a lot of worry to some of us. Are we really putting money to the right cause? Are we going to train new police officers to monitor those cameras? In schools where we have CCTV cameras, we have somebody who sits there full time to monitor whatever is taking place because these cameras are easy to manipulate.

Secondly, the Ministry should note that not all CCTV cameras should be electric cameras. In every distance of two to four kilometers, there should be cameras.

For every distance of two to four kilometres, there should be solar system cameras, which are easy to combine with the electrical ones. For the solar cameras, when power goes off, they can stay on for quite some good hours, about four to five hours. However, someone can intentionally switch off power for more than eight hours in order to have their deal passed. Otherwise, I support the loan request. 

Dangerous spots should also be considered in the installation of CCTV cameras. According to the crime survey reports, we have so many dangerous spots that are well known by the police. Nevertheless, sometimes cameras are placed in areas where crime cannot be committed because they are open spaces. These cameras should cover all those dark spots, especially in the rural areas. We have seen so many cases where there is direct connivance but nothing is being done. If they start straight – (Member timed out.) 

12.03
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support Government’s request to borrow money for installation of cameras in this country. Criminals are so elusive that we need mechanisms in place to be able to catch them. Therefore, CCTV cameras will do a lot for this country. 

Yesterday, we received the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and they clearly indicated that there is a lot of backlog in the courts of law. I believe that the installation of CCTV cameras will ensure that criminals are caught in the act. Hence, the Judiciary will now be able to quicken the process of investigation and sentencing these criminals. With that, we will have given the citizens the justice that they need once the cases are handled expeditiously. 

Mr Speaker, a concern has been raised about the maintenance of these cameras. It is a very serious issue because we may get them but if they are not well maintained regularly, then we shall have white elephants. 

Finally, security issues need a concerted effort by both the police and the citizens. The individuals should be encouraged to install these cameras in their premises. If this is to be done, the procurement costs for cameras should be subsidised so that we have many people installing cameras at their premises. In this way, they will help us catch those criminals. I thank you.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we should be planning to draw to a close. I will have the following members: Members from Rukungiri, Kyotera, Nyabushozi and then I come to the Leader of the Opposition.  

12.09
Ms BETTY MUZANIRA BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. The project is good. As they have said, Ugandans are smart at doing things. We get excited in executing projects for only the first three to six months but after that, we neglect and do not mind about them. May I know from the committee, before I support them, what the sustainability plan for this project is for the rest of the years within this country?

I would also like to seek clarification on the grace period. On page 11 of the report, they have stated that the grace period is three years but on page 12 in the table, they say it is two years. Which one is correct?

When the chairperson was presenting the report, she told us that the Standard Chartered Bank is the organiser of this loan but who is giving us the money? Can Ugandans know the bank that is giving us the money, since Standard Chartered Bank is the organiser of the loan? 

I would like to get this information from the minister: When will Uganda be free from this borrowing? Can you tell this country when you going to stop us from borrowing money for our people, which the incoming generations will pay? This is because there is some unused and useless money that comes with borrowing. When you do that, Ugandans will be happy and the projects will benefit many. However, let us not get excited in the first month and then abandon the project and not own it as a country. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

12.11
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here not to oppose the project but also not to accept it per se because of the following reasons: 

This is a project and there are many words being said for and against it. In normal cases, when you carry out a project, before you proceed you implement it in phases. You also come up with a report to justify what has so far been done. I request that a report is produced and it should indicate the presently installed cameras and how they have helped to reduce crime in the cities they have been installed in. 

I say this because some are not working and others have been placed in very obvious places. I do not think thieves are stupid to commit a crime in front of an obviously placed camera. In the area I stay in, for example, I always look around for cameras, especially when I approach corners. When they are not there, I think to myself that if a criminal was here to capture me, who would see him or her? 

Therefore, I need to see a report on the cameras so far installed. Is the report prepared on a quarterly or midterm basis? How have they helped us? What are the challenges? We need to know this in order for us to completely be sure of where we are heading before we take on a new loan. 

Like my colleague here said, we need to see the entire plan as far as the cameras are concerned. If this is going to be implemented in phases, we need to know that after Kampala City, we are probably going to move to another city the following year. This is to help us borrow money with a plan in mind. If we do not do so, we shall just borrow thinking the criminals are stupid. They know what they are doing. They can easily manipulate the cameras in areas they have been placed. 

I seek for clarification and I need a midterm report so that we plan ahead reflecting on what has been done so far. I beg to submit. 

12.14
MR PETER OKOT (DP, Tochi County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think criminality is not a profession, so today you are a criminal and tomorrow you are not. You never know, today you might not be one and tomorrow you might be a criminal.

I would like the minister to tell me about the planned 3,233 cameras to be installed in the city. In the report and the request, you are planning to install them in all major towns and municipalities in the country. Are these 3,233 meant for only Kampala or this is the overall number that is going to be installed in the country? 

In the report, I also saw a contract has already been signed by the company that is installing these cameras. The contract was signed way back in August last year. I am wondering how you enter into a contract before securing the money that is meant to pay for the services that you have asked the service provider to provide. In the event that Parliament does not bless this loan, what are you going to do, now that you have entered into a contract?

Secondly, I know in terms of police deployment - urban versus rural - there is a lot of police deployment in the urban centres. Now, with the installation of these cameras, are you going to redeploy more policemen to the rural areas? In the table in the committee’s report, they only give analysis of the crime rates up to 2015. What happened in 2016, 2017 and 2018? Have you done that deliberately so that you show that the hype was more in 2015; probably, in 2016 and 2017, the rates came down but you deliberately left the peak so that you convince Members that the crime rates are actually very high? Why did you leave out the more recent analysis of 2016, 2017 and 2018, which would have made us appreciate that there is need for this? 

Like hon. Ssewungu Joseph said, all these plans are for the cities and major towns. What plans do you have for the rural areas? As you are planning to ensure that the crime rate is brought down? The criminals are also planning. Probably, we are going to see a migration –(Member timed out.)

12.17
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support Government’s request to procure these cameras. We should support Government to apply science and technology to eliminate crime. Security is very expensive. Those who think that these cameras are expensive should scan around and see the security around other countries; that is when you will know that security is actually expensive.

I would like to see Government advancing with the latest technologies. There are no longer cameras with wires, which can be cut now and then. There are wireless cameras all over the world. There are satellite cameras that can work well. There are radars that are even installed in police vehicles that can dictate criminals everywhere. Therefore, I would like to see an integrated system which has these cameras but also the police vehicles should be installed with radars and cameras that can see further.

I would like Government to assure us that they are going to guide the country and ensure that all people who own buildings install cameras. Do you remember how a criminal was tracked by a camera at the Italian ambassador’s residence? If we can have all these rich men install cameras around their homes and commercial buildings so that they are integrated into the national network, then we can be sure that we are going to fight and eliminate crime. 

I would want Government to assure us that they are advancing with the latest technologies instead of applying systems which are out-dated and tomorrow, they come here and say, “We want more money to…” –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform my colleague and thank him for giving me way. It seems these current cameras that are being installed do not work when there is no power. Last week, at Bugolobi near a camera point, some young man came and snatched the mobile phone of the boy I was moving with. When I sent him to the people who operate the system, they told the boy that it was too dark and the camera did not capture the thief. We need to plan for sources of power in all places that have got cameras. That is the information I would like to give you.

MR MWESIGYE: Thank you. Dear colleagues, my humble appeal –(Member timed out.)

12.20
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to question the crop of economists that this Government is employing, to the extent that they can recommend that Government borrows first domestically with the challenges that they know about domestic borrowing. Secondly, how can they recommend that Government should borrow at more than eight per cent? 

Even if this project is a good one, we should get value out of it. My concern is that, one, there is a big question mark concerning the procurement of the contractor for this CCTV camera project. We are not getting value for money because the contractor was headhunted. We are paying much more than we should be paying for these cameras.

Secondly, I would like to understand something. This morning in Wandegeya when I was coming to office, cameras were all over but I found more than 100 police officers wielding guns where there were cameras. Does it mean that the cameras are not working or is it that the policemen do not trust them and so they need to be there? 

I would like to ask the minister to clarify to us whether these cameras are going to help the police to decongest our cities? Members of the Opposition have been harassed. I wish these cameras would capture Dr Besigye or hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, for example, up to when they commit the crimes rather than confining them. (Interruption) 

MR NSEREKO: Mr Speaker, I am sorry I was not able to come early due to unavoidable circumstances and an issue of national security. 

The information I would like to give is that it is not true that we do not like the cameras; we all need them but we need all these cameras to work for all of us and also to mitigate the cost. In South Africa, in Johannesburg, they have now adopted a policy of installation of what you see as street poles that are run - (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, can I have the Leader of the Opposition wind up. We have been on this debate for a long time. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you. Let me conclude by proposing some policy shift. The Uganda Police Force has raised the standard of recruitment. They recruit university graduates who get ashamed to chase after thieves. I would like to propose that we go back and recruit O’level leavers and even those who have finished Primary Leaving Examinations because they can run. However, for these officers who feel decent and embarrassed to run after criminals, I think the minister needs to consider this.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, you have three minutes.

12.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank all Members who have contributed by supporting and giving advice. We will take the advice. The important thing is that we all agree that this is a project which we needed yesterday. Although it is late, we must go on with it.

Regarding the issue of the private sector people who have CCTV, yes, we have agreed in principle and as we are laying our system, we are actually putting conduits which –(Interjection)- No, I have three minutes only. Let me finish. As my colleague has said, he will give you time. 

For the private sector, we are leaving conduits for various buildings, hotels and strategic places so that they will initially be voluntarily plugging into those systems. We will sensitise the population so that they appreciate the importance of getting into our network.

Secondly, we are going to review the Data Protection and Privacy Act, 2019, to ensure that whatever data we capture from the private sector is not misused. Let there be no fear that this is “Big Brother” trying to see everywhere to target some people. No, this is a project for the sake of the whole country.

The other issue which Members raised and I need to comment on is the issue of maintenance. This is an extremely important thing like some Member has already said. The personnel we are recruiting in the police are now from O’ Level, A’ Level and above and these are people who can be easily trained on the technical maintenance of these gadgets. 

I am glad Parliament has given us money for recruitment this year. Part of the recruitment will be deliberate to ensure that we recruit people with technical knowledge in ICT so that they are able to be trained in the period provided within the project for the contractor to hand over. However, before he hands over, we should have had enough trained personnel with experience to be able to handle this infrastructure.

Finally, we are not going to rely on CCTV only. CCTV is one of the components, which we must upgrade and integrate in our security system. The sniffer dogs are an extremely important component of the police investigation and security system. This other small issue which the colleague from Kalungu raised of supporting somebody who wanted to do a sniffer dog kennel in that area will definitely be looked into, plus many others that will be done.

About the 446 cameras which are not working - I did not say these cameras are dead. This is a project; once you install a camera, you have got to programme and connect it to the centre so that by the time you say it is working, it is actually something that you are applying. Therefore, the 446 cameras which I said are not working as of today are a work in progress. They are not dead cameras but very good cameras with very good quality.

You will even notice that the Americans were trying to discourage a company called Huawei, which is implementing this project in Uganda. They were trying to discourage the British from using it but because of the good quality of their work, the British themselves have said: “No, you do your work; we shall do ours as the British.”

Therefore, I assure you on the quality and maintenance and I thank you for the support. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Does the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development have some issue to clarify?

12.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank colleagues for their support for this important project. I have two issues to clarify. 

The first clarification is that the interest rate is five per cent, not eight per cent. The other issue was: “When will you stop borrowing?” Mr Speaker, we have put in place a domestic revenue mobilisation strategy. We hope that in three years we will be able to raise our domestic revenue to finance 80 per cent of the budget. Probably this combined with the revenues that will come from oil – (Laughter) - We will see how that will take us in future.

Lastly, somebody said this project is very expensive. Indeed, we went through a rigorous exercise to come up with this. However, I would like to tell the honourable colleague from Makindye that there is abundant evidence in our human history to prove that the cost of security is always cheaper than the cost of insecurity. It is important that we support this. 

Let me give a chance to hon. Nsereko -(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for being courteous. None of us is saying, “No” to the protection of our borders and people because the only smart way to move forward is the creation of what we call “smart cities” in security, that is, use of less human beings and deployment of more cameras that are easily monitored. 

However, this is my suggestion as the Shadow Minister of Security. There is some little research I have done that can help all of us.

Whereas you are looking for all this money, there is something simple. We can use solar poles that can be installed for power and lighting as well as use of cameras and carriers of boxes of networking. 

What happens in this case is that when you use these solar pole carriers, these companies install them and all they need from you is a power purchase agreement. These poles produce power which can be returned to the grid for you to increase your amount of power. You can also use them for lighting and installing CCTV cameras. That means you can use these poles to provide lighting but they also give you light and where to install circuit cameras. These are not dead poles like what we have today.

There is no cost to that and they do not even need any guarantee other than the guarantee to purchase the power that is remitted from the poles through solar. 

Therefore, we support this project and there is no shortcut. However, we can make it better, cheaper and smarter to benefit everyone. You will have light to improve lighting in public places. You will also have security and power. It is a three-in-one. You will cut the cost and you will not have to borrow. You will only have to guarantee that you will take power at a given price - which can even be at nine cents for production. Therefore, we are not saying “No” to what you have engaged in. 
In future, as you expand, please consider this option in order to save the taxpayer from that burden.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there a response to this matter?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Nsereko for the suggestion. It is a matter which we can study. However, as you know, guarantee and borrowing are similar. However, I appreciate his support for the project.

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank colleagues for supporting our report. However, there was one issue which was raised by my sister from Rukungiri on the grace period. The grace period runs for three years and it starts from the time of completion of the project. The project completion time is 25 months.

I would like to go further and clarify on the issue, which has been raised by my good friend, hon. Nsereko, on the guarantee. According to Article 159(2), guarantees are loans. They are contingent liabilities and so, they have to be subjected to the same scrutiny and approval like other loans. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to approve the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$ 104 million from Standard Chartered Bank to finance the National CCTV Network Expansion Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, you have five minutes and you are already using part of it.

12.36
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was wondering about the five minutes you have given me before I start speaking.

I would like to take this opportunity to lay on the Table a copy of the report and the minutes of engagement with the entities. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, since this report contains some contentious issues, which were not captured in the ministerial policy statement, I beg that you allow me to go through our recommendations.

Mr Speaker, I will leave out the legal provisions that mandate us to scrutinise ministerial policy statements and the rest because it will be wastage of time.

The votes under our scrutiny include:
    a) Vote 011 - Ministry of Local Government
    b) Vote 147 - Local Government Finance Commission
    c) Vote 501 – 850 - Local Governments
    d) Vote 005 - Ministry of Public Service
    e) Vote 146 - Public Service Commission.

Without wasting time, I would like to go to our recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I would propose that you go to your figures so that the records can capture them because that is the most important part for us to transmit. If there is time left, you can do the recommendations.

MR ONZIMA: Let us go to page 61 and the following are the figures:

a) Vote 011: Ministry of Local Government 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 22.03 billion 
Development expenditure - Shs 157.720 billion 
Total – Shs 179.75 billion 

b) Vote 147: Local Government Finance Commission
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 4.67 billion 
Development expenditure - Shs 0.572 billion 
Total – Shs 5.24 billion  

c) Votes 501-850: Local Governments 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 2,691.87 billion 
Development expenditure - Shs 724.127 billion
Total - Shs 3,416.00 billion

d) Vote 005: Ministry of Public Service 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 26.02 billion
Development expenditure - Shs 4.913 billion
Total - Shs 30.93 billion 

e) Vote 146: Public Service Commission
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 8.57 billion 
Development expenditure - Shs 0.48 billion
Total - Shs 9.05 billion 

Mr Speaker, the total for the sector is 3,640.98 billion. That is the expenditure under our scrutiny. However, there are areas where I wanted Parliament to pronounce itself. Actually, there are a number of them, which are covered in our recommendations but I would like to highlight the issue of town councils.

Mr Speaker, we have 203 town councils, which have not been provided for in this ministerial policy statement and money for their operationalisation has not been catered for. These town councils require Shs 80,687,601,000.

We also have 198 sub-counties that have been created since FY 2017/2018 but up to now, they have not been operationalised. These sub-counties require Shs 29,801,986,444 –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please wind up because your time is up. Kindly, wind up on the important issues.

MR ONZIMA: Mr Speaker, in Ministry of Public Service, we have issues of salary enhancement. Government had entered into an agreement with workers unions to increase salaries in a phased manner and this was supposed to run over a period of five years.

As Government presented the ministerial policy statement, this was not covered and a number of petitions have been referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government from various workers unions threatening industrial action should Government fail to honour its commitment. We feel that this will cause a lot of anarchy and disruption of service delivery since this was a commitment that Government had undertaken. It was also in line with their collective bargaining agreement. We, therefore, feel that Government must honour this to avoid rampant strikes from workers.

Mr Speaker, most of the civil servants had gone to 25 per cent of their enhancement and the Government had proposed 30 per cent enhancement. This will take Shs 279.2 billion and will bring most civil servants an increment of 30 per cent. 

Mr Speaker, as we debate, we feel that these issues must be considered by the House. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chair. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for adoption of the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020, for those sectors that the honourable chair has covered. That is the motion I propose for your debate.

As I said earlier, when the figures are harmonised and all these issues that are captured in the reports are forwarded to the Budget Committee, we will have better time to deal with the debates in a more comprehensive way than the sector based situation that we are dealing with. Therefore, unless there are really serious issues, I would propose that I put the question and then we deal with the next report, given the time that I have left. Can I put the question?

Honourable members, I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 for the Ministry of Public Service and Local Government be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES OF FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have five minutes. In the public gallery, this afternoon, we have pupils and teachers of Faruhan Nursery and Primary School in Wakiso. They are presented by hon. Medard Sseggona and hon. Rosemary Sseninde. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

12.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr George Ouma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Because of time, I will look at the observations and recommendations. However, before I do that, allow me to lay on the Table the documents of the report and minutes of the committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR OUMA: Mr Speaker, one of our observations was the inadequate allocation of funds to the ministry. The committee recommends that additional funding to the headquarters be provided as follows;

Scaling up sensitisation and awareness creation to be given Shs 2.75 billion and an addition of Shs 1.50 billion be approved for regional integration.

Another challenge was the payment of Uganda’s contribution to East African Community (EAC) Secretariat. The committee observed that Uganda’s additional contribution is expected to be Shs 26.287 billion. The committee recommends that additional funding amounting to Shs 9.89 billion be provided for to cater for the shortfall of the contributions.

The National Communications Strategy

The committee recommends that Cabinet prioritises and expedites the consideration of the National Communications Strategy to enable the Ministry of East African Community Affairs achieve its mandate.

Because of low awareness of EAC integration, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development provides funds to the ministry, amounting to Shs 2.7 billion to enable them effectively carry out their public sensitisation. 

Ban on recruitment of staff

The recommendation of the committee is that the ban on recruitment of staff be lifted to allow the ministry to utilise the funds that have been proposed. 

In conclusion, this is our prayer 

In reference to the recommendations made in the report, the Committee of East African Community Affairs proposes that the ministry be allocated additional funding in the following unfunded or underfunded prioritises:

    1. Scaling up sensitisation and awareness creation. EAC should ensure market access and we demand the Community to be allocated Shs 2.75 billion
    2. On Uganda’s contribution to EAC organs and institutions, we recommend that additional funding of Shs 9.89 billion be provided in the Financial Year 2019/2020
    3. On arrears, we recommend that additional funding of Shs 10.97 billion be provided for the EAC organs, especially the Inter-University Council of East Africa 
    4. We recommend that additional funding of Shs 1.50 billion shillings be provided for the coordination and participation of the EAC regional meetings.

I beg to move. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I need you now to deal with the actual figures which you have proposed. Are those the figures?

MR OUMA: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee of East African Community Affairs on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs be adopted. 

Honourable members, now that it looks like there is no debate, I now put the question to the motion that the Report of the Committee of East African Community Affairs on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for financial year 2019/2020 for the Ministry of East African Community Affairs be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have five minutes.

12.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two ministries - the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. I beg to lay both reports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the reports and the minutes.

MR KASULE: Mr Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020. As per your guidance, let me first read the figures. If time allows, I will read the rest of the recommendations as well but on page 38, section C are the proposed budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020. 

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts this report and approves the budgetary estimates for the financial year 2019/2020 under the following votes:

a) Vote 022 - Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 155,966,363,000
Development expenditure - Shs 11,232,000,000

b) Vote 117 - Uganda Tourism Board
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 25,024,000,000
Development expenditure - Shs 553,000,000

c) Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 46,522,000,000
Development expenditure- Shs 46,454,000,000
	
d) Vote 154 - Uganda National Bureau of Standards
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 53,230,000,000
Development expenditure - Shs 17,753,000,000

e) Vote 306 - Uganda Export Promotion Board
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 4,993,000,000
Development expenditure - Shs 396,000,000

Mr Speaker, the committee proposed some reallocations. The sector under the committee presented several unfunded priorities. The following are considered very critical and should be provided for within the financial year 2019/2020 through reallocation as follows - the table reads the source of the proposed reallocation, the activity, amount, destination or beneficiary vote and the amount, destination or beneficiary vote and the amount.

Vote 022 - Ministry of Wildlife, Tourism and Antiquities, the activity is under Uganda Wildlife Authority 2017/2018, Surplus Revenue in the budget for appropriation is Shs 10 billion and should go to Renovation of tourism sites of;

i) 	Kagulu Hi1ls, 
ii) 	Equator in Kayabwe 
iii)	Bishop James Hannington Memorial Site in Kyando - Shs 2 billion.
iv) 	Uganda Wildlife Education Center (UWEC) Floating Restaurant at Entebbe at that site should be given Shs 3.35 billion. They also require buying boats for recreation at Shs 300 million.
v) 	Uganda Wildlife Research Training Institute in Kasese should be given Shs 1.6 billion because they cannot even admit students now.
vi) 	Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute (UHTTI) in Jinja should be given Shs 2.75 billion.

Vote 015 - Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, feasibility studies and business plans were allocated Shs 2 billion. The committee recommended that that money should be sent to vote 306 - Uganda Export Promotion Board to implement export promotion activities at Shs 2 billion and Trade should be given more Shs 2 billion.

Mr Speaker, if my five minutes are still on, I would like to read a few of our recommendations in as far as the ministry of Tourism and its attendant agencies, whereby most of these agencies like Uganda Wildlife Education Centre, Uganda Hotel and Tourism Training Institute, Uganda Wildlife research training centre - these entities do not have a vote, which impedes their allocations. They must be under the ceiling of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

The committee prays that those institutions should be given independent votes in order to have enhanced accountability and make sure that we can bargain for their meagre resources.

On the matter of collection of tourism statistics, the committee recommends that Uganda tourism board should coordinate with various players involved in collection of tourism data and set parameters to avoid duplication. Tourism data for planning and policy should be validated and disseminated by the Uganda Tourism board (UTM).

The Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control should work with UTB and incorporate provisions of capturing data about tourists in the system since they are the first point of contact with the tourists at all entry points in Uganda.

I beg that most of the reports be captured on the Hansard. I beg to make.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you chairperson. It is a very good report. Honourable members, the motion I now propose for your debate is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 for the sectors under that Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. I proposed the question for your debate.

12.58
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, you have put it very rightly that the report is very good. I would, therefore, like to move a motion without notice that you put the question for the adoption of the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members the motion is that the question put be. I put the question to that motion that the question be put?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 for the Ministry of Tourism, Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and related sectors be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 

12.59
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Ms Annet Nyakecho):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have the honour to present to you the report for the Committee on Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance on The Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay a copy of the report and the minutes of the meetings held. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS NYAKECHO: Mr Speaker, we have two votes under the Ministry of Information, Communication, Technology and National Guidance. 
Recurrent expenditure-  Shs 25,005, 801,654 
Development expenditure -  Shs 15,220,839,682 
Total  - Shs 40,222,641,336.

Vote 126 - National Information Technology Authority (NITA) Uganda. 
Recurrent expenditure  - Shs 33,379,812,031 
Development Expenditure  - Shs 49,660,883,169
Total  -  Shs 83,040,695,200.

Under the ministry we also have Public Corperation and State Enterprises (UCC)
Recurrent expenditure  - Shs 57,744,858,000 
Development expenditure  - Shs 76,074,528,000 
Total -  Shs 133,819,386,000.

We have Posta Uganda 
Recurrent expenditure  -Shs 19,372,641,000 
Development expenditure  - Shs 937,000,500 
Total  - Shs 20,310,141,000.

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 7,959,000,800 
Development expenditure - Shs 2, 409,000,200.

Mr Speaker, the committee during its interactions, realised that we had three key issues, which we wanted this House to pronounce itself on. However, because of the time, allow me go through these three;

The revamp of UBC, this House is aware that his Excellency pledged Shs 20 billion but this House reduced that to Shs 18 billion. Out if that only Shs 8 billion so far has been received by UBC. This House is aware that UBC is a national broadcaster and therefore, it is very important that we conclude the revamp process of UBC.

Therefore, our recommendation is that Parliament should provide SHs 18.5 billion to UBC to complete the revamp to enable UBC to undertake its mandate as a national broadcaster.

The committee also recommends that UBC recovers its land titles for plots 8-10, 12-16 and 18-20 Faraday Road Bugoloobi for safe custody and profitable use of the land given that HABA Group of Companies was compensated

Mr Speaker, we looked into the allocations within the sector and the committee recommended that the ministry ring-fences Shs 4.9 billion of the Shs 9.6 billion for UBC for content development, equipment maintenance and other incidental costs to deliver on the national mandate and also carry standardised messages that enhance the national image.

Finally, the committee recommended that Parliament avails an annual subvention of Shs 4.5 billion to UBC through the Ministry of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance to cover the recurrent wage ad non-wage costs for UBC staff and content production to make UBC competitive.

The second issue was on the Innovation Fund. It is important to have constant investment in Information, Communication Technology innovation and research and therefore, the committee recommends that an additional sum of Shs 7 billion be allocated to the ministry to enhance innovation under the sector to effectively respond to its ever dynamic needs. 

The third issue which the committee captured and felt we needed to pronounce ourselves on was the issue of connectivity to tourism sites.

It is not profitable for any private investor to connect to tourism sites and to do business in tourism sites. Therefore, the committee felt that Government should take up this mantle and provide Shs 68 billion to connect these tourism sites because as tourists go to these sites they would love to remain connected. 

They would like to get Wifi and also record live events through the media and chat directly with their relatives and friends. We recommended that this Parliament provides that additional sum of Shs 68.7 billion toward the connection of the broadband to tourism sites.

We had a lot of recommendations but because of time, those are the key recommendations I felt this House should capture, thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We like the key recommendations and we prefer those ones. Thank you very much. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the report of the committee of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020 for that sector be adopted.

If there is no debate, I can put a question to this motion. Honourable members, as we agreed we need to finish this so that we can have a better debate at the budget committee stage.

I put the question that the report on the committee Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance on the Ministerial Policy Statements and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020 for that sector be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson of the committee for coming out and coming of this situation and making us work on this. I have also been advised that the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development is ready for this afternoon.

Honourable members, committees that have already presented their reports that might have had business that was suspended to enable them finish with these processes can now engage so that we can still finish with some Bills before we end this session of Parliament.

Committees, please, go back. It is not that you are done. There is some pending work that you need to finish, for example, the committee that is presented before this one.

The Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives still has the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill. The Sugar Bill that was returned by the President is now ready. Therefore, I am putting it on the Order Paper for tomorrow.

Honourable members, come and we see how to finish this matter that was referred to us for tomorrow’s debate in the morning and all other committees that had business that was suspended.

Petitions, Bills and others who have already presented those committees can now go back and work of those things so that by the time we close this Parliament by the 31 May, at least, we will also have not only dealt with the budget but some of the Bills that would still be remaining.

I am not going to adjourn this Parliament but I am going to suspend today’s proceedings to 3.00 O’clock this afternoon.

(House was suspended at 1.09 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.06 p.m., the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have five minutes.

3.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR NDEEZI: I also beg to lay on the Table the following: 

1. 	Minutes of the meetings of the committee;
2. 	Responses by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on issues raised by the committee;
3. 	Responses from the Equal Opportunities Commission on issues raised by the committee;
4. 	The contribution and response of the Shadow Minister for Gender, Labour and Social Development;
5. 	Responses from the National Library of Uganda;
6. 	Presentation from the Uganda National Cultural Centre;
7. 	The Uganda National Cultural Centre Strategic Plan;
8. 	Presentation from the National Council for Older Persons of Uganda;
9. 	Presentation from the National Youth Council;
10. 	Presentation from the National Women’s Council; and
11. 	The National Youth Council Strategic Plan. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those presentations, responses, strategic plans and minutes of the committee along with the report of the committee that have been submitted. You have five minutes now.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, I beg that you allow me to emphasise about six points in the report. The first point is that the budget for the social development sector has been declining every year. We call on this Parliament to instruct the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure that this does not happen again because the population of the vulnerable groups we are seeking to serve - the women, young persons, children and people with disabilities - is on the increase.

Secondly, I would like to let Members know that last year, we passed a resolution to finance a rollout of the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) but there is a financing gap of Shs 29 billion. Without it, there will be no rollout altogether. Therefore, I appeal to Members to ensure that the Shs 29 billion is provided for.

Thirdly, the Youth Livelihood Programme requires Shs 115 billion for it to continue to serve young people in this country.

Fourthly, we need Shs 0.7 billion to be able to feed our children in rehabilitation centres and remand homes. We also require Shs 3.4 billion annually to enable implementation of the key interventions to mitigate the street children phenomenon.  

Mr Speaker, last year the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development presented requests for approval of a loan on gender-based violence. The violence continues to be on the increase in this country. This request is with the Committee on National Economy. We appeal to the committee to expedite the policy on consideration of these requests and bring the reports to the plenary. 

We require Shs 7 billion to continue to run the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme.

Lastly, His Excellency the President promised to increase the special grant for people with disabilities to at least Shs 10 billion and provide motorcycles to the two councillors who will represent people with disabilities at local councils. We require Shs 14 billion to plug this gap.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairman, can you go to page 52.

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, our sector has three votes.
 
a) Vote 018: Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 
The total funding required is Shs 195,743,000,000.

b) Vote 124: Equal Opportunities Commission 
The total funding required is Shs 13,221,870,972.

c) Votes 501-580: Local Governments 
The total funding required is Shs 7,640,000,000. 

The total amount required under the social development sector as at page 53 is Shs 279,759,306,972. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, what is the situation with SAGE?

MR NDEEZI: Mr Speaker, last year Parliament passed four resolutions for the national rollout of SAGE. The Executive agreed with us and all of us informed the country that there would be a national rollout. I report that as of now, the national rollout cannot happen if this Parliament does not provide the Shs 29 billion required. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020 for that sector should be adopted. Debate starts now, briefly.

3.16
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the report. I would like to thank you for your findings and recommendations.

As we support the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in furthering its goals, which we hope to achieve as a nation, there is something I would like to bring to your attention. Last night, we received distress calls from our children, brothers and sisters who are working in the Middle East. About three of them have lost their lives and two are stuck in the mortuary in Oman. Just today, I made an intervention. However, it cannot be to a bottomless pit.

I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister because even when we called him late in the night, he responded and talked to the embassy. The embassy has gotten in touch with these people but we need the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, which issues licences to these labour exporters, to hold them accountable for what they do. If they need a labour externalisation fund, just like other countries do, let them tell us.

Unless we monitor the welfare of these children - The person we are returning is from Namisindwa; she is not even my constituent but she is a Ugandan. We have about 10 Ugandans lying in mortuaries who need to be returned but their parents are unknown.

Secondly, passports are issued to children who are below the age of 18 years. They are given passports under the guise that they are aged 23 years and above. If you gave me the chance, Mr Speaker, I would play the recordings of the children crying, and this was live from yesterday. People from all over the world listened to these children pleading that they were taken there without being told what they were going to do. Some of them are in brothels, others are working for 10 people in a home and they have been beaten and brutalised and some have committed suicide.

These children are as young as 14 to 15 years but are given passports which state that they are 23 years in order to pass through the borders. When they reach there, they cannot handle this pressure. The only gift that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development can give us is to first document these companies and also create a welfare fund so that we have a response team that is 24/7. The statistics that we have at the moment indicate that we have over 150,000 –(Member timed out.)

3.20
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to join my colleague in re-echoing the need for Government to reconsider the idea of labour externalisation, particularly to the Arab world.

Yesterday, I officiated at the closing of the Children’s Parliament at Nsambya Youth Sharing Hall. One of the prayers that the children tasked me to raise in this Parliament is in regard to the underfunding of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development.

Mr Speaker, the un-seriousness of Government and particularly the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development in addressing the issues within that ministry can be seen by the absence of the relevant ministers. The chair is here and has presented the report but the ministers are nowhere to be seen. 

This ministry needs closer scrutiny and support because we are dealing with the core foundation of mankind. It is the ministry that is supposed to deal with the vulnerable - children and the elderly. We have been talking about the money that is supposed to be given to the elderly. The pilot scheme that was started by donors has continued but Government has failed to add what they are supposed to add or even take over the programme. This is despite the fact that this was one of the campaign messages that the President used to canvass for votes all over the country. My district, Arua, and others are losing out.

Mr Speaker, we amended the Children’s Act with improved provisions, particularly the establishing of the Uganda National Children’s Authority. This authority is supposed to help address cases like the one hon. Nsereko has raised, where children are given passports and taken out of the country. Actually, they are facilitating trafficking of our children around the globe –(Member timed out.)

3.23
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I would like to address myself to the issue of the SAGE rollout. 

As has been discussed in this House, the impact of SAGE is not doubted; it has helped to improve the livelihood of the elderly in this country. However, in the past we have agreed that it should be rolled out to the entire country. I am lucky that in Kibaale, the elderly are benefiting from SAGE but I belong to this forum and we would like to roll it out countrywide so that all the older persons are treated equally wherever they are. The committee reports that there is a deficit of Shs 29.2 billion for it to be rolled out. This means that if this money is not provided for, the rollout that we all envisage will not take place.

Mr Speaker, I pray that serious consideration is made to provide money in this budget so that we can have the long awaited rollout of SAGE in this country. Thank you.

3.24
MS STELLA NAMOE (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chair and committee members for the report. I have an observation to make from the report, mainly on street children.

We have been struggling with this concern of street children in this House but the committee has not come out strongly to suggest how to help Parliament fast track the allocations that have always been made to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to handle this issue. As Parliament, we need to fast track ministry activities regarding street children. This is because year in, year out we talk about street children but these children are still on the streets. This Parliament passed a law on child trafficking but we have not seen people being charged with this particular crime. We only hear of stories of people trafficking children inside and outside Uganda but nothing is being done. 

Therefore, I would like to interest the committee to help these vulnerable children so that the issue of children on the streets becomes history –(Interruption)

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The matter of children should be able to come out very clearly in the report. A few months ago, there was a meeting held at the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development where a good amount of funds was provided for in order to assist the street children in all these towns, especially Kampala. The money was over Shs 9,000,000,000. However, it is not coming out clearly in this report. Therefore, as the Parliament of the country, we would like to know about the developments. What is going on? 

MS NAMOE: Mr Speaker, I would like the committee and the ministry to look at a comprehensive plan on how the monies that have so far been appropriated are being spent. I am sure there are some people who are taking advantage of these monies in the ministry. I think most of them think that for these children to be on the streets is part of their business, which is so unfortunate. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we had agreed on what we are going to do with these reports and that is exactly what I am going to do now. We need to give the Budget Committee time to come back to us so that we have a full debate on those issues that have been raised and some priorities that have not been funded. The Budget Committee has to work on them, come back here and then we see how much better the budget looks like in terms of what the committees have recommended. I think we should pause it here for now and see to deal with the rest of these things. 

Honourable members, I am going to ask the chairperson to respond to some issues. If there is nothing to respond to, then I can put the question and we move to the next report. 

3.27
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCAIL DEVELOPMENT (Mr Alex Ndeezi): Mr Speaker, we appreciate the Members’ concerns. In brief, most of these issues are already adequately captured in the report, but the problem is the time constraint. 

On the issue of externalisation of labour, the committee is equally deeply concerned about the crisis our brothers and sisters in the Middle East are facing. We have recommended that the ministry should institute stringent measures to ensure they are protected. 

On the issue of SAGE, I have mentioned, and I would like to repeat, that this Parliament, through the Budget Committee, should make an effort to provide for the Shs 29 billion. This Parliament should make sure that the Appropriation Act has the Shs 29 billion. Otherwise, it will be a shame for us, Members of Parliament and the Government. 

We have also captured the issue of street children in our report. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson and honourable members. I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020 for the sectors here be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

	Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, you have five minutes.

3.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr Hood Katuramu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to present the report of the sectoral Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020.

Mr Speaker, the committee held several meetings with the ministry and other stakeholders. I wish to lay on the Table the report and the minutes of the meetings of the committee that guided us in coming up with this report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the report and the minutes of the meetings of the committee. 

MR KATURAMU: Due to time constraints and with your guidance, I beg to go straight to the estimates of the ministry. The ministry has two votes: vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters, and vote 201-237, missions abroad. 

a) Vote 006: Ministry of Foreign Affairs Headquarters
Wage recurrent  - Shs 5,536,259,952 
Non-wage recurrent  - Shs 27,273,308,702 
Development expenditure - Shs 712,990,598 
Total - Shs 33,522,559,252 

We also captured the arrears as follows:
Subscriptions (international organisations) – Shs 50,000,000,000
Wage - Shs 668,642,000 
The total expenditure for vote 006, Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters, is Shs 84,191,201,252.

b) Vote 201-237: Missions Abroad 
Wage recurrent 	- Shs 25,323,252,681 
Non-wage recurrent - Shs 143,196,895,745 
Development expenditure - Shs 18,230,066,388 
Total  - Shs 186,750,214,814, which gives a 

Grand total - Shs 270,941,416,066 

Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence so that I present to this House what the committee looked at as critical areas that we compiled under our observations. We also made recommendations, which we feel Parliament should support in order for us to move to another level in serving the people of Uganda in this sector of foreign affairs.

The committee recommends that Shs 10,000,000,000, which is additional to what I have presented and which had been allocated to Uganda’s foreign mission in Nairobi that was recalled by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, should be given back. This will help the mission kick-start the renovation of Uganda House. The consent judgment, which was the prerequisite for this renovation, has been attained. A copy of the consent judgment has also been attached. 

Mr Speaker, I am glad to inform this House that towards the end of this year, Uganda is going to host two global conferences. One is for the G77 countries and it will be hosted here at the end of this year. It will involve dignitaries from 134 countries. There will also be another important summit, which Uganda is working on with the Republic of China. This implies that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs will have various meetings with high-level dignitaries from other countries. We, therefore, recommend that there must be security enhancement at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, as requested by the ministry, because of the many high-level dignitaries who will hold some meetings at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

We request that Shs 2.5 billion be provided to cater for security installations at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs headquarters buildings to ensure that we guarantee security. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, I wish you could just state the point.

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, arrears on contributions to international organisations: Members will appreciate that when Uganda is represented in various fora globally, we sometimes may be embarrassed because we have not paid our subscriptions. If we are not up to date on our subscriptions, our people who we have delegated to represent us may not be allowed to contribute. Therefore, Shs 50 billion is required to clear all the arrears for our subscriptions to international organisations. The committee recommends that Uganda fulfils this obligation and ensures that our subscriptions are up to date.

Properties of Uganda Abroad

Many colleagues, who have travelled to our various embassies and missions abroad, normally come back and complain about the dilapidated state –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson. I was hoping that you would just read the figures - we need this money for this - but you are elaborating the obvious. 

MR KATURAMU: Mr Speaker, we need Shs 11 billion to be reinstated in the budget. It had already been allocated for the renovation of Uganda House in Nairobi and the committee recommends that this money be reinstated by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development since it had already been recalled. 

Under security, we propose that Shs 2.5 billion be allocated to enhance security because of the important meetings that are going to take place in this country at the end of this year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020 for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the sectors under it be adopted. That is the motion I propose for your debate and it starts now. You are aware of the rules.

Honourable members, going by the number of the Members who would like to contribute to this debate, we will defer this debate to the appropriate time when we discuss the actual budget. For now, I will put the question to the motion. I put the question that the report of the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2019/2020 for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

3.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Robert Ssekitoleko): Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the sectoral Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings that considered the policy statements.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the committee meetings. Chairperson, you have five minutes.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Most obliged, Mr Speaker. The Committee on Physical Infrastructure considered ministerial policy statements for the financial year 2019/2020 for the votes as listed in the report. I will summarise in the interest of time. The budget for the votes under the works and transport sector has been revised upwards and similarly, for those under the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. 

Members can now turn to page 79 of our report. Based on the foregoing observations and recommendations, the committee recommends that the House approves the budgets of the sectors under its purview as follows:

a) Vote 012: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 42,756,656,000
Development expenditure  - Shs 126,351,231,000
Total - Shs 169,107,887,000 

b) Vote 156: Uganda Land Commission
Recurrent expenditure  - Shs 1,257,240,000 
Development expenditure - Shs 14,525,398,000
Total - Shs 15,782,638,000

c) Vote 016:  Ministry of Works and Transport
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 79,396,106,000
Development expenditure - Shs 1,536,176,378,000
Total - Shs 1,615,572,484,000

d) Vote 113: Uganda National Roads Authority
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 78,389,124,000
Development expenditure: - Shs 3,908,116,789,000
Total: 3,986,505,913,000

e) Vote 118 – Uganda Road Fund
Recurrent expenditure: Shs 475,586, 180,000
Development expenditure: Shs 8,599,471,000
Total: Shs 484,185,651,000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the first figure?

MR SSEKITOLEKO: For recurrent expenditure?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR SSEKITOLEKO: The correct figure is Shs 475,586,180,000

f) Vote 500 – Local Governments
Recurrent expenditure: Shs 0
Development expenditure: Shs 22,902,778,000
Total: Shs 22,902,778,000

Mr Speaker, I have prepared a summary in form of a table for the funding gaps on page 80 of our report. In that table, we have Shs 46 billion available for DUCAR low-cost seal but we need an additional Shs 12.4 billion. For DUCAR bridges, Shs 18 billion is available but we need additional Shs 15 billion. For DUCAR interconnectivity, we have Shs 11.8 billion but we need additional Shs 82.2 billion. 

For acquisition of new Japanese equipment, we need Shs 58.9 billion. For motor vehicle registration, Shs 5 billion is available but we need additional Shs 20 billion. For the construction of a one-stop centre, especially for driving permits, we have Shs 2 billion and require additional Shs 6 billion. For culverts, we have Shs 1 billion available and need additional Shs 20 billion.

Mr Speaker, for establishing regional labs, we need Shs 2 billion because there is nothing at all available. For strengthening regulations of construction industry, we need an extra Shs 4.2 billion. For road safety, we need another Shs 3 billion. For SGR compensation for the project affected persons, we have Shs 20 billion only and therefore need additional Shs 50 billion.

Mr Speaker, for capitalisation of Ugandan Railways Corporation, we have a funding gap of Shs 16 billion. Civil Aviation Appeals Tribunal requires Shs 1 billion. An Independent Accident and Investigation Unit for Civil Aviation Authority also requires Shs 2 billion.

Under the Lands, Housing and Urban Development sector, there is a wage shortfall that has a funding gap of Shs 4.42 billion.

Operationalising the MZOs (Ministry Zonal Offices) has a funding gap of Shs 36 billion. Land valuation has a funding gap of Shs 7 billion. Land Fund has Shs 10 billion and requires additional Shs 80 billion.

Mr Speaker, there was an attempt by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allocate resources directly to the implementing agencies, whereas they were previously being allocated through the Uganda Road Fund. The committee recommends that those funds be reallocated through Uganda Road Fund because the action of the ministry contravenes the Uganda Road Fund Act –(Interjections)- Yes, it does.

With those few remarks, I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson. (Applause) The issue of the Uganda Road Fund is very important, hon. Bahati. Why do you want to take it to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development where nothing works? (Laughter)

However, I also noticed that there is a reduction in the funds allocated to the Uganda Road Fund. Isn’t it a reduction from the previous budget?

MR SSEKITOLEKO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development had taken away Shs 507 billion from the Uganda Road Fund budget and left them with Shs 36 billion only for the whole financial year. We do not know what the money is for. Maybe it is for operations. As a committee, we recommend that the Shs 507 billon be taken back to the Uganda Road Fund. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we agree on putting back the money to Uganda Road Fund? (Applause)

Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Ministerial Policy Statement and the budget estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 for this sector be approved. That is the motion for your debate and the debate starts now.

I think the critical thing that has been raised is the issue of the Uganda Road Fund and we do not have to raise it again. We have agreed with the committee that, that money goes back to the Uganda Road Fund. Is that the position? (Applause) I think that is the only area that would have attracted a lot of debate. 

Has the minister agreed now? (Laughter) Can I put the question, honourable members? I put the question that the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Ministerial Policy Statement and budget estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 for this sector be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Procedure?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to raise this procedural matter.

Whereas, I agree with the return of funds of Uganda Road Fund, the procedural matter I would like to raise is: When you look at Uganda Road Fund, there are processes of how they get their money and it is the finance ministry, which has been taking their money. Yet, most Members of Parliament got this Uganda Road Fund to repair roads. 

The procedural matter I am raising is: Wouldn’t it be procedurally correct that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development respects the law we put in place to protect Uganda Road Fund and how they get their money?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House has spoken on the matter.

MR SSEWUNGU: You have said “returning” but why do they take that money?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The House has spoken on the matter that, that money should remain, as the law directs, with Uganda Road Fund. Any attempt by the minister - even when he is looking at me like that - would be going against the law. It is as simple as that. So, your procedural point is –

MR SSEWUNGU: Most obliged. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENT AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, you have five minutes.

3.57
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Ms Janet Okori-Moe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table a report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the Ministerial Policy Statement and Budget Estimates for the Financial Year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Proceed, Chair.

MS OKORI-MOE: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and its agencies. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture those minutes.

MS OKORI-MOE: Mr Speaker, the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries considered the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the fiscal year 2019/2020 for the following votes:

    1. Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries;
    2. Vote 121: Dairy Development Authority (DDA);
    3. Vote 125: National Animal Genetic Resource Centre & Data Bank(NAGRC&DB);
    4. Vote 142: National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO);
    5. Vote 152: National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS);
    6. Vote 155: The Cotton Development Organisation (CDO);
    7. Vote 160 : Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA);
    8. Votes 501-850: Local Government Agriculture and Commercial Services;
    9. Vote 122: KCCA Agriculture Grant 

Mr Speaker, because of lack of time, I will just go to a few observations and recommendations.

The committee critically scrutinised the planned activities and proposed allocations to various items under both the recurrent and Government of Uganda components of the budget for Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Whereas the committee apprehends that the vote is underfunded in various aspects, some funds have been allocated to items which are either not priority or not adequate. And justification has not been provided to warrant the exorbitant increments. Some of these reallocations that the committee proposed to other sectors that touch the population are items like special meals and drinks, which are in the ministry’s headquarters, which the committee proposes to be reallocated to other sectors that are more deserving.

There is also an activity under the headquarters called “other structures”. The committee also did not understand this and there was no justification. Therefore, the committee proposes reallocation of Shs 21.02 billion, from the various identified items under Vote 010, to other votes like Dairy Development Authority, National Animal Genetic Resource Centre & Data Bank and Coffee Development Authority. (Applause)

Vote 121: Dairy Development Authority

The committee proposes that Shs 1.82 billion is given towards the establishment of three border posts at Mutukula, Katuna and Mpondwe; Shs 0.344 billion for recruitment of technical staff of DDA and another Shs 0.472 billion, towards establishment of regional milk laboratories. Mr Speaker, these were monies got from what is termed as “special food and drinks” (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, the committee proposes that Shs 15 billion be reallocated to NAGRIC&DB that does breeding of animals and implementation of rural poultry development programme.

Vote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority

The committee proposes Shs 2.20 billion to be given to Uganda Coffee Development Authority for water-for-production for the promotion of small irrigation equipment for improved survival rates.

The committee also proposes another reallocation from the same Vote 010, of Shs 2.0 billion to budget for the shortfall for value addition activities for the country's coffee.

Mr Speaker, in total, the committee has proposed Shs 21.02 billion reallocation to these three sub-sectors. I will go to the actual figures, for lack of time. Actually, I thought since this is the sector which feeds us, it would be given more time, Mr Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which sector does not help us? 

MS OKORI-MOE: All sectors help us but the eating –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Without security, you cannot cultivate. Without education you cannot improve on it and so, they are all interlinked. That is why uniformly, I am giving five minutes.

MS OKORI-MOE: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. Education, health and all the sectors need food. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

Mr Speaker, the figures are as follows:
 
a) Vote 010: Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries 
Recurrent expenditure - Shs 45,666,826,000
Wage – Shs 13,032,950,000
Non-wage – Shs 26,650,812,000
Government of Uganda Development budget - Shs 140,105,664,000
External financing - Shs 323,409,083,000
Total - Shs 509,181,573,000

b) Vote 121: Dairy Development Authority
Recurrent - Shs 7,843,044,000
Wage - Shs 1,914,400,000
Non-wage - Shs 5,928,644,000
GOU Development - Shs 4,042,435,000
Total - Shs 11,885,479,000

c) Vote 125: National Agricultural Research Centre and Data Bank
Recurrent - Shs 9,908,438,000
Wage - Shs 1,900,000,000
Non-wage - Shs 8,008,438,000
GOU Development - Shs 37,364,217,000
Total - Shs 47,272,655,000

d) Vote 142: National Agricultural Research Organisation
Recurrent - Shs 42,249,024,000
Wage - Shs 22,472,228,000
Non-wage - Shs 19,776,796,000
GOU Development - Shs 39,182,994,000
Total - Shs 81,432,018,000

e) Vote 152: - National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) Secretariat
Recurrent - Shs 5,053,157,000
Wage - Shs 2,184,900,000
Non-wage - Shs 2,868,257,000
GOU Development - Shs 117,849,892,000
Total - Shs 122,903,049,000

f) Vote 155: Uganda Cotton Development Organisation
Recurrent - Shs 4,436,253,000
Wage - Shs 2,013,258,000
Non-wage - Shs 2,422,995,000
GOU Development - Shs 4,771,000,000
Total - Shs 9,207,253,000

g) Vote 160: Uganda Coffee Development Authority
Recurrent Shs 100,901,673,000
Wage - Shs 6,864,730,000
Non-wage - Shs 94,036,943,000
Total - Shs 100,901,673,000

h) Votes 501-850: - Local Government Agriculture and Commercial Services
Recurrent - Shs 106,620,000,000
Wage - Shs 72,854,000,000
Non-wage - Shs 33,766,000,000
GOU Development - Shs 15,369,000,000
Total - Shs 121,989,000,000

i) Vote 122: Kampala Capital City Authority Agriculture Grant
Recurrent - Shs 853,534,000
Wage - Shs 201,755,000
Non-wage - Shs 651,779,000
GOU Development - Shs 6,334,472,000
Total - Shs 7,188,006,000

Sector grand total - Shs 1,011,960,706,000 	
		
In conclusion, agriculture plays a crucial role in the economy of our country. It provides the main source of food, income and employment to the population. Improvements in agriculture and land use are fundamental to achieving food security, poverty alleviation and overall sustainable development. 

Therefore, putting in place the necessary reforms such as market access, access to finance and revival of cooperatives will unlock the sector’s potential and steer the country towards middle-income status.

The past five years have witnessed the highest levels of hunger and under nutrition, alongside slight increased economic growth. Uganda will continue facing an increasingly food-insecure future if nothing is done to address these critical institutional, policy and financial challenges. Government’s intervention is needed, both financially and strategically, to address the concerns identified above for the sector to achieve its full potential and contribute to the country’s development.

Mr Speaker, the committee observes, with a lot of concern, that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has, over the years, failed to comply with the Malabo Declaration of allocation of at least 10 per cent of the Budget to the agricultural sector and at least six per cent as provided by our own National Development Plan II.

Therefore, the committee strongly calls upon the entire Parliament to put up a spirited fight to ensure that Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development complies with what is recommended by our country's NDP II of six per cent to the sector.

Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to extend my appreciation to the committee members and the technical team for their contribution towards producing this report. I pray that the committee report be considered by this honourable House and the recommendations therein be adopted. Mr Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Before I propose the question for debate, honourable chairperson, the figures that you have read - the component of recurrent is a total of the wage and non-wage.

However, in the first Vote 010, the figures do not add up. If you add up the expenditures on wage and the non-wage, it comes to Shs 39 billion but yours is Shs 45 billion. Could there be a figure that is missing? The very first item of the Vote 010; Shs 13.032 billion added to Shs 26.650, the total comes to Shs 39 billion and not Shs 45 billion. Because it is on record, we need to be sure that the record has captured right figures.

MS OKORI-MOE: Mr Speaker, we are always guided by the technical team who know these figures and they do all the additions. Maybe it is a typing error and I beg that it is corrected at the appropriate time when it is submitted to the Budget Committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the record will show that in Vote 010 - Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the summation should be for both wage and non-wage, which is Shs 13,032,950,000 plus Shs 26,650,812,000. It is that total that will constitute the recurrent expenditure for that vote because there seem to be some variance. The rest add up well. Okay, is that correct? Have you checked? I think so.

Honourable members, the question that I propose for your debate is that the Report of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2019/2020 for the sector be adopted and debate will start now.

When I see the numbers are many then I take the other measure because I needed just two to three people raising questions of clarification because the main debate will not be now. The main debate on this will come later so, we don’t want to debate twice on the same issue. Can I put the question? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, I now put the question that the Report on the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2019/2010 relating to this sector, be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and the committee members - this is the procedure we have been using if that is what you want to ask. Is there any other report?

Honourable members, there being no other report ready for us to debate this moment - tomorrow we have, as I have indicated earlier , the Sugar Bill is ready. We need to look at why the President sent back the Bill. The committee is ready to report on the reconsideration of the Sugar Bill and we see how to proceed.

The remaining reports on: Committee on Education and Sports, Committee on Health, Committee on Presidential Affairs and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development are not ready. We hope they will finalise their reports today so that tomorrow, after dealing with the Sugar Bill, we can also finish with them, in which case we do not have to sit on Monday. We will have compiled all the things ready for transmission to the Budget Committee.

In light of this, honourable members, this House is adjourned to tomorrow Friday, 26 April 2019 at 10 O’clock. 

(The House rose at 4.19 and adjourned until Friday, 26 April 2019 at 10.00a.m.) 










