

Tuesday, 7 April 2020

Parliament met at 3.20 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do apologise for the late start; we had a very lengthy Commission meeting. However, I hope that as usual, we shall be able to cover the items we wanted to cover. 

Secondly, I would like to announce that hon. James Kakooza completed his quarantine and he has been cleared. He is free to come back and attend the House. I would also like to inform the public that it is not that they had the virus but only that they had gone to countries where there was a big incidence and we wanted to be sure that they are okay.

I would also like to announce that hon. Ssekitoleko Kafeero underwent a 21-day quarantine and he has also been given clearance. Therefore, hon. Ssekitoleko Kafeero is free to come back and proceed with his work. In the same way, I would like to confirm to the public that it is not that they were sick but only that they had gone to countries where they could have been affected. However, they are okay and free to come back.

I would like to thank honourable members for the recordings to the population, which you have been doing over the radio for the campaign against coronavirus in all your languages. I would like to thank you so much, for those who have completed the programme. I would like to ask the Commissioners to facilitate those Members who have not yet recorded their messages to do so. After my communication, hon. Mwijukye will tell them where they can assemble so that we can complete the schedule and the people hear you on that issue.

Honourable members, there is another matter, which came to light yesterday; the Office of the Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has failed on the issue of the Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy. This is one of the ways in which our prisons can be decongested. It is only yesterday when we were interacting with the Commissioner General of Prisons that he said that they are now making arrangements, because of this disease, to decongest the prisons and yet the Committee on the Prerogative of Mercy is provided for. I recall that our Committee on Human Rights reported, over two years ago, that this committee was not functional and that many prisoners remained in custody when they could have been released. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to the Attorney-General and his team to wake up and do their constitutional obligation. Let the Committee on Prerogative of Mercy be activated, not just because of Covid-19 but in the other ordinary way.

Honourable members, matters of national interest are so many and I propose that we shall not facilitate them tomorrow. They are 15 and if we handle them, we shall not do anything else today. Therefore, we shall facilitate them tomorrow and we shall also identify - because there are some, which touch on the issues, which are being addressed, like the economy, health and so on. 

Therefore, on that note, I will amend the Order Paper to allow two statements; one is an update from the Office of the Prime Minister on the distribution of food. The Minister of Health would also like to give us an update. She is already on the Order Paper. We shall amend the Order Paper to include those two. 

Hon. Mwijukye, please brief the Members.

3.26
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Like you directed, we sat with the Minister of Information, Communication and Technology and we agreed that Members’ voices be recorded. The minister went and talked to Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC), which has been recording Members from the Parliamentary Commission Boardroom. It was done for only three days and most Members have not yet been recorded.

Therefore, we would like to ask the Minister of Information, Communication and Technology to again ask UBC to come back and record the rest of the Members of Parliament. We had agreed that the recordings will be given to Uganda Communications Commission and they will see how to transmit them to all radio stations. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: When and where?

MR MWIJUKYE: We think that tomorrow they can come and start recording from 9.00 a.m. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: At the Members’ Lounge?

MR MWIJUKYE: In the Commission Boardroom.

THE SPEAKER: The Commission Board Room on the sixth floor. Okay.

MR KATUSABE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. At the close of the last sitting, you made a clear national judgement and guidance that was nationally received by every citizen of this country. You were crystal clear that food distribution be halted until the Prime Minister has brought to this House a clear plan that caters for every citizen of this country.

Madam Speaker, the country was shocked - I was personally shocked - to see the Prime Minister disregarding your judgment. My procedural issue is twofold. Disregarding your ruling or directive that you gave on Thursday is, in my considered opinion, a direct attack on the constitutional office of the Speaker of Parliament and by extension, the authority and constitutional mandate of this House. Madam Speaker, should this be allowed? 

I see three tragic outcomes. One, the public is going to lose the trust and confidence that it has in this Parliament, Two, the constitutional mandate given to your office, Madam Speaker, will be diminished. Three, I do not think that we will be qualified enough to carry that title “honourable Members of Parliament”.

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for us to proceed with today’s business when the country is engulfed in anxiety and the only source of help, which is called Parliament, is now completely disregarded by other heads of department. 

Madam Speaker, it is either today that we redeem the constitutional authority given to your office by the Constitution of Uganda or never.  

I beg to submit and I ask my honourable brothers and sisters to live up to the challenge; for as long as we allow this to continue or happen, we can as well declare ourselves non-existent. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Katusabe. Indeed, when I was amending the Order Paper, I inserted the provision for the Government to come and explain to us the issue of food distribution. I hope they will explain why they did what they did. 

More than that, we would like to know from the Government whether they have officially allowed someone called the Government spokesperson to go and disparage the National Assembly with no reprisal. A Government spokesperson, paid by the funds we vote here, goes on radio to disparage the National Assembly and the Government is happy with it; they are comfortable and continue doing business with him. We shall want an explanation. 

We shall get an explanation from the Government on why they did not do what we agreed and what else they are going to do about the other people of Uganda. This matter is not just about Kampala and Wakiso but about the people of Uganda, who are all in the same position. Let us go to the Order Paper and get an answer quickly. Let us go to item No. 3.  

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TOBACCO CONTROL (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development? Is there no one to read the Bill? Apparently, the Government does not know about this Bill; it is only the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that knows about it. The rest do not know about it. Let us go to item No.4. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF HEALTH ON THE 14 DAYS LOCKDOWN STRATEGY

3.36 
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Ruth Aceng): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to discuss with you –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: I rise under rule 77. Should I read it, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Yes. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, rule 77 of our Rules of Procedure is on interruptions of debate. It states:  

“(1) Debates may be interrupted- 
(a) 	by a matter of privilege suddenly arising;
(b) 	by a point of order being raised; 
(c) 	upon a point of information or elucidation or clarification; 
(d) 	upon a point of procedure.” 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, there is no debate at the moment, so please do not abuse the rules. Honourable member, I have made a ruling. There is no debate on the Floor. There is nobody on the Floor so please do not abuse the rules. 

DR ACENG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Before I make my statement, allow me to clarify on an issue that has been “hot” here in Parliament, about my travel to South Africa. I would like to lay these documents on the Table. I returned from South Africa on the 5 March 2020. My return ticket is here attached, as well as the ticket that I purchased and my test results for COVID. 

Madam Speaker, I returned on 5 March 2020. I would like to say this. This COVID season has been a very humbling experience for all Ugandans, big and small, the meekest in the community, and even to the very important people. I am sorry that some of my colleagues in Cabinet were inconvenienced as we followed His Excellency’s guidance to protect the land. 

Information of their flouting quarantine rules did not come from me. I would like to advise them to approach the Leader of Government Business, who informed them not to attend Cabinet. Let them go to him for further information about who informed him. 

As we were setting up systems and the rest of the national taskforce, I received a phone call from hon. Nakiwala, whom I supported to clear herself. I did not receive any phone call from hon. Sarah Opendi. I have since checked my phone several times and the last phone call I received from her was on 3 December 2019. Therefore, Madam Speaker, once again, allow me to apologise for any misinformation and allow me now to move straight to my statement. (Applause) 

My statement is large. I do not know how many minutes I have - 

THE SPEAKER: You have 20 minutes to present it; you can summarise it.  

DR ACENG: The statement is uploaded. Today is the seventh day of the lockdown. The Ministry of Health developed and is implementing a 14-day lockdown strategy, which I will present shortly. However, first, allow me to update Members as follows: 

The country has registered a cumulative total of 52 confirmed cases. Most of the cases were travelers returning from various countries and I have given a breakdown of those countries. All the confirmed cases are admitted in Entebbe Grade B (30) and Mulago Specialised Hospital (20). There is one in Adjumani and one in Hoima. The patients presented with mild symptoms and the majority were asymptomatic. However, all are improving and we do not have any reported deaths.

The index case has since completed 14 days of treatment and if he tests twice on a 24-hour interval and the tests are negative, we may consider discharge.

Madam Speaker, you may also be aware that we had a baby delivered to a mother in quarantine by caesarean section. The baby and the mother are both well. With guidelines from the World Health Organisation (WHO), the mother will be able to breastfeed the baby as long as she has a mask on and the mask should be the N95.

A total of 960 contacts to the 52 confirmed cases have been listed and are being followed up. The contacts have been advised to quarantine themselves and are being monitored daily for signs and symptoms of COVID by the ministry’s epidemiologist. 

Out of the 52 cases, 24, which is 49 per cent, were identified with no clinical symptoms at presentation. This underscores the point of asymptomatic cases. Madam Speaker, from research statistics, the United States has 50 per cent of their confirmed cases as asymptomatic. 

We continue to test our samples from the Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) and so far, 3,160 samples of patients have been tested and out of that, 52 have been confirmed.

As part of our disease surveillance at points of entry, a total of 2,661 travellers were identified for either self-quarantine or institutional quarantine.

A total of 820 people out of the 1,040 travellers are still under quarantine. Two hundred and twenty-six (226) have been discharged and they have gone home to begin another 14 days of self-quarantine.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, you will recall that from the time of declaration of COVID-19 on 31 December 2019, Government has been putting in place measures. First, it was to prevent importation of COVID-19 into the country. However, because we were concerned about our children and Ugandans abroad, we delayed to close the airport and so we imported. After importation, our strategy changed from preventing importation to suppressing transmission and the lockdown strategy is hinged on this.

Madam Speaker, I will not talk about the national emergency and the appointed taskforce because of time; I will request Members to read that. I will not also talk about institutional quarantine. I want to move straight to page 6 and talk about human resources.

To strengthen surveillance and treatment services for COVID-19 in the country, an additional 220 health workers are being recruited on short-term contracts of six months following approval by Cabinet. By end of last week, we had recruited 40 epidemiologists, 50 medical officers and 10 medical officers, special grade, to support the pandemic. Recruitment of other staff is ongoing and these staff will be deployed in the various districts as well as the centre to support the response to the pandemic.

We have also been beefed up by 82 Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) medical personnel of different categories to support the response.

Funds for the Outbreak

The total amount of funds required for six months for the health part of the response is Shs 404 billion. Financial response to COVID-19 has been made by –

    1. Government of Uganda - Shs 104 billion; 
    2. The World Bank, under the Contingency Emergency Response Component - US$ 15 million; 
    3. Global Fund - US$ 4.4 million; 
    4. GAVI - US$ 2.4 million; and 
    5. The Uganda Sanitation Fund - US$ 200,000 

This gives a total of Shs 81 billion. All these contributions, combined with commitment from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development totals to Shs 104 billion, leaving a gap of Shs 300 billion for six months.

Madam Speaker, the private sector has also provided material and financial support towards the response and this morning there was a meeting regarding these donations. The Permanent Secretary Office of the Prime Minister and that of health will compile the donations and their worth and they will provide an update as soon as possible under the guidance of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Development partners are also providing support to the response in various ways, via the off-budget support mechanism.

The biggest part of the response is the commodities. Commodities for six months will cost Shs 176 billion. Madam Speaker, I attached that to my statement to Parliament.

Decentralization of Management of COVID

As cases begin to appear up country, the ministry has decentralised the management of cases to districts to stop people travelling to Kampala or Entebbe for testing, screening and treatment.

People with COVID-19-like symptoms will call their respective district health officers and surveillance focal persons through contact numbers, which have been availed, and the district health offices will continue to communicate. District rapid response teams will be collecting samples and sending them through the hub system, either using the postal bus or vehicles that we have stationed in the 14 regions to send samples to Kampala and then we can send the results back online. This takes about 48 hours, depending on the distance of the district to Kampala.

We have also identified facilities that will manage COVID and the numbers of beds. Madam Speaker, as of now, we have identified 3,650 beds. I have also given the breakdown of the ICU facilities but we continue to work with the private sector to identify more in the event that the need arises.

Allow me now to move to the lockdown strategy. Madam Speaker, as you are all aware, on 30 March 2020, His Excellency the President announced a 14-day lockdown across the country. The purpose of a lockdown is to suppress transmission by reducing the number of people any undetected yet positive case in the community can infect. We know from evidence across other countries that extreme social distancing is an effective intervention to interrupt transmission and keep other uninfected members of the society healthy. In other words, this measure breaks the chain of transmission. 

The goal is to ensure that each confirmed case infects less than one person on average. Science tells us that this level of transmission interrupts the growth of the epidemic curve, which is what some people commonly call flattening the curve. That means, instead of having a spike, like what is happening in Italy, we can have flattening of the curve and we have fewer people reach the peak and ensure that the epidemic does not ravage the country.

Without any lockdown or social distancing measures, the epidemic will get out of hand. Modelling done by WHO projects that if Uganda did not have a lockdown or social distancing and other preventive measures, Uganda would have about 18,878 cases of COVID-19 and 566 deaths (at a three per cent fatality rate) by April 31 2020.  Obviously, our health system would not be able to handle this.

Government has developed a strategy for the 14-days lockdown period, which is already being implemented. The strategy was informed by the characteristics of the COVID-19 virus which include:

    1. High and rapid attack rate. 
    2. Spreading through infected people who are severely ill (20 per cent);
    3. Significantly high asymptomatic caseload and the early viral load shedding before the onset of symptoms (80 per cent).

We expect that the interventions in the l4-day lockdown will have significant impact on control and stopping the spread of the virus and the disease to other geographical areas.

The objectives of the Strategy

    1. To implement enhanced surveillance activities against concrete baseline data. 
    2. To employ containment measures for identified hotspots or clusters and contacts.
    3. To decentralise and streamline surveillance, case management and other activities to the regional and district levels. 
    4. To heighten or amplify communication on risk of disease spread and prevention measures. 
    5. To facilitate coordination of response activities at national and sub-national level hotspots or areas where cases and contacts of cases have been identified.

Strategies

The first strategy is rapid suppression of transmission through targeted containment in hotspots like communities or high density areas. We do that by either carrying out a geographical quarantining around identified cases, the contacts, and contacts of contacts to limit spread.

Under this, we –
a) 	Assess area for quarantine based on contact density. 
b) Constitute containment teams to implement the containment measure, for example, police, health workers and social workers.
c) 	Institutional quarantining for high risk individuals based on epidemiologic link. In Kisubi, for example, we have a boda boda man who tested positive. In that situation, after getting information from him, we identify the area where he was, the contacts he has had, including the people that he was ferrying, and then we cordon off the area using security and health workers. We then take samples and also maintain the 14 days of follow-up. If no one tests positive, well and good, but if people test positive, then it is good for us because we have cordoned off the area. 

Strategy No.2 is to test all individuals under institutional quarantine. The constraint of this strategy is the limited number of test kits available in country. The Ministry of Health and partners are doing their best to address this shortage this week. However, implementation has already commenced. As I reported earlier, we have already discharged 226 people.

I have given alternatives to that in the event that we still have a limited number of test kits.

Strategy No.3 is to suppress risk of transmission by individuals identified as high risk - those are returnees from abroad. Under this strategy, we shall identify and locate all remaining passengers who travelled between 7 and 20 March 2020, from flight manifests, who were not quarantined. We have obtained the flight manifests for this time period and the total number of passengers who travelled back is 18,860. We shall give count for those that are under quarantine. We have already mapped where they are and we are tracking them with support from the security people.

We shall conduct mandatory testing for all identified passengers. We shall isolate all confirmed cases in designated isolation facilities regardless of clinical presentation or severity. We shall provide guidance for social distancing and safeguarding for the vulnerable populations, such as the elderly.

Strategy No.4 is to support and strengthen regional and district-level facility preparedness. The Ministry of Health has deployed two epidemiologists per region to support the districts. The epidemiologists will be based at the regional referral hospitals but will move to the districts on a daily basis. Other health workers will be deployed as the recruitment process is completed.

Under this strategy, we shall –

i. 	Emphasise the continuation of provision of basic and emergency healthcare services. 
ii. 	Strengthen capacity for healthcare facilities at different levels of care to isolate and manage confirmed cases.
iii. 	Identify and prepare alternative spaces for management of mild to moderate cases in anticipation of worst case scenarios. That is in the event that we have sustained community spread of the disease that overwhelms the healthcare capacity to accommodate cases.

Strategy No.5 is to strengthen community engagement on COVID-19. Under this strategy, we shall -

i. 	Decentralise risk communication to the districts and continue providing technical support remotely and/or physically where need arises.

ii. 	Decentralise disease surveillance activities to the district health office to enhance indicator-based surveillance and community-based surveillance through the village health teams.

Strategy No.6: Aware of escalating transmission in the neighbouring countries like Kenya and Rwanda and those without clear information, cross-border truck cargo crew, according to the guidance from His Excellency the President, are three per truck in addition to the ongoing clinical screening - starting yesterday, 6 April 2020, we have been removing a nose and throat swab from them and we do batch testing at UVRI. To ensure a smooth flow of incoming cargo, the Ministry of Health aims to have a rapid turnaround time (up to 24 hours) by deploying alternate sample transportation vehicles.

To ensure that the interventions in the l4-day lockdown period have a significant impact on control and slowing the spread of the virus and the disease to other geographical areas, a checklist has been developed for the response teams to follow. The Ministry of Health will give accountability of the outcomes of the interventions and the impact it has had on the pandemic to the general population.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to appreciate you and this august House for the support, encouragement and financial allocations for the response. The battle ahead is big. We must remain focused to ensure that this pandemic does not ravage our country. We believe that together we will do a good job.

Finally, I would like to thank His Excellency the President of Uganda for spearheading this battle and for the 33 guidelines for preventing the spread of COVID-19 that he has put in place and communicated to the entire nation. His vigilance in understanding the pandemic and keeping abreast with new developments and information cannot be matched.

The Ministry of Health will continue to provide information to the general public on a daily basis and would like to appeal to all of us to follow the preventive measures. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I was however hoping that you might at least thank Members of Parliament for providing 172 ambulances, which you are using already.

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, we have received them and I would like to appreciate all of you in a special way. Most of them are not yet on the ground because of lack of fuel but we are working to address that with your support, through the supplementary budget. Thank you very much, honourable members. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the minister, but before we debate I would like to invite the minister in charge of disaster preparedness to address the other issue, then we can talk about them together.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON UPDATES ON COVID-19 RELIEF FOOD DISTRIBUTION AND STOCK BALANCES IN STORES

4.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES) (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, my statement is going to be very brief. It is just to indicate to you and to this august House what we are doing, why we are doing what we are doing, and then to seek for your guidance and support.

From the onset, I would like to state that the cardinal mandate of my ministry is to pick signals of distress in the country associated with emergencies and make necessary life-saving interventions. Given what the Ministry of Health has just indicated to this august House, we all agree that the magnitude of the challenges associated with COVID-19 are enormous and therefore, present a huge challenge to our country.

Government recognises the severe impact of the lockdown that was instituted by the Government because of COVID-19 on all people who live particularly from hand to mouth in all districts of the country. Given the many challenges that we face and the ranking of the magnitude of the challenges, we found it wise to address the following:

1. 	The slum dwellers. These are people who keep in informal settlements in Kampala. While we have a general problem with the rest of the country, interestingly, their case is such that they have zero options.
 
2. 	We also looked at all hospitals in the country. Why? Madam Speaker, I will single out about three of them. By the time of the lockdown, some hospitals in the country had patients admitted. One case, which has not been indicated in the report but which I can verbally talk about, is Tokoroa Hospital in Nakapiripirit District.

Madam Speaker, Tokoroa Hospital had patients, including some from Kenya. The caregivers have been riding to the hospital all the way from Konyawo to support these patients. When we instituted a lockdown and closed the borders, the patients remained in the hospitals. These are not COVID-19 patients; they are patients who have been routinely getting treatment from this hospital. Naturally, we cannot allow these people to die and so, something must be done.

The same applies to Matany and Rukungiri hospitals, located in the northeast and western parts of the country respectively. Madam Speaker, our attention was drawn to Rukungiri. One of the hospitals in Rukungiri had patients from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). They have been riding to give support to their patients in this hospital but we have closed the border. This is happening in many of the hospitals in the country. Given that, we decided to create hospitals as a special case.

3. 	We also looked at special needs, care homes and orphanages across the country, particularly Wakiso and Mukono districts, and also Kampala Capital City and its surrounding municipalities. We decided to intervene knowing very well that any delay would have caused loss of lives. We knew we could come and explain to this august House why we are doing what we are doing and seek their support to enable us proceed to logically conclude this exercise.

Trucks to make deliveries to the 134 hospitals, special needs, care homes and orphanages across the country are being dispatched today. I will be updating the House on the progress and indicating to them how this is happening. 

Distribution of food in Kampala was launched on Saturday, 4 April 2020 and commenced immediately at Bwaise. A total of 2,947 people, an equivalent of 894 households, were reached on that day. On Sunday, 5 April, 10,639 people, which is 3,224 households, were covered in 15 villages in the same area. On Monday, 6 April, we handled 11,998 people, which is 3,428 households. In total, we have so far covered 25,548 people, which is 7,546 households, in three days. 

We are targeting persons such as taxi conductors and drivers, boda boda riders, saloon operators, market and stall hardware operators, et cetera, whose daily operations are closed. Most of them live in the informal settlements that I named.

Madam Speaker, I would like to emphasize to Members that it is true these people are in all corners of the country. However, when we were doing the ranking, we realised that there are those who have zero options. They do not have even a backyard they can turn to, to access any vegetable. Therefore, we said that while the whole country is in need, we should start with areas where life could be lost if we delayed the intervention. This is the reason why we did that.

Deliveries of food, including powdered milk, sugar and others to special needs care homes and orphanages in Kampala and Wakiso was completed by midday today.

Madam Speaker, if we had not begun food distribution by Saturday 4th, a number of persons that I have indicated and some that you have been able to see from the media – Again, I would like to give an example of a facility that had not only orphans but people with disabilities who were being looked after by a charity whose line of support was cut, because the people who were supporting them were cut off outside our country. They needed intervention as quickly as yesterday. I am happy to report to this House that some little intervention has been made, it may not be adequate, but we will continue to give them support until they get back to their line of support.

Madam Speaker, the reality is that all that we have been able to do is to save lives. I would like to make it abundantly clear that it is not His Excellency the President who ordered us to defy suggestions of the Parliament. It was our understating that we must save lives. For anything that went wrong, I would like to take the blame. It should never be the President because he did not order. The President of Uganda respects this House and therefore, he cannot do anything that is -  It was just us who were reading.

Madam Speaker - 

THE SPEAKER: Members, order!

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, I thought I should say that for now. This is the position. 

After these deliveries, I will draw the attention of the House to the consultation that we had with other stakeholders. We have learnt that there are areas, which were not covered by the hospitals, orphanages and these homes. Those have been factored in in our planning. We shall give this House a comprehensive arrangement that we intend to undertake in the next few days. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable minister, the only difficulty I see is that you still have not given us a plan for the rest of the country. All your plans are around Wakiso and now a bit of Mukono. Where is Jinja, Iganga, Mbale and Karamoja? That is what we want to hear. There is no plan here. In fact, I think you clearly have no plans to support anywhere except Kampala, Wakiso and now a part of Mukono, not even the whole of Mukono. 

4.11
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the honourable minister presented that plan, he talked about slums. Do we have slums only in Kampala? How about slums in other towns, municipalities and cities? If you talk about special consideration, we in the north have children who suffered from the nodding disease syndrome. You did not factor all that in your plan and you think that you are fair. 

You also said that you are defying - Why do you want to defy Parliament? You need to explain that defiance because you said that it was not the President defying. Please –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Leader of the Opposition for giving way. The point of information I would like to give to the Leader of the Opposition is that even in Kampala where the intervention was made, they only selected 100 homes in every parish.

Secondly, women who are breastfeeding were told that they would receive milk from the hospitals. Three, people that live in Kampala are not only located in shabby areas like slums. We have people that are off work like taxi drivers and people that operate salons and they do not necessarily stay in slums. Therefore, if we are talking about an intervention for 1.5 million people, let it be honest, transparent and to all people that it is deemed to benefit and not a few.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you for the information. I would like to add that we are all here representing the people of Uganda. You cannot confine yourself to a very small area and forget the rest of the nation.

Uganda is not only about Kampala and Wakiso. Please, we also want our knives to cut; so, let them cut. Please, do your comprehensive plan because we do not accept the current one.

MR KABAZIGURUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government started distributing food in Kampala on Saturday. However, I have a problem with the manner in which they are doing it because the plan was to go division by division.

We were earlier told that they would be in Nakawa today but there is no sign of any distribution. The people of Nakawa and other divisions that have not yet received relief are doing very badly.

I would like to appeal to Government to have an approach that simultaneously distributes food within the whole of Kampala and the metropolitan area, not division by division. People are very hungry. Honourable minister, please, address that. Thank you.

4.15
MS SARAH KITYO (NRM, Youth Representative, Central): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Unlike other Members, my colleagues and I, the Youth members of Parliament, represent a group of people that have not worked for long; they have no pension or any other way of surviving. Most of them survive on day-to-day work.

When a young person gets out to ride a boda boda, that is when he will earn a living. The Office of the Prime Minister has not considered this category of people. They have considered the elderly, which is okay as these are our parents. They have considered people with disabilities, which is very fine because these are our parents and relatives but it would be fair that such groups of people are considered. They have leadership right from LCI and they can easily be tracked.

It is not that they are not known in this country. They are well known; we have youth leaders from the LCI up to the district level. My humble request is that this group should be considered. Thank you. 

4.16
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will start on the statement by the honourable minister that he defied your ruling. Your rulings are not in vain because if they are in vain, then we would have no business here. I would like to recommend that the minister be referred to our disciplinary committee for defying your ruling. 

Madam Speaker, Government has decided to manage us by crisis. My constituency is an industrial town with workers. Under section 19 of the Employment Act, employers must file returns. If Government was serious, they would be talking of wage subsidies to the companies affected by COVID-19 so that these people maintain their jobs.

Having said that, when you look at the pattern of Kampala and Jinja, people in Jinja live from hand to mouth. There are slums in Jinja.

Without wasting a lot of time lamenting - because it is the nature of this Government to disregard well thought out decisions of Parliament - I would like the honourable minister to come up with a plan because we have a boda boda industry, taxi operators and salons in Jinja. The people who used to work in factories have all been laid off because their services are not essential. Therefore, the situation obtaining in Kampala and Wakiso is also obtaining in Jinja.

I would implore Government - I know you manage by crisis but go back and come up with a plan so that when we are considering the supplementary budget, we take into consideration those areas.

Finally, I saw the packaging - Honourable minister, was this procurement done before COVID-19? It was so fast that in a spell of very few days – Yes, if Government had people with whom they had framework contracts, we would have sought to see fairness where you gave more than one supplier but all this supply was to one person. I thank you.

4.19
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health. I am speaking on health because COVID-19 is creating a lot of anxiety and fear worldwide.

I have a few comments to make. Why is it that the testing centre is only at Uganda Virus Research Institute? This is an issue that needs to be considered by Government. We have a lot of technical areas or labs within the country that we feel can assist in testing COVID-19. Why is it only restricted to Uganda Virus Research Institute?

We are not sure about the figures that the Government is giving. Is it representative enough or is it because a lot of people are not tested? We would like to hear what plan you have to scale up the testing.

Additionally, honourable minister, there seems to be little information available across the country. The challenges that most of the health units are facing are that once victims report cases and signs, once they are confined in areas, they escape. This is very critical because then, it poses a danger to the communities.

What security measures have you put in place, for example, to secure the members of the community who present with these signs, so that they do not cause a revolt? For instance, yesterday, I got a call from Soroti. One person reported signs in Soroti Referral Hospital. Once he was directed to occupy the isolation, he escaped and it put the whole district in panic, until he was rounded up today morning.

Therefore, there needs to be steps taken to secure especially those who report these cases and signs, so that we protect the communities.

There is another thing I would like to request from the minister. You have talked about fuel. The districts are crying. They are actually bothering members of Parliament to supply them with fuel in the districts. Why is it so up to now? If the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has money, it should get fuel quickly. Why is it that the Ministry if Health is slow? The districts are struggling with fuel and movement. Something needs to be urgently done. 

Lastly, you talked about 18,000 people who are at large. This is a big scare. How do you intend to quickly test these people using only one facility; that is Uganda Virus Research Institute? That is why I am calling upon you to look at other areas that you may need to utilise to be able to cover these results squarely, so that the country is put at peace.

Otherwise, the way it is right now, there is a big worry. There could be a lot of people who do not know that they are even carrying this disease and they are moving with it in public. At the end of the day, it may scale up and bring more problems to the whole country. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Franca Akello and then, hon. Kabagenyi. We have less than 40 minutes; we must stop at 5.00 p.m., as you know. Speak for only two minutes each.

4.24
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two clarifications to seek. The first one is that I would like the Ministry of Health to clarify on the issue of financing the district taskforce.

Agago District taskforce already exhausted their operational money by yesterday in trying to implement the lockdown. As we speak, the district does not have fuel anymore to move and implement the directives of the President.

Secondly, this goes to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. Honourable minister, we cannot sit in this House, legislate and give money for you to simply distribute to selected districts. We are all here as representatives of the people and the lockdown affected all the districts. (Applause) Therefore, you must find money, buy food and distribute. Money must be found and food distributed to all.

Finally, Madam Speaker, there is an issue on the pace at which the minister is distributing the food. Currently, he has already distributed to only 25,000 people and their target in Kampala is 1.5 million Ugandans. At that pace, they need six months to complete Kampala alone. So, how long is this distribution going to take? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.26
MS ROSE KABAGYENYI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to draw the attention of the two ministers. First, I come from a border district; we border Rwanda and DR Congo. We have many people who derive their livelihood from cross border trade. At the moment, these people have nothing to eat. 

Honourable minister, I would like to make it known to you that in Kisoro, we have what the Minister of Health called quarantine patients. There are many people in self-quarantine that are from across the border and they have totally nothing to eat. We have been contributing but we cannot do so anymore.

Another issue to the Minister of Health is that in Kisoro, we have about five border areas. We have done supplies from when we had Ebola. Our people have nothing to use. The little we have been providing locally is over. I think attention should be given to the border districts to be equipped and to be able to support our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MR ALERO: Thank you, honourable minister, for allowing me to give information. Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are those who contributed last week. You contributed, hon. Kasumba. Hon. Macho, you contributed. Let us give chance to Members who did not contribute last week. 

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Food distribution should cover the whole country. As you are aware, honourable minister, our people are subsistence farmers. They have emerged out of the dry season and have just started cultivating their land. They do not have food reserves. Whatever they had was consumed during the dry season. Therefore, we will be happy if the whole country gets food distributed to them.

Secondly, our RDCs in the whole country are getting difficulty in sensitising people, in their surveillance work, in screening and monitoring the sick and those who are suspected to be having corona virus. These people do not have ambulances. Most of the ambulances have broken down with the tires all worn out. 

There are also very few districts that have got ambulances. There is no fuel for the vehicles. There are also few security personnel to patrol, especially the border areas. This has made it very difficult for the lockdown to be effected. We would, therefore, be very grateful if you provide fuel for effective patrols, vehicles and ambulances. Increase security, as well as police, army and LDUs. 

Lastly, there is need for sensitisation, mobilisation and education of all those people who stay around refugee hosting areas. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lucy Akello and we shall have hon. Bebona. Then, we will have hon. Lufafa. Hon. Silvia Akello also did not contribute. Honourable members, some of you contributed last week. Please, hon. Dulu and hon. Joy Atim sit down. Hon. Joy Atim, you spoke. Let us give other people a chance. Hon. Gutomoi, you also contributed. Hon. Centenary and hon. Mpuuga also contributed. I know those who contributed. 

4.31
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me thank the Minister of Health. Where I come from, they say you do not thank somebody when she is dead. Honourable minister, I would like to thank you for your efforts and I believe if we join our hands, we will do better. 

I would like to raise the concerns of my border people in Elegu. Yesterday, there were two cases with high temperature. They were checked and they did not have Malaria. The isolation centre in Elegu, however, can no longer contain these people for more than five hours because the room is very small. When the centre communicated with Kampala, they were asked to deport those people because they were South Sudanese and that they do not have resources to keep them. 

I think this is postponing a problem. We already know that South Sudan has problems. They have just declared one case and we are sure that there are many other cases in South Sudan. 

So, my prayer is that we need more money at the border posts. Secondly, the truck drivers that have been allowed to move are causing us a lot of problems. When they reach the borders, they mingle with the people without being checked and I am very scared that they are going to infect our people. These truck drivers hide people under the trucks when they are about to reach the border. They are usually not just three. They hide more people and transport them into our country. 

So, we need more vigilance at the border points especially at Elegu. Our district taskforce in Amuru is suffering because there is no money. What facilities and measures are being put in place to boost these border posts? Since you are a border man, I give you a chance to raise information. Thank you.

MR ANGURA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank my colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give you and the Minister of Health is that we at the border points are suffering. Very many new porous points have been created from the ones we used to know. 

Honourable minister, yesterday, we received one minibus that came from Kenya with over 15 people. In Malaba, after closing the known porous points, these people created new ones. They come with jerrycans and they float towards Uganda. All these – (Member timed out.)

4.35
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees for the report. I also thank the Minister of Health for the job so far well done. I will go straight to the point. First, I would like to start with the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. Thank you for supplying food. As you can hear, there are still a lot of outcries from Members but my point is that as you plan to supply food to the hospitals, make sure you supply to all the hospitals at the same time and not in a phased manner like how you are going to do it in the different districts. 

Honourable Minister of Health, in the report, I did not hear about the 600 people who got in contact with the 13 people as earlier on mentioned in the – I heard you on radio. Even the other day, when the President was addressing the nation, the other doctor mentioned it. We do not know what happened to them; whether you are following them up and how far you have gone with testing them.

The other thing you mentioned is about the fuel, which you are about to provide to some ambulances, which were contributed by members of Parliament. I am one of the Members who contributed an ambulance to Bundibugyo District. Apart from the fuel, in case you get the money, are the drivers going to get some allowances? We are the ones – (Member timed out.)

4.37
MR NELSON LUFAFA (NRM, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Thursday last week, upon a presentation by the Prime Minister, this Parliament resolved and directed that the Government’s proposal of distribution of food that had been scheduled to start on the 04 April 2020 and restricted to areas of Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono be halted until the Government comes up with a more nationalistic formula of distribution of food and relief. 

Our position, as the House, was guided by obvious facts that the Government policy of lockdown and its subsequent disruption of the citizens and the welfare of the people was not limited to only Kampala but also to its immediate neighbours. It was national in character with several Ugandans affected. 

However, it is a routine and it is characteristic of this Government to abuse and disregard the voices of the majority of Ugandans as represented in Parliament. Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister who is voted by one person alongside other Government ministers who are not voted, in total defiance of the Parliament’s resolution, actually proceeded and implemented their earlier discriminatory approach to Government relief –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me way. I would like to say to the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees that amidst all the challenges you have mentioned, the security of our people is more disastrous. On Saturday, in Otuke District, Okwang sub county, a lady was beaten by security personnel when she was in her house cooking. The community almost rose up against the security personnel but they were scared. 

Madam Speaker, if any Government vehicle breaks down in the community, no one will assist them. Wherever they see any Government vehicle or motorcycles, they run to the bush. What I am referring to is not only in Otuke but also Lira, Kole and other places.

Honourable minister, the security says that the curfew is supposed to end by 5.00.a.m. If it is beyond 5.00 a.m., they begin beating the community and do not want to see anybody even riding motorcycles. Therefore, as we think of distributing food only in Kampala, the people who are even supposed to get food correctly are being harassed. Other people are already committing suicide.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees be more prepared because as we think of COVID-19, there are also other diseases. How are we getting blood? There is no blood donation and yet, people are dying. What will we do if we have not thought of blood donation? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.42
MS DONONZIO MUGABE (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My first clarification point goes to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, especially on the hospitals he has talked about. I would like to ask for the list of those hospitals because when you talk of a hospital in Rukungiri that is treating people from Congo, I get worried. You would rather talk of Kanungu and may be, some parts of Mitooma.

Secondly, on the distribution, I witnessed the distribution of food in Bwaise and I was very worried that this could be one way of spreading the coronavirus where every individual is supposed to append a signature. I saw that and I was so worried that Members of the public can get the virus through signing on the same list using the same pen.

Honourable Minister of Health, Ugandans are wearing masks and we have seen America returning the donation they had got from China. We have seen on social media medical workers describing the safety of the masks. How safe are Ugandans who are putting on these masks? I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.44
MS EVELYN CHEMUTAI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukwo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give more information to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, Bukwo has sub counties that border Kenya. Most of the people go to Kenya for kibaluwa, they go to work in floriculture farms for daily survival. Now, they have been locked out and they have no food for the last one week. They are crying that there is no food. 

Honourable Minister of Health, Bukwo still has porous borders and these are two communities that interact very closely. They come at any time. Kindly, can we have security beefed up in the 42 kilometres at Swam Border so that we can vet the people who cross anyhow. At the moment, we have over 18 people under quarantine and we are not sure of their safety. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

4.45
MS VERONICA BABIRYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is with the Minister of Health. She has talked about recruitment but many Ugandans are interested in applying for the jobs she has talked about. However, at the moment, the country is on lockdown. 

Many Ugandans are wondering how they can apply for these jobs. We have many of them who can travel from different districts but there is no transport for them to come to Kampala to bring their applications. Therefore, I am requesting that if applicants could apply online, it would be very ideal for every Ugandan who is willing to apply.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, right now, there is a country lockdown. However, in my district, fishermen have been requested to gather in one place so that they are registered. Most of them fear to register because they were told not to gather but do social distancing.

Madam Speaker, I am requesting that this registration by UPDF should be halted until the 14 days are done. Many of them cannot register because of coronavirus and the UPDF are insisting that those who are not able to register during this time will not be allowed to operate on the Lake Kyoga. I am requesting that the registration of fishermen should be halted and –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise regarding the statement from the Ministry of Health. We have quarantine centres in districts and institutional quarantine centres. Many times, we have received calls from RDCs requesting for support from members of Parliament. I would like the honourable minister to clarify the services offered at these isolation and quarantine centres from the Ministry of Health.

Secondly, under strategy two, you mentioned that if a person finishes the 14 days, they are subjected to a mandatory test before they are released. However, then, you talked about the shortage of these testing kits and you have mentioned that we shall be getting them this week. What happens to people who complete their isolation when these kits are not available?

Then on strategy three, you talked about the flight manifest of passengers who came between 7 and 20 March 2020 and they are about 18000 passengers. I would like to know what strategies you have put in place to make sure that these people are identified. If you have started, how many have you so far identified and how many are remaining and what timeline can you give us?

Finally, on the financial commitments, when you look at the commitment from Government, it is Shs 104 billion and the commitment from other donors like Global Fund, World –(Member timed out.)

4.52
MR FRANCIS MUKULA (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to draw the following to the attention of the Minister of Health; first, I would like to appreciate your statement and efforts. However, the issue is about the illiteracy and ignorance of about 70 per cent of the rural population of this disease.

For example, in my county, there is mass sensitisation, which is terrible and is called kiboko. The LDUs are battering the population. There is actually trauma in the villages. When they see people in uniforms, they run away. 

My plea is that we need to put more energies in strengthening the village, sub-county and district health committees to reach the population so that they know what the disease is, the symptoms and the dangers. Otherwise, 90 per cent of the sensitisation is basically through radios, televisions and social media yet the rural population, including the elderly, do not access social media. They also do not have radios. 

To show ignorance, the latest talks you find are that this disease is for “Bazungu” –(Member timed out.) 

4.52
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some Members are from the border areas and are concerned about the porous borders. 

I am from the border areas of Amudat District. For our people, the border is just like an imaginary line because we are of the same tribe as the Kenyans. Most of our people graze their cows both in Kenya and Uganda and that is why the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees said that there were patients referred from Kinyawa, Kacheliba and Alale in Kenya; it is because we are all cattle keepers. Our animals do well in that climate of Kenya. 

When one is sick, they refer them to Uganda because they do not have good hospitals around that border area. My request, therefore, is that we should not block those people. We should treat them as Ugandans because they are Ugandans. 

Secondly, for – (Member timed out.) 

4.54
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to raise. The first is on maternal-mortality rate. You are all aware that this country had put up a strong fight against the issue of maternal-mortality rate. However, as we talk, because public transport is not available, many mothers are delivering on their way to the health centres. 

Two days ago, we buried a mother in Kayunga. She died because they did not have transport to take her to the hospital. By the time the RDC provided transport, it was too late to save her life. The RDC made it clear to me that they have the transport at the district but that they do not have fuel to transport these mothers because they are so many. She receives very many calls but she cannot be available everywhere. 

My request is that we provide fuel to the district health teams to have these mothers transported to the health centres before it is too late to rescue them. If not, we should establish containment centres for expectant mothers to deliver in about 10 days so that they are transported to the health centres in time, if that can be possible, as a strategy to be laid by the Minister of Health. 

The other issue is delivering ARVs to the patients who need them. These people that need ARVs cannot access them at the moment – (Member timed out.) 

4.56
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Minister of Health. Colleagues, it seems the Ministry of Health - all health and medical workers are getting their math correct. I think they deserve congratulations from this House. 

However, this COVID-19 is going to lead to another economic disaster and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has consistently kept quiet and abstained from this debate. I think we need to take this issue very seriously because it is going to affect our economy. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to point out that all the concerns being raised by colleagues are a function of money and nothing else. They all require resources. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is not here to hear the members’ concerns. 

I can see on the Order Paper, there is a supplementary budget. I am waiting for an opportunity for us to start passing a budget for billboards when people do not have money; you need to critically look at the supplementary budget. Madam Speaker, we need a surgical operation of that supplementary budget. That is the only way to answer your concerns. Without it, we shall be here day after day –(Member timed out.) 

4.59
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two issues to draw this House to. First of all, the Minister of Health, in her statement, has decried the district budgets. I would like to draw your attention to last year. Parliament approved a promissory note to the Ministry of Health giving it to a private investor to construct a hospital in Lubowa. Madam Speaker, can’t we suspend this promissory note to the private investor for constructing the hospital in Lubowa and activate it when the country stabilises?  

Secondly, I would like to draw the attention of this House to the elderly people in the rural areas, who are on the verge of starvation. I would like to inform the honourable members that there are many scientific burials of the elderly taking place in rural areas.

Madam Speaker, we have been providing –(Member timed out.)

5.00
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Government for the work so far done towards fighting the pandemic. 

Madam Speaker, my concern is on two issues. First, is the economy and second is the supply of food. We all want food to be supplied to our constituencies and rightly so because if they talk of 1.5 million people getting food, I do not know where they get this formula from. If they follow the poverty index, the people who are poor are now about 22 per cent and 22 per cent of 45 million is close to 9.9 million people. Madam Speaker, I do not know how they are going to handle the rest of the poor people. 

Secondly, do we have enough stock? We all want food but do you have sufficient reserves? I remember, Madam Speaker, some years ago, there was an attempt to build silos in the different parts of the country so that we can store food during times of massive production to be used in such situations. However, do we have the stock? If we do not, what are we doing? Do we know how long this situation is going to last? Madam Speaker, as we distribute the little food we have, I think we should be addressing production. 

Right now, it is the rainy season throughout the country. We should be distributing seeds and we are lucky that there are many crops, which mature in a very short time such as maize, beans, which they are distributing today. The one tonne they gave us was just a mockery. We need to get more seeds. 

Madam Speaker, I went –(Member timed out.) 

5.03
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a crisis in my place and I would like to address it to the Minister for Disaster. Every morning, boda boda riders in Rubaga Division wake up and converge at my gate asking for food. I stay in Mutundwe and they know I live with a minister; they converge and ask for food. I would like you to advise me on what I should do. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, my second point goes to the Minister of Health. Madam Minister, I have reliable information that the United Arab Emirates Government is registering Ugandans and all nationals living in Dubai. They are preparing outbound flights to return nationals to their countries. I do not know how prepared you are for these people from Dubai who are about to arrive in this country. I do not know how you are going to manage the situation because Dubai is one of the listed countries where the problem is. 

Lastly, the distribution of food is very slow. You cannot tell me that for seven days, you have only handled 25,000 people. The Parliament of Uganda should work very fast to allocate resources so that we handle the situation because this is a crisis and we cannot manage a crisis by dillydallying like that. People are going to die while we wait for money to be released. I beg that we release funds - (Member timed out.) 

5.05
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like add my voice to what hon. Sarah had talked concerning the youth. We are all aware that we have parks here - Arua Park and Nebbi Park. Since the lockdown was announced, the youth did not have anything do on the streets and so, they have travelled back on foot. 

Today, we got a report that some have already arrived in Nebbi with swollen legs – some are still on the way. I am of the view that the responsible body does an audit of the people who left Kampala alive because they had to go through the park - and those who have not arrived - and the do the needful. 

On another note, right now we know that COVID-19 does not only have impact on the economy but also has a social impact. I do not see the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development active in all this. We need counselling for our people; we need people to be talked to. We have people under quarantine who are being stigmatised and who also need to be talked to. I thought those who are supposed to be talking to these people and counselling them should be from the Ministry of Gender. 

Talking about the border points, yes, we have all heard what is in Bunia –(Member timed out.) 

5.07
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My first concern goes to the Minister for Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. As you are aware, a number of workers are employed as casual labourers and most companies have closed and only retained critical staff. These casual workers earn only when they have worked; they are paid on a daily basis. 

Looking at the list and what the minister has mentioned, he has not touched that group of vulnerable workers. They are also vulnerable and they are waiting to hear when they are going to get food. 

Earlier on, the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees had mentioned that they are going to use LCs. However, from what is happening in Kawempe and other areas, they have left out LCs. Maybe the LCs are just helping them to move but they are not registering. A number of workers had already registered with their LCs expecting to get some food. We are waiting to hear from you. 

My second concern goes to the Minister of Health. Some districts do not have cars, for example Kitagwenda. Even the leadership like the chairperson and others do not have cars. How are you helping those districts to ensure that they also have transport, even ambulances so that they are able to help in case of any emergency? 

In addition, you mentioned that protective wear will be given to members that are handling issues of COVID-19. How about other members of staff like nurses in the health centres? Why aren’t you providing protective - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know it has come to 5.00 p.m. and we normally try to get you out of here before the curfew time. However, we just want to give the minister three minutes. First, we want to hear your plan for Uganda. We are totally unconvinced by what you have said. It is the same thing the Prime Minister said last time; that you are looking at the vulnerable in Kampala and Wakiso. 

However, the vulnerable are in every town in this country. There is no justification for excluding them. We do not want to be party to the exclusion. What we want is a plan from you. When are you going to address the rest of the country? And then we shall get the Minister of Health. 

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate you for having given me the opportunity to respond. Some Members were wondering why I talked about Rukungiri yet it is not at the border. The hospital is called Kisizi Hospital –(Interjections)– my pronunciation is in Teso. It is in Rukungiri. I took the trouble to get all the information, so you just need to really know that I cannot present what is not researched.

Madam Speaker, the speed is slow because we have not gotten the resources. The plan is on, scheduled for the day after tomorrow, to expand our operations across these areas that I have identified. 

We are going to sit down and do the following. One, we will have to factor in the areas of people who may not have been captured. For instance, we are talking about Jinja Municipality, where we have the problem of very many workers who may not even have an option, for instance, a garden where they can go and find some vegetables. We are going to look at all those and factor them in, in our second phase. 

What we want first is to allow us to complete the first phase. This Parliament has the keys to facilitate that process. Please allow us finish the first phase. We will come back here. For example, one of our colleagues from Lira has indicated to us that while we were looking at the orphanages, Nyeta has an orphanage which has not been captured in our records. 

We would like this Parliament to expedite the process so that we can actually start working. What is actually happening now is that we have activated those people who are giving us resources with the hope that Government will make good on what is going to come from Government. That is the position. Therefore, this Parliament must make this happen so that we can move and then come back for the second phase.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we want to assist you but against a plan.

MR ECWERU: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Not just general plans. What is the plan? That is what we want. (Applause)

MR ECWERU: We will indicate that to you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health. Wait, just one clarification honourable.

MP OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Health. She has done her part. 

Last week, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development assured us and gave us a deadline of midnight that there would be money in the districts but to date, there is no money in the districts and we do not see the minister of finance here. 

Madam Speaker, like honourable Katuntu said, what we need is money. Now the honourable Minister of Health has told us here that supplies alone need Shs 176 billion and what is provided, even in the supplementary budget, is less than Shs 176 billion. Where is the minister of finance to provide the resources if even the money for the supplies has not been provided? 

The fuel for the ambulances in the districts is not there. What is the ministry of finance doing? So, Madam Speaker, we need the minister of finance to come here and explain why they are failing the good work of the Ministry of Health. Without resources, they will not be able to provide the services. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the issue of donations, the Ministry of Health has listed the one from the World Bank and the IMF but there are also individuals. I wish you would provide that list. We are reading that the Tororo Cement Factory is giving Shs 200 million –(Interjections)– there are companies, like the Ruparelia Foundation, which are giving vehicles. There are a number of those. I wish they would be able to give us that list. 

As I conclude, the 18,000 people who are out in the public; we heard two days ago, the Minister of Education and Sports saying that the schools should open on 27th April. How can the schools open on the 27th when we have 18,000 people out there? I think they must scrutinise and sort this, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, the procedural issue that I would like to raise is that yesterday, we brought to the attention of the Office of the Prime Minister that the Batwa people in Kigezi Sub-region completely depend on tourism. They do not generally engage is farming. Their livelihoods depend on dancing for the tourists. We wrote that information and brought it to the Office of the Prime Minister. 

Right now, even as we speak, they have already buried some because of hunger. It was surprising for me to see that the minister did not talk about the Batwa. Further still, there are people who were affected by the opening of the border with Congo and Uganda in Kanungu District. There are about 400 people who were displaced, whom he did not talk about in his speech.  

I wonder whether the Office of the Prime Minister has a plan for those people who have been suffering, especially those who were displaced when we opened the border. He has not said anything. They have not done anything since we brought the information. I do not know why. This is a very serious issue for the whole of Kigezi and that border part. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.17
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point of procedure is about the lamentations made by honourable members here regarding the disbursement of funds to the different districts. 

Madam Speaker, we have on the Order Paper, the Supplementary Budget which we are supposed to look at and I wonder how Members here expect Government or the ministry of finance to disperse funds to the districts without us having looked at the budget and approved it. 

Other than that, I would like to appeal to the Minister of Disaster Preparedness to consider on his list, the following vulnerable people. We have families in this country which are headed by children. We are receiving a lot of cries from our constituents about this category of people and I want to appeal to the Government to specifically pay attention to this category of people. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, it is a quarter past five o’clock. We need to close soon. Minister. 

5.18
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Ms Ruth Aceng): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The response to COVID-19 is multi-sectoral, so it not health alone. The issues concerning transport will require input from the Minister of Works and Transport. The issues concerning food have been answered. The issues concerning the border require both security and health and in this case, the Ministry if Health does the part of screening the samples but securing the borders is the responsibility of the Ministry of Security. 

I will respond to a few issues that concern us. One is about testing. Madam Speaker, currently we are using what is called the Berlin Test. This is our gold standard. There are many rapid-test kits that have come on the market, either for PCR or anti-body tests. The ones we have validated at UVRI have failed to meet the standard and so, we cannot use them. We continue to wait for the new ones which are coming, then we shall roll out the testing. But UVRI has the capacity to run even one thousand tests in a single day and we can expand to over 75 tests in four hours. We only need to have test kits available. 

The sample transport mechanism works very well. It has been working since the time of Ebola. Up to now, there is no problem with it. However, if the rapid test kits become available and they meet our standards by being sensitive, we shall roll that out to the districts. 

Madam Speaker, I will not talk about finances. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will answer his questions accordingly. We are aware about the challenges in Elegu and we have since guided the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) on what to do. 

On the issue of the contact, if you read my statement, they are no longer only 660 but they are 920. I have enumerated very well on them in my statement. All health workers will get a risk allowance. 

On the issue of recruitment of health workers, the advert was run in the newspapers and they were asked to submit their applications online. Recruitment has been completed. If more health workers are required, we shall advertise again and recruit accordingly. 

The over 18,000 people are being tracked using a mechanism that we have devised with security. I do not want to divulge because people may disappear, having heard me speak. So, allow me to keep that silent so that we can identify them for purposes of our safety. 

Regarding illiteracy or lack of knowledge on COVID-19 by our people, in my statement, I spoke about risk communication as one of the strategies. I think it is strategy No. 4 and it is well elaborated. 

Madam Speaker, on the returnees from Dubai and other countries, we are preparing more quarantine facilities based in schools, where we shall receive, quarantine and monitor them. Quarantine has proved very useful. As you have seen, most of our cases are in quarantine, which keeps us safe. 

Lastly, the districts are ready to work as soon as they receive the funding. I, therefore, request that the supplementary budget is passed today. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have two supplementary requests before this House. I think it is important that we consider them urgently. However, I have only seen one report. I have not seen the second one. Can we do them first thing tomorrow?  Otherwise, it is 5.20 p.m. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the curfew starts at 7.00 p.m. and it is now a few minutes past 5.00 p.m. I think we can go in for another 40 minutes. After all, there is no traffic jam –(Interjections)– let us help the Minister of Health. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal that you limit the debate and have this passed. However, this will depend on how the committee will present the report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you ready to wait until 6.00 p.m.? [HON.MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Okay. Let us invite the chairperson. 

5.24
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to present the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 2: Addendum 1 and 2 for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Madam Speaker, I should clarify that we have Supplementary Schedule No. 1, which is not very urgent because that schedule was under the legal limit of the 3 per cent of the approved budget. So, that money was already spent. For Schedule No.2, also, some components for money that was spent. We are, therefore, focused on Addendum 1 and 2 on Schedule 2 for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

We circulated the report but after circulating the report, we got new information and that information necessitated amending our original report. I now beg to move those amendments before I present the entire report.

We have an amendment on Page 4 –(Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members. Listen to the report. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: The last paragraph on Page 4 has a figure reflected as Shs 207,684,369,305. That figure is being replaced by the figure Shs 203,609,369,305. 

The second amendment is on page 13. We are amending the schedule at the bottom of that page entitled, “Summary of sums to be supplied”. We are amending the first figure under recurrent expenditure, under the column entitled, “Addendum No. 1.” I am sorry that figure remained the same. But the next figure under Addendum No. 2, which is Shs 217,780,760,614 is being replaced by a new figure, which is Shs 207,780,760,614. The sum of those two numbers changes. In other words, the total of the second row changes from Shs 421,390,129,919 to Shs 411,390,129,919. 

In addition –(Interruption) 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am really sorry, Members, if this will rub you the wrong way. 

Madam Speaker, the figures that are being amended are coming after the committee had already processed and signed the report. The procedural matter I am raising is whether those figures that are being proposed have the blessing of Members of the committee. Otherwise, it will raise serious legal challenges if we proceed that way without having a report that meets the standard of our Rules of Procedure. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, all the amendments contained in this document have been duly signed. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Proceed, honourable chair. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, there is a new figure under statutory in the third column. In that column, we have zero under Addendum 2 but now we are replacing that zero with Shs 10,000,000,000.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can you allow him to first present? Proceed, honourable chairperson. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: The next amendment is on page No. 23, Annex No.2 under Vote 014: Ministry of Health. The figure we had before was Shs 50,009,794,724; it was replaced by a new figure, which is Shs 40,083,434,724 and the resultant total also changes from Shs 104,188,234,110 to a new total which is Shs 94,261,874,110. 

The last amendment on the schedule comes on page No.28; we are amending totals at the bottom of that page. The first change is on the third column. We are changing that figure that reads Shs 217,780,760,614. The new figure is Shs 207,780,760,614. That gives us a consequential amendment on the total from Shs 284 billion to a new total which is Shs 274 billion. 

Below that total, we create another line of expenditure under Vote 104 and that is the statutory charge on the Consolidated Fund under the Parliamentary Commission. The amendment under that schedule, column 3 at the bottom of the page; we are creating a new figure of Shs 10 billion and the total in the same row on the last column on the same page is Shs 10 billion. 

Those are the amendments that we have made. I now present the report of the committee in summary. If we go back to page No.2, we present the schedules that were laid on the Table in Parliament. All those schedules are reflected in there. 

On the third page, we are indicating structure of the report; it has parts (a), (c) and (d) and I believe that you can read for yourselves the details in each part. 

Under part (a), we are presenting the methodology and paragraph No.2 (o) we are presenting the legal framework and on the fourth page, the sources of funding which you shall read during your spare time. 

In part (b), we are presenting the justification of supplementary recurrent expenditure by vote for prior approval under Schedule No.2 Addendum 1, Financial Year 2019/20. 

The total supplementary expenditure under Schedule No.2 Addendum 1, Financial Year 2019/20 and the total supplementary expenditure under Schedule No.2 Addendum 1, Financial Year 2019/20 amounts to Shs 638,878,692,305. 

That is broken down between the recurrent and development expenditures, which are all reflected on that page. The justification comes under the various votes reflected on page No.5. We have several votes under missions abroad. Those missions are reflected in schedule annex No.1; there are many votes in there for missions abroad and the details on the numbers are all reflected. 

No.2 includes several votes under local Governments; we have reflected the breakdown of the allocation to various local Governments under annex No.1, which we are presenting for supply. 

We have wage shortfalls also for various votes amounting to Shs 201 billion and that expenditure is spread between Ministry of Defence and Veterans, public universities, the Judiciary and salary enhancement under the education sector. 

Various votes also to cater for staffing posts based on payroll performance of various votes which we have reflected in that schedule. This section is largely about salaries, save for the expenditure under missions abroad. 

In part (c) we provide the justification of supplementary development expenditure still under addendum No.1 for prior approval by Parliament. 

Vote No.004 presents a request by the Ministry of Defence for Shs 400 billion to cater for procurement of classified defence equipment. The classified committee considered this request and recommends that Parliament passes this request. 

Under Vote 008: Ministry of Finance, there is a request of Shs 3.701 billion which is arising from external funding to cater for winding up the clean cooking supply chain energy expansion project under the ministry. The committee has recommended that this amount be supplied to the ministry. 

Under Vote 014 (vi) is the Ministry of Health that has requested for Shs 30.57 billion again also arising from external financing for the East African Public Health Laboratory networking project and the Uganda Reproductive Maternal Child Health Services Improvement Project. The committee considered this matter and has recommended approval. 

Justification of supplementary expenditure under schedule No.2 addendum No.2; this is the COVID-19 Fund under Financial Year 2019/2020. 

Madam Speaker, this schedule was scheduled to cater for the activities under the emergency response to COVID-19 under the following agencies: 

The health sector; security sector (comprising UDPF, police, prisons, ISO, ESO and immigration); there is local Government (the Resident District Commissioners and district local Governments, KCCA) and finally, disaster preparedness support to the vulnerable. 

Under the health sector budget, the committee has recommended the enhancement of the health sector budget to Shs 94,261,874,110 divided as follows; 

Recurrent budget is Shs 40,083,434,724 and it is intended to cater for salary of staff that will be recruited on contract to beef up the current staffing levels in the ministry in the sector, for the allowances for staff on surveillance, accommodation for those under quarantine, provision of blood, medical supplies like gloves, masks and sanitisers. 

Under development budget we have Shs 54,178,439,386 being allocated to the ministry; and these funds are intended for the purchase of ambulances numbering 38, personal protective equipment, beds under intensive care units, ventilators and provision of oxygen in the various referral hospitals. 

The summary of the budget allocations is presented in the schedule at page 7. I will not go through it, in the interest of time.

We also have the security sector. It presented a budget request of Shs 81.498 billion. However, this has been reduced to Shs 77.5 billion. 

The committee recommends that we supply Shs 77,497,505,890 to this sector. The money will be distributed, in the detailed schedule attached in Annex 2, to the various agencies that are involved in this intervention.

Under local governments, it was noted that district task forces have been established, headed by the RDCs and constituting of the chief administrative officers, development partners and the security while the district health department will act as the taskforce secretariat. It is part of the general taskforce at the district.

We have a breakdown for this group under Table 3. Items 1, 2, 3 and 4 belong to the RDCs under the Office of the President. Items 5 and 6 constitute money to be sent to the various local governments; an average of about Shs 165,530,299. 

So, each district in Uganda will receive that amount, if this proposal is approved. However, this does not include the expenditure under the Office of the President targeting the RDCs’ operations.

Item 4 is about disaster preparedness - see page 9. Disaster preparedness is receiving money - which is detailed on page 10 – to the tune of Shs 59,400,000,000. The breakdown is given there.

Maize flour distribution is targeting two million beneficiaries. While distribution of beans is targeting two million beneficiaries and the breakdown is given there. 

The committee recommends that the budget for this item be maintained as requested. However, the Government is advised to look for more resources to support the vulnerable people throughout the country.

Intervention No.5 is under Kampala Capital City Authority. They presented a budget of Shs 30 billion. However, this has been suppressed to two billion shillings, which the committee recommends for approval by this House. The balance has been transferred to the health sector.

The Ministry of ICT and National Guidance presented a request of Shs 14.72 billion. The committee, in its wisdom, reduced this figure to six billion shillings. We have done away with one of those issues people have been complaining about; the billboards and many other non-priority expenses. So, this budget has also been reduced to six billion shillings with the balance being transferred to the health sector.

Madam Speaker, on page 13 paragraph 6.0, we present the recurrent supplementary estimates recommended for prior approval and supply, under Schedule 2, Addendum 1 and Addendum 2. It is actually both recurrent and development.

The committee has noted the inflow of new resources, in form of donations - I think the minister presented those donations - from different development partners, the private sector and other well-wishers.

For purposes of harmonising and rationalising resource utilisation in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, the committee recommends that all such donations, especially involving cash, should be channelled through the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

The committee further recommends that the Supplementary Expenditure requests for the votes specified in Annex 1, which is attached and Annex 2, be approved and supplied, as amended; I have already proposed the amendments. The summary is presented in that schedule below. These are the figures, Madam Speaker, we request the House to supply, to take care of all the votes that we have presented in Annex 1 and Annex 2.

Recurrent expenditure

We request for a supply, under Addendum No. 1, of Shs 203,609,369,305. For recurrent expenditure, under Addendum No. 2, we propose to the House to supply Shs 217 billion – I beg your pardon. I had already amended those figures. For Addendum No. 2 - recurrent expenditure - we propose that the House supplies Shs 207,780,760,614.

The total we are proposing to supply under recurrent expenditure for Addendum No. 1 and Addendum No. 2, is Shs 411, 390,129,919.

We propose to the House to supply Shs 435,269,323,000 under Addendum No. 1, as development expenditure, and Shs 66,219,239,386 under Addendum No. 2, as development expenditure. The total for those two is Shs 501,488,562,386. The overall total for Addendum No. 1, for both recurrent and development expenditures, is Shs 638,878,692,305.

The total for recurrent and development expenditures, under Addendum No. 2, is Shs 274,000,000,000. The overall total involving Addendum No.1 and Addendum No. 2 proposed for supply and appropriation is Shs 912,878,692,305.

However, we have statutory expenditure amounting to Shs 9,886,705,208 intended for the Judiciary and Shs 10 billion, under Addendum No. 2, meant for the Parliamentary Commission. 

The overall total for statutory expenditure, which we request the House to supply, is Shs 19,886,705,208. We have presented the grand totals, which we do not necessarily have to supply and they are presented in that summarised schedule.

The committee further requests the House to adopt the report of the committee. As you note, Annex 1, running from pages 14 to 22, presents Addendum No. 1 under schedule 2. Those are the figures that we propose to the House for supply for all those votes. All those figures are linked to the summarised schedule, which I have just presented.

From pages 23 to 28 - those figures under Annex 2 are proposed under Supplementary Expenditure Schedule 2, Addendum No. 2. Those are the COVID-19 funds.

So, that brings me to the end of my report. However, Madam Speaker, I received a minority report as I was coming to this sitting. The movers are the usual ones: hon. Cecilia Atim, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi – this time, there is a new entrant; hon. Winfred Kiiza. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Where are the movers of the minority report? 

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, maybe before they come in, I beg to lay on Table the amendment of the committee to the report of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 02, Addendum No. 01 and No. 02 for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

Now, I also beg to lay on Table the report of the Committee on Budget on the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No. 02, Addendum No. 01 and Addendum No. 02 for the Financial Year 2019/2020. I also beg to lay the minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Budget. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Where is the minority report? Please present it quickly. There is going to be a curfew in a short time.

5.51
MR GERALD KARUHANGA (Independent, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development laid a supplementary expenditure schedule for which Parliament’s approval is being sought. 

Pursuant to Rule 202 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I hereby present a dissenting opinion from the opinion of the majority of the Committee on Budget. Madam Speaker, the minority opinion is supported by five Members of Parliament of the Committee on Budget namely: 

    1. Hon. Winfred Kiiza
    2. Hon. Cecilia Atim
    3. Hon. Joy Atim
    4. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi
    5. Hon. Gerald Karuhanga

Madam Speaker, firstly, let me be very clear that I am hearing for first time the amendment that has just been presented in this House and we completely disassociate ourselves from it. We are unequivocally, in any way, not related to that amendment because we are hearing about it here on the Floor for first time. 

So, I move to proceed on the issues that we were able to address during the meetings. Our first point of dissent is the Ministry of Health as well as the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development informed the committee that the Government considered the worst case scenario. This worst case scenario – I am trying to make sure I give a summary of this report in the interest of time.

So, they used the China model. The China model, when they related it with Uganda, they stated that two per cent of the population, over the course of the pandemic, will get infections; 20 per cent of the infected persons will require hospital admission; 15 per cent of the hospitalised persons will require intensive care; and two per cent of the hospitalised persons could die. 

Madam Speaker, firstly, the main report of the committee is completely silent on the fact that the Ministry of Health informed the committee that it had requested for over Shs 400 billion to effectively manage the pandemic. Unfortunately, Government allocated it only Shs 62 billion as shown in the laid supplementary schedule.

The main report recommends approval of revised figures of Shs 104 billion. This leaves a deficit of over Shs 300 billion. This funding gap adversely affects the preparation and execution of a comprehensive COVID-19 response plan as shall be highlighted below. 

Madam Speaker, in our country, we have 6,937 health facilities for which Government has 45 per cent and 55 per cent are non-Government. Of these, majority are located in Central Region with 45 per cent while 20 per cent are located in Western Uganda, 19 per cent in Eastern Uganda and 15 per cent in Northern Uganda. 

While the management of cases is currently done in the Central Region, given the inequality in the distribution of health facilities, it is clear that eastern and northern regions would be adversely affected. So far, it has been realised that the COVID-19 burden, as it is the case in the rest of the world, is largely borne by Government facilities. 

Madam Speaker, no interventions have been articulated yet on how to facilitate and engage the private and not for profit facilities in event that COVID-19 pandemic is widespread. Secondly, Uganda would require 1,666,800 beds. However, Uganda only has a total of only 48,231 beds across all levels of health facilities –(Interruption)

MR OKOTH OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure according to Rule 202. I rise on the admissibility of the minority report. Rule 202 requires members to dissent on the opinion of the majority report. The areas of dissent of the minority report is not covered. There is nowhere in the main report where the areas of dissent as presented in the minority report are in the majority report. 

So, the point of procedure I am raising is given that we do not even have sufficient time, is it procedurally right for us to listen to a report, which offends Rule 202 that requires the minority report to dissent on the opinion of the majority report and yet the areas of dissent are not anywhere covered in the main report? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, can I have a look at your report? Honourable members, one of the reasons I required to attach your report to the main is so that we can follow it.

MR NAGWOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of clarification. The honourable member presenting a minority report has put it to this House that he has never heard of the report; that he is hearing about it here for the first time. Now, if he is hearing about it for the first time is he right to comment about something which he has heard about for the first time? I beg the clarification.

THE SPEAKER: I have not understood your rational for the objection. What are you objecting to? What are you dissenting from?

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are several points of dissent but I am trying to summarise. Therefore, our first point of dissent is on the total un-recognition of the extreme inadequate financial support to the health sector. Therefore, that is what I was trying to explain in part A.

Madam Speaker, I can go to part B, but part A is making out a case of how we are inadequately facilitating the health sector vis-à-vis the pandemic and its magnitude. Can I go to part B, Madam Speaker, if you may allow?

THE SPEAKER: Your reason is inadequate funding, what is the second one?

MR KARUHANGA: The second one is on misleading forecast.

THE SPEAKER: By the committee?

MR KARUHANGA: By the ministry and what the committee has captured in its report. I can even move from there and go to the third one.

THE SPEAKER: Are you attacking the Government proposal or the committee’s report?

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, both because-

THE SPEAKER: No.

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, let me be very clear. The emphasis is on dissenting with the committee report. The committee report is reporting on the supplementary by Government. Therefore, referring to the supplementary in the document makes no big problem. However,-

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the chair. 

MR KARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, if you may allow me to conclude in a very precise way and we-

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from the chair.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, the mover is talking of a figure of Shs 404 billion proposed by Government. In as far as we are concerned, the request that came from Government on the health sector was Shs 62 billion. Therefore, he is dissenting from something that we did not have. We are not privy to the figure you are dissenting from. Other issues relate to spinners, Nyanza textile which we do not have in our report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that-

MS EGUNYU: Thank You, Madam Speaker. I am aware that time is not on our side but also rushing something is not also good.  I have an issue on this supplementary. All along and ever since this pandemic began in this country, I have been listening well to the submissions by our ministers of Health. I have also been listening very well to even other stakeholders in this nation.

However, Madam Speaker, island communities are completely left out. I have heard of the ambulances that are going to be bought here. We have people who represent island districts like Buvuma, Kalangala, districts of Lake Kyoga, people from Mayuge who also have an attachment on the water and other districts. Therefore, as the Minister of Health is going to do surveillance and evacuation of the people, we need assurance from here; as they are going to buy ambulances, the cars of the road, we also need boats on the water.

Madam Speaker, since they have forgotten us for some good times - I am not objecting to the supplementary budget, but allow me to stand and emphasize on this point until when they tell us the ambulances they are going to buy and also the boats they are going to buy on the water bodies of Uganda. We are also human beings.  (Interjection)- No I want to know the boats.

6.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT)(Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, it is 6.07 p.m. The Government of Uganda put in a place a curfew starting at 7.00.p.m. some of us come from as far as Kawempe and we need more than an hour to get home. I, therefore, would like to propose a motion that the question be put. Thank you.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this minority report was brought in accordance with the rule and we have been consulting. The code of conduct and the code of doing business in this House is that if there are two sides, let the two sides be heard.

Madam Speaker, it does not matter the sentiment what can be. We want to get out of this House with a smart face and we do not want anybody to blackmail the image of Parliament. What I am saying is that we are aware of the figure which was first read by the chairperson of the committee. I swear before God that figure was never circulated to all the members. All we are trying to say, in a smart way, is that we should have been informed so that we reconcile it in our minds; how to incorporate that particular amendment to the main body of the report. 

Some of you think that, automatically because we were left out, therefore, we were going to be of constraint. It is not so. What we are trying to say is if there is any new idea, bring it to the entire committee and we look at it. If we are to disagree, let us disagree. 

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has explained to me where that amendment came from. Unfortunately, we were not informed and we did not incorporate it on this. 

We made it very clear in the committee that the reason why the figure for the Ministry of Health rose to 104 is to make sure that all the ICUs all over the country are rehabilitated unconditionally. We are to make sure that all the health centres across the country are rehabilitated unconditionally, as a way of demonstrating our commitment. We need to demonstrate that we are ready for this COVID and nobody is going to blackmail us. We have agreed to disagree. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to get out of here as – I think the chairperson has to apologise for doing the amendment without giving the figure to all the members. That amendment was being brought and it accommodates other areas – we can always discuss and agree on it. However, what I do not agree on is to do things as a mafia. Some of us have seen that kind of harassment before. You cannot talk to us as if we are kids. 

Madam Speaker, we have a right – let us hear the majority – without spoiling the image of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the minority report be adopted. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the majority report be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

THE SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.2: ADDENDUM 1 AND 2 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

Addendum 1 – Recurrent expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the total sum of Shs 203,609,369,305 be provided for as recurrent expenditure for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Addendum 1 – Development Expenditure 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 435,269,323,000 be provided for under Addendum 1 as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Addendum 2 –Recurrent Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 207,780,760,614 be provided for as recurrent expenditure under Addendum 2 for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Addendum 2 – Development Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 66,219,239,386 be provided for under Addendum 2 as development expenditure for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Statutory Expenditure

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that a total sum of Shs 19,886,705,208 be provided for as statutory expenditure for the Financial Year 2019/2020. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Supply reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply do reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, and the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered and approved the Supplementary Schedule Addendum 1 and 2 for the Financial Year 2019/2020 with amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

6.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of Supply be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is now 6.20 p.m.; it is important that we really run home. House adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 8 April 2020 at 2.00 p.m.)


