
Disclaimer: The electronic version of the Official Report of the proceedings of Parliament (Hansard) is for information purposes only. A certified version of this Report can be obtained from the Office of the Clerk to Parliament.




Wednesday, 24 April 2019

Parliament met at 2.05 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. We have reports that are ready and we will deal with them. At an appropriate time, when the Member is available, I will ask that Item No. 19 be brought forward for a motion to introduce a Private member’s Bill. For now, let us proceed with the business.

There were some urgent matters.

2.07
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Mr Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent national importance regarding Item No. 4 (x) on the Order Paper. We are going to pass the budget for the health sector for Financial Year 2019/2020. I have read through the ministerial policy statement but I have not seen anything concerning nodding syndrome. How are we going to handle nodding syndrome in northern Uganda? Last year, we passed a supplementary budget to a tune of Shs 1.4 billion. Are we going to continuously pass supplementary budgets on issues that we are aware that we have? 

Mr Speaker, we passed the supplementary budget but the Ministry of Health did not include anything to do with nodding syndrome in their budget for the coming financial year.

My prayers are that:

    1. Let this House look for a long-term plan for the children suffering from the nodding syndrome, for example, setting up a skills-training school where they can do tailoring or something that could help them.
    2. This House should ensure that if we do not have any money for the nodding syndrome, we should not pass the budget. 

I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What happened, honourable minister? It is true that last year, it came through as an emergency situation and we had to look for Shs 1.4 billion. Ordinarily, that should have now been captured in the subsequent budget.

2.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Mr Speaker, this has been raised as an urgent matter and we had a stakeholders’ meeting concerning the nodding syndrome. If you could allow me to give a very brief report regarding what the meeting recommended, specifically after the implementation of the supplementary budget that was approved on this Floor.

It is true that a supplementary budget of up to Shs 1.4 billion was approved for the victims of the nodding syndrome in northern Uganda last year. Immediately after, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released these funds directly to the affected districts and some of the funds were sent to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. This was a one-off release following the closure of the rehabilitation centres, specifically in Omoro and Kitgum districts.
The Ministry of Health has for this coming financial year put in place approximately Shs 340 million for the nodding syndrome, which will be released on a quarterly basis for the affected districts. 

However, the meeting that was held in Gulu involving all the stakeholders came up with recommendations, key among them being to first of all have an audit in place and assess how the released supplementary funds were utilised and thereafter, a report brought to Parliament so that Members can get to know and appreciate how the funds were utilised.

The meeting also came up with a way forward in terms of a long-term strategy in order to improve the future for these victims to have a multi-purpose skills training school built in one of the districts, preferably Omoro. It was noted that the rehabilitation centre should be integrated into the health facilities. 

Mr Speaker, the matter that the Member has raised is very important and the meeting that was held consisting the Lango and Acholi members of Parliament made recommendations. One of the key recommendations was to have a multi-purpose skills’ training centre for these children and to integrate the funding in the annual budgets of the Ministry of Health and other ministries. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the incorporation in the budget that we are dealing with now or you are looking at budgets that are still anticipated to come sometime?

DR MORIKU: The supplementary budget was a one-off.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which budget are you saying should be incorporated in the annual budget?

DR MORIKU: We thought that probably it could be under the Ministry of Education and Sports.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, what I am asking is, which financial year budget are you talking about?

DR MORIKU: This coming financial year.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: For which ministerial policy statements we are discussing now?

DR MORIKU: Yes –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the explanation she has given. However, whatever gets integrated in the budget gets lost. The honourable member here has expressed the need and urgency for addressing the nodding syndrome and we all know what these children have suffered. Can the minister tell us how much money has been put in the budget for the coming financial year and how much has been allocated to each of these ministries so that we know that the money is there and that the problem will be addressed?

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, it is true that this is an urgent matter.  However, this particular item remains unfunded. We are looking at a long-term plan and that is why we probably need to look at it before the budget is passed. I believe we still have time to integrate this and look for money for this important and urgent matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member for Kitgum, would you like to follow this up with the committees and see how it can be handled?

MS ROSE AKELLO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to get clarification from the minister. When we passed the supplementary budget last year for the nodding syndrome, it was Shs 1.4 billion but the minister has explained that she gave only about Shs 340 million. How is it going to help these children suffering from nodding syndrome? Will that money be enough to take care of all the children suffering from nodding syndrome in the whole of Northern Uganda?

Secondly, I would like to urge the minister to take this matter seriously because we do not want her to come back here requesting for a supplementary budget for the nodding syndrome. Nodding syndrome is in existence and the children are suffering. Therefore, the ministry should bring a proper budget to the House to pass. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, the Shs 340 million I talked about has been the annual budget for nodding syndrome in the Ministry of Health’s budget. However, the supplementary budget that was passed of Shs 1.4 billion has not been captured as of today.

Since the budget has not been passed by Parliament, we still have an opportunity to reallocate funds for the nodding syndrome because what we have is not adequate, Mr Speaker. 

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter. The minister knows that this Parliament has to wait for the budgets from the line ministries. We look at the figures before we appropriate accordingly. The minister is trying to give the impression that her ministry is very helpless, that this Parliament must help her prepare a budget for the nodding syndrome. I think that is being unfair to this Parliament.

As a matter of procedure, I would like to request you to guide the minister to go back to the ministry and make sure they provide the House with the right figures and programme of what they want to implement, as far as the nodding syndrome is concerned.

I would like to also give the minister some information as well. We know that under Atiak Sugar Project, there is affirmative action for purposes of helping the community to raise funds. The families that have children affected by the nodding syndrome should benefit from this affirmative action programme. Through this programme, they will help them to raise funds to maintain themselves because of the long history of suffering in the Acholi sub-region. Therefore, I would like to request the minister to exploit that opportunity to make sure that the families that are affected can also benefit. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if it is not indicated in your budget - and I am assuming that, that is where the budget should be housed, it is not even mentioned as an unfunded priority. So, even if Parliament was to look for the money, where would you take it? 

If you had said that you have such a challenge but that there is no money for it, it would become an unfunded priority for which Parliament would think about supplying. However, now that you have no housing for it, where are you going to put it?

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. If I heard the minister correctly, she said that in their meeting in Gulu, they decided to wait until they get the audited books for the Shs 1.4 billion before coming to Parliament. 

To me, people are more important than money. Allocate money and then, you can carry out an audit for the Shs 1.4 billion. Otherwise, it would be absurd for people to die because staff at your ministry are delaying to audit the Shs 1.4 billion. I would like to, therefore, urge the Ministry of Health to urgently allocate money for the nodding syndrome. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the statement is that the accounts have to be audited – of course, the Auditor-General will audit those accounts and they will come to Parliament to be dealt with. 

However, if we were to wait for accounts to be audited before we give money, would we be doing budgeting here? We would just close business and go home until the Auditor-General finishes with all the audits before we send any money to anybody because we are sending before audits are done and before Parliament has examined anything. That can hardly be a reason.

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, as I mentioned, the meeting that we held in Gulu was attended by all the stakeholders, including the members of Parliament from Acholi and Lango sub regions, an area that is affected by the nodding syndrome. They came up with a number of recommendations.

One of them was the audit, which is long-term. The other recommendation was that we should focus on livelihood projects to generate income for these children. The Office of the Prime Minister was urged to utilise the available projects like the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) III, Development Initiative for Northern Uganda (DINU) and other projects such that affirmative action is put in place for the families and victims affected by Nodding Syndrome.

Another recommendation was that since the supplementary budget had been passed because the centre formerly used for rehabilitation had been closed, a multipurpose training skills school, under the responsible ministry, would be established because the previous centre had a lot of problems regarding land ownership. 

That is why when we looked at the supplementary budget which was passed last year meant to save the closure of the centre; we recommended the opening of another skills school to give a future to these children. Otherwise, there are no more new cases; we are now focusing on the existing cases. Such skills’ training is good for these children since their pace is not like the normal children. 

Mr Speaker, what I would like to say is that –(Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think there is no one objecting to what the minister is talking about in terms of the centre for rehabilitation and skills development and so on. Everyone is aware that the nodding syndrome ceased to be a matter for northern Uganda members of Parliament alone and became a national matter.

In this House, we have all discussed the issue of funds allocation for victims of nodding syndrome. I do not see why the Ministry of Health is not looking at it as a matter of health and whether they can provide funds for it so that the Office of the Prime Minister can equally look at the other issues that can be handled under the social aspect while the health bit of it is budgeted for under the Ministry of Health.

Many ministries in this House have used the supplementary budget as a by-the-way or possibly as a way of getting more money, without necessarily looking at what the law provides. The nodding syndrome is an issue that has been with us. It would not be procedurally right for us to wait and say we shall possibly demand for another supplementary budget for the nodding syndrome, as if we did not know that it existed.

Wouldn’t it, therefore, be procedurally right for the minister – since we are in the budget process – to put a line item, look for money or come to Parliament and say, “there is this urgency but there is no money for it. Parliament should help me look for money for the nodding syndrome.” Let it not be a northern Uganda issue; it is a national issue.

Whether you had meetings as representatives of those people, these are Ugandans who need to be cared for. Therefore, stop lumping the issue in the Office of the Prime Minister. Let the Prime Minister deal with the social issues that are related to the nodding syndrome and the Ministry of Health handles the health issues that are to do with the problem. 

Therefore, the procedural matter is whether the ministry fears to put the issue under its docket and whether it would not be procedurally correct for you to provide the money or a line item, under which Parliament can allocate the money that you want. Stop reading from the book of lamentations - (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, deal with that. It is more like guidance given by the Member. Would you like to respond to that?

DR MORIKU: Mr Speaker, the guidance is well received. Under your guidance, we will certainly seek for that funding for the nodding syndrome. I thank you. (Ms Betty Aol rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Leader of the Opposition, on what matter do you rise?

2.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): On nodding syndrome -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought we had concluded.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, I was in that meeting, which was held in Gulu. We also observed that the Ministry of Education and Sports was not there. Now that you are sending some of the responsibilities to the Ministry of Education and Sports, yet, you did not invite them to the meeting even though that issue was a multi-sectoral one, can the minister also assure us that the Ministry of Education and Sports will take up our recommendation? Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think let us pause this matter here now. Thank you, honourable minister, for these undertakings. We will live with that. We are still in the process. I will be here monitoring closely what goes on with the rest of the discussions. Can we go to the other items?

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE INSTITUTE OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE OF UGANDA BILL 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We could deal with the statements first. Is the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development here now? There is a statement from the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The minister is here. Maybe, we could deal with those and then, we come back to item 19.

Honourable minister, do you have a statement on these issues on the Order Paper? I see you with a piece of paper. Please, come. (Laughter)

2.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have two statements and if you permit me, I would like to comment on both.

The first is in regard to the detention of hon. Robert Kyagulanyi at his home up to now. It is true that the police are still at his premises. The reason is that the police have decided to prefer charges against him and he has been summoned to make a statement at the Criminal Investigations and Intelligence Directorate (CIID) this afternoon or tomorrow morning, whichever he chooses. That is why he is still there.

Due to the nature of those criminal charges which they will prefer, I find it difficult to make a substantive statement on the circumstances until he is so charged and then we can make a statement.

Secondly, yesterday, there was the issue of the extrajudicial killing of a one Mubarak Mugeni in the police station of the town council in Namutumba District. The five police officers who were in the patrol car and were involved were arrested. Their case is being handled as a criminal case. The files have been prepared and the decision of the District police Commander (DPC) is being awaited. Again, because of the nature of this investigation, which is going on, I find it difficult to make a substantive statement on that matter. Those are the two issues on which I was required to make statements. Thank you very much.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and the minister for the brief statement. It is clear from the minister’s statement that the police have decided to prefer criminal charges against hon. Kyagulanyi.

However, can the minister be clear? Has hon. Kyagulanyi been charged yet? By the police deciding -  I do not know at what time, moment or stage – we do not know whether, indeed, that decision has been taken. 

Is it procedurally right for the minister to lead this Parliament in anticipation? He is debating in anticipation, contrary to our Rules of Procedure. Unless the charges have been formally preferred against a Member, then the minister can hide behind the decision of the police. However, at the moment, the man is still at his house. The minister has not furnished any documentation before this House and wants us to take his statement for granted.

Is the honourable minister procedurally right to mislead and try to undercut the debate and plight of hon. Kyagulanyi by hiding in an anticipated preference of the police? Is he procedurally right?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, where is hon. Kyagulanyi now and when is he going to be charged, if he is going to be charged? Is he under arrest or is he a free man?

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, hon. Kyagulanyi is a free man within the confines of his home. (Laughter) The police –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the honourable minister finish what he is saying?

MR MACHO: Mr Speaker, I have risen on a point of order because the minister has given a statement that makes people question whether it is a statement within the confines of the law. You cannot be confined and at the same time be free.

I see the Uganda police Force pushing politicians to the wall to commit crimes so that they can prefer cases against them. I, therefore, do not think the minister is in order to give a statement that hon. Kyagulanyi is free but confined within his home.

Therefore, is the minister in order to make such a statement? Thank you, Mr Speaker. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to speak directly?

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, before that order was raised, I was speaking directly. Hon. Kyagulanyi is not being detained at his home as a politician. He is – (Interjections) - whether the word is detained or confined - he is detained as Robert Kyagulanyi, whom the police say has committed some crimes. Therefore, they would like him to make statements to the police in - (Interjections) - I said he has been summoned to make a statement at the Criminal Investigation and Intelligence Department (CIID) headquarters either today or tomorrow morning at his own choice.

This does not in any way - because the police are preferring charges against him, I am unable to make any statements beyond this. That is all I would like to say. Thank you.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, we have just been at the prison where hon. Kyagulanyi is detained.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is he in prison?

MS BETTY AOL: Yes; he is in prison in his home - with big barricades – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, please. I do not know what is happening to Parliament today. All the Members are choosing to speak in tongues. The Leader of the Opposition is saying we have just come from Prison -(Laughter)- Prison is a gazetted place and there is a law that operates – but if you have been to somebody’s house, you cannot call it a prison. For the purpose of the record of Parliament - because they have said that the man is at his house. Now, you are coming to state that actually he is in prison. Which prison? Is it Luzira or where? Please, be clear.

MS BETTY AOL: Mr Speaker, thank you for your guidance. By calling it a prison, I could have been wrong but he is in his house, where he is not free to come out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That, the minister has already said.

MS BETTY AOL: My feeling is that you, the Rt Hon. Speaker, are in charge of all of us. If one of us is in great pain, you should identify yourself with them. The honourable minister should ably tell us why they cannot take him to court and yet, he is confined in his house. He is in a lot of pain for that. 

Tomorrow, if I summon all the members of Parliament on the Opposition and those who share our pain and I say, “Let us all of us go to visit hon. Kyagulanyi” you will say it is too much. And I mean my words. We are not going to continuously allow that impunity that the honourable minister cannot even tell us the crime committed by hon. Kyagulanyi. What is his crime that you should detain him in his house without being taken to court?

I am not a learned fellow because I did not study law but you, the lawyers, need to guide us. It is already too much. You cannot push people that much to the wall; if the pressure comes back, honourable Minister of Defence, all Ugandans will suffer and not only one person. We should not allow Uganda to go back to anarchy, where we shall say, “enough is enough”. Let us rise up and defend our rights. 

It is possible for Ugandans to rise up and defend their rights. How can you keep on pushing people or stifling the rights of people? People have no right to do their economic activities or the right to exercise their political responsibility; is that what we want? If that is what we want, we can rise up. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was that a point of procedure? Honourable members, yesterday, I paused my guidance on this matter pending what the minister was going to say today, that we can see how to proceed with this matter. If a person has gone against the law - there are three circumstances: if a person is committing, has committed or is about to commit an offence, that person can be arrested.

The honourable minister has stated here that the police have established that the honourable member has committed a crime. His place is court and not his house. If it has been established that he has committed an offence, then his place is the courts of law but not his house - because it has been established that he has committed an offence or a crime; whatever it has been called. (Applause)

Therefore, his place should be court and from court, the other processes would continue; either they release him on bail or detain him having been charged with an offence. Therefore, we cannot have it either way. We cannot have a confirmation of a crime having been committed and then, no arrest has been done and then there is no possibility of a trial or a charge being levied on the person. You cannot have it either way, honourable minister.

Can we have a definitive statement of what is going to happen to the honourable member, as of now?

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, with your guidance, we shall take the appropriate measures, arrest him and detain him in the right place. Thank you.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Mr Speaker, I heard your guidance on this matter very clearly. At no time did you guide or advise the minister to proceed and arrest hon. Kyagulanyi. There are institutions that are charged with that area. There are institutions that can take care to ascertain if a crime has been committed and I am sure that the criminal law justice system does not punish the intention but I have heard the minister say that as the Rt Hon. Speaker of this House has guided, they are going to proceed to arrest and arraign hon. Kyagulanyi. 

Is the honourable minister in order to leave his own docket and put the entire responsibility on the Speaker of this House, who ruled in accordance with the Rules of Procedure using a legal background?

He is now turning around saying that it is the Speaker who has commanded the police and the Ministry of Internal Affairs to run very fast and arraign hon. Kyagulanyi without looking at the ingredients of the offence and the culpability of the honourable Member of Parliament. Is he in order to impute improper motive to the Speaker of this House?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Sometimes, we complicate things for ourselves for nothing. The minister’s other name is Mario. He might be using tricks of other things to try and get off the hook.

However, you cannot have it all the way. There has to be one way you choose to do so that we know what you have intended to do with the person. You do not need the guidance of the Speaker.

If you needed guidance, you would not have the Member under house arrest because I would not have allowed it but you have had him under house arrest already in those circumstances that are not clear to anybody and even to you from what you are saying. Do something definitive that you can stand by so that we know what you have decided to do.

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, yes, you have said that we cannot have it either way; we have to decide on one way or the other. I paraphrased my statement that we shall take appropriate action so that we are in line with one way and not the other. Thank you very much.

2.50
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Thank you, for giving me this opportunity. People’s homes are being turned into prisons every other day. The police arrested hon. Kyagulanyi and they are the ones who even delivered him to his home until they decided to confine him in his own house.

If the police knew that hon. Kyagulanyi had committed an offence, they would have preferred charges against him like they are now planning to do. I would like to know what happens; do you first arrest a person and then you go and think about the offences that you should prefer against them or you should have first investigated the offences so that by the time you arrest them you know why you are arresting that person?

A minister comes to Parliament and says, “I think we are now going to arrest.” It means they do not even have any offence against the honourable member. I would advise the minister and his officers to stop turning people’s homes into prisons. These issues hurt our children, spouses and relatives when you choose to turn our homes into prisons - you should be ready to pay the cost because prisoners are paid for. 

However, when you choose to turn our homes into prisons and make them your own homes; we shall begin taking Government to court. Stop fabricating crimes against individuals for the sake of it because I know that if you knew the person committed an offence, you would have preferred charges against him that very moment when he was in the hands of the police. However, dumping him at his home and later think about the offences to be preferred - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is exactly what I said and I thought it would not have been necessary for us to reopen this. Let the minister do the necessary thing and avoid keeping us in situations that we do not understand. Let us know what the Government has done with hon. Kyagulanyi instead of being kept in uncertainty.

Honourable members, this afternoon we have guests from the Institute of Corporate Governance. As I said, we have an item under Item no.19 that I need to bring forward. They are Ms Dorothy Kiyaga, Head Audit, Housing Finance Bank; Ms Regis Namuddu, Executive Director Makerere University Business School Leadership Centre; Ms Rebecca Atwiine, Lawyer and Partner at M-Smith Advocates. Mrs Christine Kawooya, officer, Institute of Corporate Governance, Uganda and Mr Joshua Mawerere, Head Marketing and Strategic Partnership, Institute of Corporate Governance, Uganda. Please, join me in welcoming them. They are here to observe the proceedings.

2.52
MR NOAH OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime last year, I raised a very important issue on a dispute between Yumbe and Arua districts to the minister. I would like to know from the minister whether this place called Ewanga Parish belongs to Arua or Yumbe District.

The minister responded that the land belongs to Yumbe for administration and they were supposed to come to Yumbe last year in October to rectify and clarify on this situation. Up to now, nobody has come. I called on their officers and they are not willing and yet, this matter is serious - it may cause death. Since the minister declared here that they will be going there and people are waiting, are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we are not.

MR OLEGA: Mr Speaker, I would like you to prevail over the Minister of Local Government and the Office of the Prime Minister to make sure that this matter is settled amicably without lives being lost.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not proceeding well, honourable Minister of Local Government. Why are you delaying these processes and heightening tensions among communities?

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that there are issues in Ewanga subcounty but we discovered that Yumbe has issues with all its neighbours. It has issues with Moyo, Koboko and Arua.

As Government, we have decided to open boundaries for the entire Yumbe so that we sort out all the neighbours. We are only constrained by resources but as soon as we get them, we are moving to open boundaries for Yumbe and it will be sorted out.

MR OLEGA: Mr Speaker, I wish to inform you that the committee handling these inter-border conflicts is playing double standards because resources were availed to them but they moved to Karamoja and Apaa where they have interests. Let us try to find out - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which committee are we talking about here?

MR OLEGA: The sub-committee of Cabinet to end further disputes. The committee is moving around the country. They went to Apaa and Karamoja but they have left out Yumbe. We want to know why they are playing double standards.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not a committee of Parliament.

MR OLEGA: Yes, it is a sub-committee of Cabinet but Parliament handles the report here. My prayer is that let them give us a timeframe when they will come. They are just buying time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, when do you suspect to get this money? (Laughter) This issue can create a lot of tension for nothing. Why don’t you deal with it?

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, I would like to put it on record that there is no committee of Cabinet that is moving to Apaa or Karamoja. However, the Ministry of Local Government, basing on the outcome of the demarcations by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development declared that the issues in Apaa, Napak and Katakwi were sorted. Next, we are moving to Yumbe.

Therefore, we expect to get money; after all it is Parliament that is responsible for appropriation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We already gave you money, honourable minister and it is not yet the end of the financial year. You cannot say that it is Parliament that does this. We have already done it but you are the one who has not done your job. 

Should a problem arise there, you cannot blame Parliament because what we are appropriating now is for the next financial year. For this financial year, you are covered. Do not refer to us in this matter. You only have Members who are deeply concerned about your inactivity, which could easily bring further tension in this thing. Therefore, please, act on it so that you bring harmony among communities instead of hyping tension.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE INSTITUTE OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE OF UGANDA BILL”

2.57
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo District): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private member’s Bill entitled, “The Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda Bill.”

I am moving this motion under Article 94(4)(b)of the Constitution and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Can I proceed, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not presented the motion.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. 
“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance;

AWARE THAT corporate governance principles are embedded in Uganda's legal framework; for example; 
    (a) the Constitution provides for accountability mechanisms; 
    (b) the Companies Act, 2012 provides for incorporation of the code of corporate governance into a company’s Articles of Association;
    (c) the Financial Institutions (Corporate Governance) Regulations, 2005 made under the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 governs financial institutions; and
    (d) several other laws establishing statutory corporations and enterprises embed corporate governance principles into the governance and administrative structures of those entities;

NOTING that in l998, the Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda was incorporated as a company limited by guarantee with the mandate of promoting good corporate governance practices in Uganda as an essential pre-requisite for the accountability, integrity and credibility of institutions;

NOTING further that since its incorporation, the role of the Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda has to a larger extent not been embraced by public institutions as exhibited in various cases of failed governance that cuts across most sectors of the economy, which ultimately affects the country's level of economic development;

CONSIDERING that corporate governance has become an issue of worldwide importance as the engine for economic and social development of a country through transparent and effective management of resources, promotion of accountability, integrity and management of risk;

COGNISANT that in order to realise the benefits of good corporate governance principles, there is need to promote the adoption and practical application of sustainable best practices of corporate governance through creation of awareness, training, monitoring and advocacy of all levels of management and governance;

CONVINCED that establishing the Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda through an Act of Parliament will strengthen its capability to facilitate the promotion of corporate governance in private and public institutions and individual citizens;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that:
This House grants me leave to introduce a Private member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda Bill”, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its First Reading.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the Member of Parliament for Rubanda, the Leader of the Opposition and the Member of Parliament for West Moyo. Would you like to speak to your motion briefly?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, for the benefit of hon. Bahati and team, this motion does not contravene Article 93 of the Constitution and Rule 123 of the Rules of Procedure regarding settlement of financial matters.

It is common knowledge that corporate governance has become a worldwide inbuilt essential tool for directing and controlling business affairs of any organisation whether private or public, with the ultimate purpose of promoting accountability, integrity, transparency; innovation, efficiency and excellence, which are key factors in maximising performance output taking into account the interest of all stakeholders.

The Bill, which I am seeking to introduce, will help us to address two critical challenges, which the current legal regime has created. First, it will give effect to the recognition of the values of corporate governance that will set standards and good practices of the governance profession that will inevitably improve transparency, accountability and integrity of private and public enterprises or institutions.

Secondly, this Bill is seeking to inculcate the culture of good practices and management in our public and private institutions. Mr Speaker, the corporate governance ideals, which compel governance audits for all organisations are still lacking in this country. In addition, good stewardship, a culture which is required, if we want our economy to grow, is also still lacking in this country.

It is for this reason that I feel that corporate governance, if embraced by all public and private institutions by law, will no doubt control the way management and general leadership are practiced. It will also definitely be a cure to the rampant corruption that is eating up this country.

Mr Speaker, given the significant role that both public and private enterprises play in driving economic development, I urge this Parliament to support this initiative to introduce a Private member’s Bill for us to inculcate a culture that will ensure that when a person is put in a position of leadership, they will run that office for the good of the country without putting their interests first, which has been the ground for breeding corruption in our country.

I would like to also let the Members know that Uganda is actually late in coming up with this law on corporate governance. Neighbouring countries like Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania within the East African region, other countries on the continent and the world already embraced corporate governance as a way of managing public and private institutions. 

Late as we are, I urge the House to grant me permission to introduce a Private member’s Bill to deal with issues of corporate governance. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the motion. Can I have one seconder to speak to it?

3.08
MR HENRY MUSASIZI (NRM, Rubanda County East, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion in regard to the establishment of the Institute of Corporate Governance in Uganda because of the following reasons.

I would like to emphasise that corporate governance is embedded in all our systems of management and control. It is involved in the management of our boards, internal control systems and processes that organisations run on.
We have seen many scandals happen in this country and the world over, for the case of multinationals. We have seen cases of fraud and company failure. All these failures have largely happened because of failure to ensure and promote good corporate governance principles. 

It is on this background that if we are to bring confidence in how the public and the private sectors are run, in the investors who invest in our companies and be fair and make the country know that systems of accountability, transparency and leadership within our institutions are really real, we need that apex organisation to keep talking about these issues.

Mr Speaker, it is on this background that I rise to invite the House to support the motion. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the hon. Cecilia Atim Barbra Ogwal, Woman Representative, Dokolo District, be granted leave by this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Institute of Corporate Governance of Uganda Bill.” That is the motion I propose for your debate and debate starts now; the issues are clear. Let us not go into the substance but reasons why we should grant the Member leave if we have to.

3.12
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I stand here clearly not to support this motion for reasons that unless explained otherwise, corporate governance is a module literally in every management course. For the benefit, I went to the Uganda Management Institute (UMI). It used to be very clear on what its mandate is; to improve public management. However, it has extended to the private sector.

My humble view is that corporate governance was just one of the modules that I did in Human Resource Management. My simple information is that every master’s degree literally, even if it is in law, one will do a module on corporate governance - the terminology may change but the substance remains the same.

An institute of this nature needs to be drawn from a white paper of an education policy of a country. Some of these institutions coming the way they come may fail to network with the entire education system that we pursue and a clear objective of the country.

Therefore, much as someone I fondly respect has moved it, we need to ask very broad questions about its value because I think we better invest in improving modules that we teach in all our higher institutions of learning than having a specific institution tailored to a module. This is too narrow to build an institution on.

Mr humble view is that we may need to listen to the Ministry of Education and Sports to give us a blueprint of what this is really like - the full import of this motion. That is why I am hesitant, as a Member of Parliament, to support a motion drafted in this manner. I do it with a heart of stone because it is moved by someone I highly respect in this Parliament. 

Multiplication of institutions of this nature has not helped this country –(Interruption) 

MS OPENDI: Mr Speaker, my point of order has been pre-empted. Hon. Ssekikubo came to this House on a known ticket but he has been seated on the Opposition side. He pre-empted my point of order, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there might be debate we would rather leave. 

3.16
MR WADRI KASSIANO (Independent, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As I heard hon. Ogwal seek leave to introduce this Private member’s Bill, I had a lot of questions on my mind. I think there is one major problem that we are confronted with as a country; believing that we can cause positive change by creating many institutions in this country. 

The problem of non-adherence to good governance, transparency and accountability in this country is not as a result of lack of institutions to inculcate these cultures into our people. It is because of lack of commitment.

More importantly, even in our institutions of higher learning, we need to rethink what culture we want to inculcate into our students to offer good leadership in this country. I only see two practical universities; Uganda Christian University, Mukono and Uganda Martyrs University, Nkozi. They have taken it upon themselves to make sure that issues of ethics and good governance are an integral subject offered in all courses undertaken. That should be the way for us to go. 

Even if we granted leave to hon. Ogwal today and this institute was put in place, we would still run into problems unless we address the core reason we are not able to live to the expectation of a developing nation. Then, we will still have problems. 

If you look at a situation like the UMI, which formerly was the Institute of Public Administration, it directly draws its course contents from the Royal Institute of Public Administration of UK. It has outlived its usefulness. 

However, today, over time, with erosion of our morals as a country, UMI has even failed at being used as an institute for grooming civil servants; having hands-on experience in terms of practical training so that they are able to adhere to issues of good governance and accountability. 

I will say that today, it has now gone astray. It even now offers masters degrees. It is now being run as an institute of educational nature, yet the purpose –(Member timed out.) 

3.19
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me pick from where my honourable colleague has just left. We probably need to support UMI in making sure that these subjects or modules are a work tool so that it becomes better. 

For those members of Parliament that have done professional accounting, you know this very well; at level three or four of CPA, corporate governance is a core topic across the country. I do not think we are going to make every paper an institute because it will be a problem. Personally, I do not intend to grant leave to the Member for this Bill to go ahead because of those reasons. 

Mr Speaker, even if we decided to go ahead and grant this Bill permission today, board meetings will not cease. When people are making requests for financing board meetings, they will claim to discuss corporate governance. They will go abroad to benchmark on good practices on corporate governance. I, therefore, do not support this totally, much as I have much respect for my senior colleagues. 

In brief, the country has a lot where we can do better. There are very many institutions that we need to support. We have the Civil Service College in Jinja; we should probably house it there. There are so many institutes and universities like Makerere. We can review all the processes and then insert – even in local government - when they go for workshops, people go and discuss corporate governance. If you open this institute, you will have stopped people from going to their workshops. 

Agencies are being merged. Are we not going against the spirit of mergers? There will be a problem and therefore, I do not support this motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.21
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ogwal for the motion. As my colleagues have said, we are all aware that it is necessary to teach our people corporate governance. We are suffering from unemployment and yet, we have lost so many of our jobs – if I can be allowed to say – to foreigners. 

In the hotel industry and some others, you have non-Ugandans taking up those positions because we do not have the requisite skills in corporate governance and customer care. Obviously, it is important that we teach this. However, is it necessary to create a separate institution for this? I think what we should require is for every institution to teach corporate governance. We should nurture this along with the issues of national values. 

Recently, we were challenged by Kenya when we saw the President giving an account on national values during the State of the Nation Address. It is important that we begin to think along these lines; we should begin to teach national values, issues of human rights and corporate governance. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, could it be possible that based on our experiences, we are narrowing the debate to the subject? This is probably because we went to accounting schools and had a subject on corporate governance and that is all you know about it. 

Could it be something that could benefit lawyers because they do not learn about corporate governance? For policemen, I am sure that they are trained in corporate governance. In the military, I am sure their instructions do not deal with corporate governance. 

I am sure teachers, who end up being head teachers and managing schools, through their interaction, do not deal with corporate governance. All these other professions – maybe, they are not exposed. Probably, the idea is that there should be a centre where all of us can go, learn these principles and come and apply them. Is it just because we were trained as a model and so it is the model for the whole country and we all know it? I am just poking the debate. 

3.25
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko County North, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. 

As you have rightly observed, we have different disciplines; some are accountants, lawyers, teachers, agriculturalists, among others. Let us address ourselves to why corporate governance has of recent become an issue of reference. Although this is taught as a subject, in practice we have failed to live to its imperatives. Corporate governance addresses the best management practices and these cut across; whether you are in a law firm, whether you are a teacher or a politician, it is imperative that you be aware of the best management practices. 

Let us be aware that we have a lot of areas where we have failed miserably in this country. We have had companies that have gone bust; we have had state enterprises that have not been managed well and nobody seems to be held accountable. What is it that this corporate governance will bring for us? Although its objectives have not yet been spelled out clearly, my view is that it is imperative that we have a system that looks at championing the best management practices in the country. This is going to contribute to how we manage this country in the 21st century.

Mr Speaker, -(Member timed out.)

3.28
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Civil Service College in Jinja was started in the Ninth Parliament. They told us that the objective of the Civil Service College is the same objective that the Bill is trying to address - good governance, corruption, accountability. That is what we were told as the purpose of the Civil Service College. The Civil Service College is not only for people who have done accounting but it is for all the civil servants; the public would go there. 

The other question I have is: The way Ugandans are behaving, is it because we lack the information and knowledge or it is just a spirit that is in us? The accountants who are stealing, I am told are also taught corporate governance but why then are they thieves? Is it because they do not have the information? They have the information but the problem is the spirit in us. You can start this school but the people will still behave in another way. That is the issue that is in my mind. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.29
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you for the motion, but I beg to differ. Corporate governance is a principle of best practice in management. It cuts across all professions. For institutions that keep updating their curricula and courses, corporate governance is captured. 

We have a problem of limited resources in this country. We have universities that teach management; the people in charge of our curricula should bring people on board and ensure that corporate governance principles are taught. We have the Uganda Management Institute (UMI) and the public service school in Jinja. What is the public service school in Jinja teaching? What is the Law Development Centre teaching? Before this motion goes through Parliament, have there been consultations with those stakeholders?

Here is an institution that is supposed to dispense resources; are we being wise by passing something that is going to incur a burden on the Government when it can be done in other institutions? I do not support the motion. Thank you.

3.31
MS JACKLET ATUHAIRE (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

Good governance is a key component of our oversight roles. Honourable Members of Parliament, I would like to assure you that we have three accountability committees: Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government), Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE) and Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). For us to be able to have good corporate governance, we need these improved and we need them to emphasise good governance. I think it would be good for this Parliament to give hon. Cecilia Ogwal leave to go and prepare this Bill. Thank you very much.

3.32
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Education and Sports but I am also a teacher by profession. I know the suffering that the public universities go through, including UMI. Sixty per cent of the lecturers in Kabale University are part-timers, for example. However, those part-timers in Kabale University are full-timers in Mbarara University of Science and Technology. 

This means that there are no full-timers in public universities because of meagre resources. Mbarara University of Science and Technology will tell you that 40 per cent of their lecturers come from Kabale University as part-timers and in Kabale University they will tell you that 60 per cent of the lecturers are part-timers. It is a crosscutting problem. It, therefore, means that Uganda public universities do not have full-time lecturers and this is a very big problem.

I would like to agree with my colleague from Butambala that this is just a programme that we can urge UMI to design for Uganda National Council for Higher Education to approve and we have it taught at UMI. We shall get the same; otherwise, we may be tempted to form an institution of learning for every component of life. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

3.34
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When women became important in Uganda – (Interruption)

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order following a statement which has been made by my good friend, hon. Nathan Nandala-Mafabi, saying that the importance of women is a new discovery. (Laughter) His statement implied that women became important only recently yet women have been important, even during the days of Abraham as well as Adam and Eve. Adam could not settle until God got Eve from his rib. (Applause) 

Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to say that women became important only yesterday, yet the one who brought him on earth is a woman?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in Acholi, men do not go to war unless that war is blessed by a woman, and that has been from the time the tribe became existent. A war that is executed without the blessing of a woman is a lost battle. I know a bit about Bugisu also and it is about the same. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi might have been making a different point. Would you like to substantiate what you were saying?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Mr Speaker, I was waiting for that. Even for Adam that God created, it was a woman who made Adam sin and it was a woman who caused us death. (Laughter) All these deaths we have are a result of a woman.

Mr Speaker, I can assure you that women are respected persons – (Interruption)

MR TUMWEBAZE: Mr Speaker, is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to abuse the opportunity you gave him to substantiate his statement by making it worse by saying that the woman was a sinner?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Probably, we have different experiences. The Member might be speaking about his experience. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, hon. Tumwebaze came with anger towards me and that is why he jumped to raise a point of order against me. 

Having said that, I wanted to say that we recognize that women should not kneel because it is wrong for one human being to kneel before another. (Laughter) Therefore, we have realised that women should stop kneeling. That is why we made the Constitution of Uganda and said “one-third should be women”. Initially, they were not even in the Constitution. What I am trying to put across is that when we started noticing that women are surely important, that is when even at Makerere University they started a department for women studies. Initially, there were no women studies. 

We were talking about corporate governance. I think we have noticed that our morals have gone bad. What we should do is to create departments to deal with morals. However, we are not going to create departments by creating other institutions. Let us create a department of corporate governance at Makerere University, Busoga College Mwiri and other secondary schools or Uganda Management Institute, which used to be called Institute of Public Administration. If you never went there, you missed. There are very few of us who went there and that is why you see that we know about corporate governance.

Mr Speaker, this is a very good thing and I would like to beg Members. As hon. Kasibante has said, let us clear this and make it one of the courses to study at university. In the NRM manifesto, we have something called “patriotism”. Are you going to create an institution of patriotism? You cannot. This is a very good idea but I would like to say that if we create many of these institutions, they will collapse – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wanted hon. Ogwal to speak a bit but let us first hear from the Member for Butemba.

3.41
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Mr Speaker, I concur with the majority of Members of Parliament who have spoken and said that we have the infrastructure and institutions and what we probably need is to look at the policy. Probably, the National Curriculum Development Centre and the National Council for Higher Education could come together and streamline it so that throughout life, we have people interfacing with corporate governance at some point. 

Secondly and finally, we have run away from the teachings of the holy books. There is serious moral decay in this country where people can even steal an anthill, steal from a home cupboard and anywhere. There is no responsibility at management level. Anybody at any point wants to pick something for himself while actually they are stealing from their children. I usually tell people that when you spoil water up here, your children will fetch dirty water downstream. There is a challenge.

We have very many churches and religious sects these days but the preaching is about sowing seeds; they do not preach weeding and good harvesting practices. We need to look at the moral decay. Let us turn and be serious about the holy books like the Bible and we shall be saved.

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank my sister, Cecilia Ogwal, for that good innovation –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is she your sister or your mother? (Laughter)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Either way - (Laughter) Mr Speaker, I have listened to those who have supported and opposed the motion. I am of the view that instead of throwing away her innovation, let us stay it for some weeks, crosscheck with the stakeholders in my ministry and we see whether we need to strengthen or see if there is need to start a fresh institution, as per her request.

Mr Speaker, what is important is for her concern to be incorporated in one way or another, either as institution or as a department. At the end of the day, we want to achieve what she is proposing. My request, therefore, is that we stay it and consult the stakeholders. Thank you.

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank all those who have contributed positively or negatively. Whatever you have contributed has had a positive impact on what we are trying to achieve. 

This is an initiative of the Commission of Parliament. We have observed that there is something lacking in the system. If we had an inbuilt governance audits, we would never have had the kind of report we heard about Bank of Uganda where the chairman of the board was also the managing director - no separation. The principles of corporate governance would require a governance audit so that you know that while you are playing your role as the member of the board, you are also not the one executing your own policies. This is the kind of gap that we have seen exists.

Mr Speaker, the laws are there. We have several laws, which we have cited in the motion, but they leave gaps. They do not empower and enforce the law that is in place. When you look at the Companies Act, for example, there is a section which mentions corporate governance but there is no enforceability. This allows the board and management to operate the way they want.

I appreciate the information given, that we need to teach the principles of corporate governance in our various institutions. However, who is going to champion this? Corporate governance institutes already exist. What we are trying to do is to build capacity so that the corporate governance principles can be inculcated in almost every field of management. That is what we are trying to do as a way of helping our country curb corruption and abuse of office.

Mr Speaker, it appears that the conversation on this topic of corporate governance needs a lot of talking. For that reason, I would like to seek your guidance. We have not yet presented a Bill; I was only seeking leave so that I would come with the Bill. However, now that Parliament seems to give me an impression that they are not willing to give me leave, maybe I will have to use another avenue. (Laughter) I am being advised that I may have to take the topic to Kyankwanzi; I am looking into that avenue to see whether it will be adopted there and then I will come back with confidence that –(Laughter) 

Finally, I would like to say that wherever you go – Nigeria, for example, is now being quoted as one of the countries with best practices in corporate governance. They have a very elaborate institute. South Africa also has a very elaborate institute. What the institute would do is to help us set standards, which we could use to train other institutions. Otherwise, we are lacking something.

Mr Speaker, whether we like it or not, we have to think about this issue. Probably, we will come back and plead with you again to allow a law on corporate governance to regulate the concerns as we continue with our efforts to entrench the culture of corporate governance in our governance system.

I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity to have a conversation in Parliament on this very important issue. I am not discouraged but only encouraged because all of you know that we need corporate governance in our leadership in order to entrench integrity and effectiveness in our management sphere. Mr Speaker, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what would you like us to do now?

MS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I was seeking leave and I can only say that if you give me time to have a conversation on this topic with the Members and other stakeholders, I will come back with the motion to see whether at that time, we would have understood the principle better than now. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you withdrawing it for now?

MS OGWAL: For now, the motion is stale because they have refused to give me – (Laughter) - If you would like me to do it the way the rules require, – unfortunately, I have not consulted my co-movers - with the permission of the House we could withdraw the motion and have more conversation after this. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I am always the most reluctant to disallow Members to bring private Members’ Bills. This is because the Constitution does not provide any limitation except those that are financial and those that bring provisions that have retrospectivity as their principle. The rules make these provisions for us to do a sieving process, to see if it is something we can handle, and that is all it should do. It should never act as a bar to the Members’ right to present a private Member’s Bill; it must never act as so.

I think for this particular one, we have ventilated it and we have understood that the principle is acceptable but maybe wider consultations will be required. This is one of the things where you suspend a battle so that you fight another day. We are not going to say this is defeated by vote but we are going to say it is taken down for now and it will resurface at an appropriate time when the atmosphere has been worked on - probably through consultations from the other place that the Member suggested, but that was on a light note.

Honourable members, for now, let us go back to the Order Paper and deal with the issues. This motion will be brought back at an appropriate time. As the Member said, it was a proposal from the Parliamentary Commission that this issue could be dealt with. Thank you very much, Members.  

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LEGAL PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Next.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson for the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, you have five minutes to give a summary of your report and propose the figures and then we see how to proceed. The text of the report is already uploaded, so we should be okay. We only need to know where we were, what recommendations were made, what has been improved upon, the new challenges and then we take a decision on that. 

3.53
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Doreen Amulen): Mr Speaker, this is the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for financial year 2019/2020. Before I read the executive summary, allow me to lay this report and all the documents herein on the Table. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The documents would be the report and the minutes of the committee meetings? 

MS AMULE: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MS AMULE: The documents are the report on the ministerial policy statement, the minutes and the names of the Members and witnesses that appeared before the committee. They are all herein. I beg to lay. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed, chairperson.

MS AMULE: Mr Speaker, in accordance with rule 185 (d) of the Rules of Procedures of the Parliament of Uganda, the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs has critically examined the ministerial policy statements and recurrent and capital budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020 for the following votes:
    a) Vote 004	- Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs; 
    b) Vote 009	- Ministry of Internal Affairs headquarters; 
    c) Vote 120	- National Citizenship and Immigration Control;
    d) Vote 144	- Uganda Police Force;
    e) Vote 145	- Uganda Prisons Service; 
    f) Vote 305	- Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory; and
    g) Vote 309	- National Identification and Registration Authority. 

In accordance with Articles 208 and 209 of the Constitution, the Uganda Peoples Defence Force is established and mandated to carry out the following functions:

    1. Defend and protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda; 
    2. Cooperate with the civilian authorities in emergency situations and in case of natural disasters; 
    3. Foster harmony and understanding between the defence forces and civilians; and
    4. Engage in productive activities for national development. 

During this period of reporting, the political and security situation in the country has remained generally stable. Threats to national security, including terrorism, general criminality, illegal immigration and other forms of cross border crimes have been largely contained. As a result of peace in the country, Ugandans have continued to conduct their activities freely. This has resulted into the phenomenal economic growth of the country.

Infrastructure Development

As guided by the Second Defence Strategic Infrastructure Investment Plan II, infrastructure development priorities will be to –

    a) Continue phased construction of the Military Referral Hospital;
    b) Fast track construction of the 30,000 housing project;
    c) Construct stores and armouries for the military;
    d) Nakasongola infrastructure;
    e) Construct core infrastructure for the National Defence College (NDC);
    f) Complete the solar project;
    g) Continuous barracks maintenance; and 
    h) Land acquisition. 

Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Internal Affairs will continue leading the joint security coordination activities; formulate, implement and review the Firearms Act 1970, Explosives Act, Cap. 298, Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Act, the policy on civil registration and vital statistics, Uganda Police Forces Anti-Corruption Strategy; disseminate anti-torture guidelines to reduce cases of torture and compensation awards. 

It will also develop the community policing doctrine and finalise amendment of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act, National Corrections Policy, National Migration Policy, National Poison Information Centre Policy, Forensic Evidence and DNA Database Policy in Uganda, and Forensic Evidence and DNA Database Bill, 2015.

The Ministry of Internal Affairs will prioritise the following activities:

    1. The installation of security technology and infrastructure CCTV projects;
    2. Telecommunication intelligence monitoring system;
    3. Data monitoring system and expansion of dogs section; and
    4. Issuance of national identity cards and cleaning up the national identification register, in preparation for the 2021 general elections. 

The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs scrutinised the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates and made a number of observations and recommendations. Therefore, I take you to page 15 of our report.

Committee Observations under the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs 

1. Pension, Gratuity and Survivors’ Benefits

The committee observed that Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs has accumulated pension, gratuity and survivors’ benefits backlogs worth Shs 508 billion. This has reached an unspeakable level, which affects the morale of both the retired and serving forces.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development adopts specific budget proposals to offset pension arrears of the veterans.

2. Salaries for Soldiers and Local Defence Units (LDUs)

The committee observed that in the course of financial year 2018/2019, there arose unforeseen security situations that required recruitment of LDUs to fill the security gap. The committee noted that salaries for soldiers and LDUs worth Shs 80.4 billion wage requirement has not been catered for in the budget for financial year 2019/2020 yet the LDUs are already recruited and deployed.

The committee recommends that Shs 80.4 billion should be reallocated from the classified expenditure to wages (salaries) for soldiers and LDUs.

3. Enhancement of Force Welfare

The committee observed that in the phased salary enhancement scheme, partial salary enhancement for lower ranks was done in financial year 2018/2019. The Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs seeks for an additional wage budget to cater for enhancement of salaries for UPDF officers and scientists in financial year 2019/2020. Enhancement of salaries for UPDF scientists requires Shs 33.2 billion and enhancement of salaries for UPDF officers from the rank of captain to general requires Shs 196 billion. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs be provided with an additional Shs 33.2 billion in financial year 2019/2020 to enhance salaries for UPDF scientists and Shs 196 billion for the enhancement of UPDF salaries for ranks from captain to general be implemented over medium term.

4. Unpaid Domestic Arrears

The ministry’s stock of domestic arrears, as at December 2018, is Shs 592,600,383,717 of which Shs 508,636,383,717 is to clear backlog pension and Shs 83,964,003,395 for other items. Below is the breakdown - Honourable members, I implore you to read the table.

The committee recommends that an additional Shs 592,600,387,112 be provided to clear domestic arrears and pension under defence.

5. Arrears for Court

The committee observed that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs requires Shs 52 billion to clear arrears for court awards under the decentralisation policy.

The committee recommends that Shs 52 billion be provided over the medium term, starting in financial year 2019/2020, to reduce arrears for court awards under the decentralisation policy.

6. Capitalisation of Uganda Air Cargo

The committee observed that the Uganda Air Cargo Corporation requires Shs 38 billion for capitalisation. The committee further noted that Uganda Air cargo is a strategic investment that should be supported because it provides business for Government; otherwise, other countries will continue taking up the business that could have otherwise been the country’s business. The Shs 38 billion will be used for the overhaul of the C130 that will work as a backup aircraft and raise the opportunity for lucrative business for this country.

The committee recommends that Shs 38 billion be reallocated from the classified item to capitalisation of Uganda Air Cargo under the same ministry.

7. Vehicle Utilisation and Procurements

The Ministry of Defence has a number of vehicles with some over 10 years of age. Some vehicles are in working condition and some in non-working condition or unserviceable. The budget for vehicle maintenance under defence has increased over a period of time; this is in spite of the proposed acquisition. The ministry is expected to acquire a number of vehicles as shown in the table below - I request Members to read that table.

The committee recommends that old vehicles of the Ministry Of Defence and Veteran Affairs be replaced to reduce the high maintenance budget over the medium term.

8. Gender Compliance

The committee observed that there is evidence of integration of gender concerns in planning, budgeting and implementation frameworks amidst a number of challenges. These include: 

    a) Limited number of women professionals in the security sector; 
    b) Stereotyping - different stakeholders attributing gender issues to only women; 
    c) Negative attitude, where many stakeholders always assume that security activities are for men and not fit for women; 
    d) Underfunding of the subsector.

The committee further observed that there should be continued participation of spouses of UPDF soldiers, especially the women, in socio-economic projects to boost family income. Such initiatives will include embracing the village savings and loans associations as well as engaging in a cross-section of agriculture and cottage industry. The activities should be carried out in all units countrywide to improve spouses’ livelihood and incomes and contribute to the reduction in Gender Based Violence (GBV).

The committee recommends that Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs should consider mainstreaming gender and reviewing its recruitment and training policy to be accorded towards cases involving women, pregnant mothers and other disadvantaged groups.

9. HIV/AIDS and Related Matters

The committee observed that the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs under the Department of Medical Services established a special directorate of HIV with a mission of streamlining, re-aligning and implementation of prevention activities, which will contribute to a healthy workforce and HIV/AIDS-free defence forces. In financial year 2018/2019, with the support of various MDAs, Ministry of Health, National Medical stores and Joint clinical Research centre, the Directorate of HIV/AIDS sensitised UPDF, their spouses and neighbouring communities about the danger of HIV/AIDS including the need to live responsibly, treat, manage and provided free ARVS for all, which the committee appreciates. The committee, however, noted that Shs 0.090 billion allocated for the subsector was very low due to high HIV/AIDS and related matters prevalence in the sector.

The committee recommends that Shs 0.200 billion be reallocated from other Government units for HIV/AIDS and related matters in the same ministry to have a healthy workforce.

10. Classified

Whereas the classified budget is critical, the committee noted that the outputs for the same classified items were not indicated and there are other pressing issues within the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs that needed urgent funding like salaries for soldiers, LDUs and overhaul of the C130 aircraft. 

The committee recommends that Shs 118.4 billion be reallocated from classified to capitalisation of Uganda Air Cargo and salaries for soldiers and LDUs.

Mr Speaker, this takes us to observations and recommendations under Ministry of Internal Affairs. I would like to start with Ministry headquarters.

1. Untitled Ministry Lands

The committee observed that land protection is necessary and that land belonging to the ministry and its agencies is under threat. There is therefore a need for the ministry to title its lands.

The committee recommends that the ministry should prioritise processing the necessary documents for land in Greater Kampala Metropolitan Area and other upcountry stations.

2. Congestion in Prisons

The committee observed that the slow judicial process and prosecution is the major cause of congestion in prisons countrywide. The committee further observed that whereas Parliament enacted the Community Service Act, 2000 and the Community Service Regulations (2001), the Act has not been implemented. This has led to an increase of inmates over a period of time and hence led to the increased cost of feeding and utilities, which has almost doubled over a period of time. The committee noted the need for the implementation of the Community Service Act to reduce operational costs in the ministry.

The committee recommends that -  

i) 	There is need to review bail guidelines to include the mandatory period for which suspects should be automatically granted bail if it lapsed without trial. 

ii) 	Police should carry out investigations before arrest of suspects, especially for minor offences, to reduce on the pre-trial detention period.

iii) 	Plea bargaining should be encouraged in exchange for some concession from the state to reduce on the sentence period for the convicted persons.

iv) 	The Government should fast track the implementation of the Community Service Act, 2000 countrywide.

v) 	Government should roll out the community service order countrywide.

3. Staff Gaps 

The committee observed that the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Department located at the ministry headquarters was grossly understaffed. There was need for the ministry to develop strategies to address the rising challenge of human trafficking especially to the Arab world for provision of labour. The committee noted that young girls are being trafficked through Jomo Kenyatta International Airport.

The committee recommends that the Prevention of Trafficking in Persons Department be strengthened for effectiveness and combating of trafficking in persons.

4. Influx of Immigrants
The committee observed that there is an influx of immigrants in the country. This is a sign of laxity in the enforcement of laws. A case in point is that persons from neighbouring countries with similar dialects are in possession of Ugandan national identification documents and passports. There are foreigners who are doing small businesses like small-scale shops and restaurants that the citizens are supposed to be trading in -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, is that still the executive summary?

MS AMULE: No; these are recommendations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you try to summarise more?

MS AMULE: Should I just go to reallocations?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do the recommendations. That will help.

MS AMULE: These are recommendations. Should I go to reallocations?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MS AMULE:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have seven votes under my sector; perhaps for the sake of time, because each and every vote has its own recommendations, I will take us to the reallocation table. The Members will read the recommendations themselves.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Those are the matters which we are referring to the Budget Committee. If we use all the time in the presentation, we will not have time to debate it.

MS AMULE: Thank you. I request Members go to page 58 where we have our proposed committee reallocations. In summary, under the Ministry of Defence, we are reallocating Shs 118.6 billion. From this, Shs 38 billion is reallocated from classified to overhaul Uganda Air Cargo, as I read; Shs 80.4 billion is reallocated from classified to salaries for LDUs and soldiers; Shs 0.200 billion is going to HIV/AIDS and we are relocating it from “transfer to other Government units”.

Under Ministry of Internal Affairs, under the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory, we are reallocating Shs 2 billion from what we call “non-residential” to support community service order at the ministry headquarters. We are also reallocating Shs 3.00 billion from classified expenditure to support community service order at the ministry. We are reallocating Shs 1.8 billion to accredit forensic laboratories for the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory. The total that we are reallocating under this is Shs 6.8 billion. 

Under the National Citizenship and Immigration Control, we are reallocating Shs 0.5 billion to internal security, coordination and advisory services within the same ministry. From workshops and seminars, we are reallocating Shs 0.200 billion to support national security coordination at the ministry headquarters. From beddings and uniforms, we are reallocating Shs 0.5 billion to support national security coordination as well.

From postage and courier, we are reallocating Shs 2 billion to support national security coordination. We are reallocating Shs 1.5 billion from “non-residential”. We are reallocating Shs 2.0 billion from welfare and entertainment to the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) purchase of land and architectural and structural drawings. Under maintenance of vehicles, we are reallocating Shs 0.295 billion to purchase of land for NIRA. From printing and stationary, we are reallocating Shs 3.0 billion and from fuel and lubricants, we are reallocating Shs 1.5 billion. From travel abroad, we are reallocating Shs 1 billion and from travel inland, Shs 1.5 billion.

Under this, we are reallocating a total of Shs 13.995 billion. 

Under the National Identification and Registration Authority, we are reallocating Shs 1.22 to the purchase of land for NIRA. Again, Shs 0.43 billion is reallocated to the purchase of land. From maintenance of vehicles, we are reallocating Shs 0.150 to the same item. From civil maintenance, we are reallocating Shs 0.405 billion to the purchase of land. We propose to reallocate Shs 0.3 billion from travel abroad and Shs 1 billion from inland travel to the purchase of land. Under printing and stationery, we are reallocating Shs 1.5 billion. We are reallocating Shs 1 billion from welfare and entertainment and Shs 0.7 billion from staff training. 

We are reallocating a total of Shs 6.705 billion under this.

Under Uganda Prison Services, we are reallocating Shs 0.920 billion from special drinks and meals to construct one out of five low cost security prisons at Shs 3.8 billion. The total reallocation under this is Shs 0.920 billion.

Under Uganda Police Force, we are reallocating Shs 1 billion from non-residential buildings to the Police SACCO under the same vote. You realise that the police had used some money from the SACCO, which are savings from the common police officers. There was no budget to cater for this and we recently almost got into serious trouble with them. We are reallocating Shs 2.0 billion from residential buildings and Shs 2 billion from fuel lubricants and oil to the police SACCO. We are reallocating a total of Shs 5 billion under this.

Mr Speaker and honourable members, this is the summary and the total estimate under my sector is Shs 4,766,296,000,000.

In conclusion, more needs to be done by Government to address the emerging issues and challenges, and the successful management of the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Their activities, among which is classified, requires a combination of strategies including, but not limited to, strengthening the legal framework, increased monitoring of these activities by Parliament, regular audit by the office of the Auditor-General, increased appropriation of funds as well as sensitisation of the public on their activities and improving the staff welfare in the ministries, as I highlighted in this report, so as to improve operations.

Allow me appreciate the contribution of the members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the technical staff who helped in the production of this report. I pray that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and the budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020 be considered by this august House and recommendations therein be adopted. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I propose for your debate the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/20.

Honourable chairperson, did you present the actual figures that are going to the Budget Committee now? Is it the Shs 4,766,296,000,000?

MS AMULE: I gave you the actual figure that the sector has proposed. 

a) Vote 004: Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs 
Recurrent expenditure 	- Shs 1,162,406,000,000 
Development expenditure - Shs 2,341,139,000,000 
Total 	 Shs 3,503,545,000,000

b) Vote 009- Ministry of Internal Affairs 
Recurrent expenditure  	– Shs 41,301,000,000
Development expenditure 	– Shs 2,079,000,000
Total                      Shs 43,380,000,000

c) Vote 120- National Citizenship and Immigration Control
Recurrent expenditure 	– Shs 69,035,000,000
Development expenditure 	– Shs 4,813,000,000
Total                  	  Shs 77,845,000,000

d) Vote 144
 - Uganda Police Force
Recurrent expenditure 	– Shs 514,692,000,000
Development expenditure 	– Shs 302,874,000,000
Total                   	  Shs 817,566,000,000

e) Vote 145- Uganda Prisons Service
Recurrent expenditure 	– Shs 194,549,000,000
Development expenditure 	– Shs 46,986,000,000
Total                   	  Shs 241,535,000,000

f) Vote 305 - Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory
Recurrent expenditure 	– Shs 9,757,000,000
Development expenditure 	– Shs 4,544,000,000
Total                      Shs 14,301,000,000

g) Vote 309- National Identification and Registration Authority
Recurrent expenditure 	– Shs 45,774,000,000
Development expenditure 	– Shs 22,350,000,000
Total                  	  Shs 68,124,000,000

This brings us to a total of Shs 4,766,296,000,000. 
I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Honourable members, I have already proposed the motion, so let us have a limited debate. Some of you spoke yesterday, like the Member of Parliament for Buliisa. Please, let us give others a chance.

4.27
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and my dear colleagues. Thank you, chairperson, for the report. 

I would like to draw the attention of the Minister of Defence and the Minister of Internal Affairs specifically to the colonial police barracks in Moyo Town. We have a very small barracks, which has now been overwhelmed by the number of police officers. The barracks is within the town centre hence no room for expansion. It sits on a small piece of land and there is no fence. The toilet system is broken down. There is no parking lot and there are only small cells for suspects. Also, because there is not enough land, they cannot continue digging toilets. Hence, there is need for it to relocate from the town centre.

I would like to also talk about the issue of the District Internal Security Officer’s office. There is no vehicle for the office as well as for the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) hence they cannot patrol the border areas. Recently, a refugee was shot dead in one of the camps and the issue could not be followed up.

When it comes to the issue of the army, Moyo Army Barracks is very small, not fenced and has little land. Honourable minister, up to now, our cattle that were raided by people from Sudan have not yet been compensated. We are waiting for that.

When it comes to the issue of prisons, there is congestion. The sanitation system is very poor and this has resulted into diseases and other communicable diseases that are being spread in the barracks. (Member timed out.)

4.30
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and members of the committee for the report. 

I have two concerns on the reallocations. The first is reallocation from the special meals and drinks for prisons to construct one of the five low-cost security prisons at Shs 3.8 billion. I had the opportunity of working with the Uganda Human Rights Commission as a member and we used to visit detention centres. One time when we went to the north, one of the challenges we found was that there were no special meals for children who were incarcerated with their mothers. When we asked the Commissioner-General of Prisons why meals were not provided for these children, the challenge was the budget.

Therefore, when I look at the amounts of money reallocated from special meals, I would like to believe that these are nutritious meals that are supposed to be provided for the children incarcerated with their mothers. Why must such a budget be reallocated for other activities when in actual sense they say they hardly get budgets for that? They always call upon non-governmental organisations to support such children.

The second aspect is also reallocation of monies from residential buildings. This is now on the budget for the Uganda Police Force. We also know the challenge that our police officers go through in terms of their accommodation and now we have Shs 2 billion of this money being reallocated to the police SACCO. I thought the plot would be finding accommodation for our policemen and policewomen. Therefore, I would not expect that you would be deducting money meant for that to the SACCO. Instead, we should be providing more budgets for the accommodation for the policemen and policewomen. I beg to move.

4.33
MR WAIRA KYEWALABYE (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the report.

Mr Speaker, I would request that you advise the committee to critically look at the issue of electronic passport issuance. The ministry was directed to come here and convince us but up to now, they have never come. The booklets we have now have more pages than the new passport. As long as the practice involves signing and stamping on pages, it ceases to be electronic. Now they want over Shs 67 billion to acquire 300,000 booklets. Whoever has been at the passport office will see lines of people in their thousands and you are only acquiring 300,000 booklets. Is this sustainable? Therefore, the committee should critically look at this project we are going into.

The second issue is that of national identity cards. I wanted the committee to help our voters because they are advised to come to Kololo. If you lose an identity card and you are at the lakeside in Mayuge, you are supposed to travel to Kololo to get an identity card and also pay Shs 50,000. Moreover, the procedures involved at Kololo - The committee should help our voters in the villages to ensure that these services are taken closer to the people.

Lastly, regarding the issue of motorcycles for our fishermen - the Minister of Defence is looking at me. You got the motorcycles for our fishermen and put them in Nakasongola –(Member timed out.)

4.36
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs. They have really dissected their policy statement and I am happy that they have reallocated money from some areas to others, especially from classified expenditure, which was never touched. I hope that our Budget Committee will try to maintain this reallocation so that there is fairness in the allocation of our money to the various sectors.

Mr Speaker, I would like to talk about the ex-servicemen, starting from King’s African Rifles up to the different groups of rebels that have given up war and Government is planning to compensate them. In West Nile, they have been recruiting people, writing their names and opening bank accounts but there is no money. They wait until it is close to election time and then say, “come and register and open bank accounts” but no money comes. I hope this committee gives this money so that this problem is solved once and for all because these ex-servicemen are very many. They have young children and they might go back to rebel activities if they are not given their benefits.

The second issue is about domestic arrears. How much money are you going to accumulate? Every time, there is collection of domestic arrears. You know well that domestic arrears is money for providing food and clothes for the army but you are accumulating it all the time. You are letting down those businesspersons who supply these items so that they earn money. Therefore, let us solve the domestic arrears problem.

The reallocation that I am very happy about is the one of Local Defence Units. We recruited LDUs to help in our security; how then do we leave them without salaries? They will become a nuisance and cause insecurity to us if they are not given their salaries. I am happy that they are budgeted for and I hope it is sufficient to make them happy so that they can support the police and the army in security.

When it comes to gender, women can also fire a gun and do security work; why don’t you treat them equally? You think army work –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

4.39
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chair and the committee members for the good report. 

Mr Speaker, my concern is that many police stations in urban councils are in a squeezed environment. Since you have reallocated money, this is the right time for us to separate police from traffic. When you look at Mukono, we are too squeezed. All accident vehicles are packed alongside the district road causing more accidents. Recently, we had a meeting and they were saying that we are going to the budget period. Let us hope that the reallocation is going to consider urban police stations to be reallocated, mainly the traffic section because they do not have where to park accident vehicles. 

In addition, these days you take long to dispose them off, which is also becoming a problem to those of us who are neighbours in those urban councils. I think this time the police will solve that problem once and for all. Thank you.

4.40
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chair and the committee. I would like to draw your attention to tables 3 and 4. Table No. 3 is about domestic arrears. I realised that the committee recommended that money, to the tune of Shs 592 billion, be paid to clear off domestic arrears. In table 4, the committee is recommending that vehicles, costing a total of Shs 1 trillion, be bought.

My concern is that under table No. 3, we have a component of transport equipment, which is about Shs 4.3 billion, and then hire of transport, which is about Shs 289.2 million. I need to find out from the committee if it interested itself in the vehicle utilisation report where we can see the vehicles that are due for boarding off and their condition so that we can know which particular vehicles we need to board off. I think there is some revenue that accrues when we board off vehicles. Therefore, this other table, which comes in to say that we should buy vehicles to the tune of Shs 1 trillion - We should be sure that these are the vehicles we need so that we do not accumulate other arrears for hiring vehicles.

Mr Speaker, the other issue is about gender compliance. I realise that the committee observed that there should be continued participation of spouses of soldiers in social and economic projects. Last week on Tuesday, I had a dialogue with wives of soldiers in Bombo Barracks and I would like to say that the situation is terrible. When we hear them saying that we should recommend more money to the SACCOs, the committee needed to come out vividly; are they the SACCOs for the soldiers or for the wives of the soldiers? These women are left out and I must say that they are in bad shape. I would like to see this come out clearly. When we talk about money, are we are talking of money for the wives of the soldiers? This is because they have projects. To be specific, the women in Bombo Barracks have never received anything in their small SACCOs. The committee – (Member timed out.) 

4.44
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report presented. My observation is on the illegal trafficking of our people to the Arab world, which the chairperson talked about. I am a Member of Parliament representing Namisindwa and there is a border from where many people cross to Kenya and go up to Nairobi. I do not know how they do it but they have beaten the security. They go up to Nairobi and from there, they fly to Saudi Arabia. I always receive bodies of dead workers because after working for a very long time, they are instead paid by death. 

This has brought so many problems in my area. I wonder how these people get passports to go up to Nairobi. Why doesn’t the Ministry of Internal Affairs or the security try to make arrangements with the Government of Kenya so that these people are arrested before they fly to the Arab world? 

Apart from that, I would like to inform the committee that something must be done so that those people, who have already gone illegally to Saudi Arabia and those ones that have gone legally, are at least followed up. The parents of those people that have gone to work should report to the Local Councils (LCs)/police and then to the Ministry of Internal Affairs so that we can know the number of people there. There are people that were asking me for some money to bring their dead ones back home but I do not have this money. 

Therefore, there are some porous areas that the ministry or the committee should look into so that we can solve the problem of illegally taking our people to work in the Arab world. Thank you very much. 

4.46
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support some of the aspects of the report. 

I have heard of pension arrears but I do not know what you mean. My understanding of pension is that it is a terminal benefit for those people that have been working for the Government. It is not by mistake that people are working because you are required to provide information when you get a job and it includes your date of birth, which means that the date of retirement is known. We expect an orderly Government to plan so that by the time a senior citizen retires from their job, there is nothing like pension arrears. 

It is also an embarrassment for us to talk about this because Government does not allocate money for pension arrears but requires a committee of Parliament to direct this allocation. In this century, we should not be talking about pension arrears. I do not know who the Leader of Government Business is today – it is in good faith. It should not even feature in our records that the senior citizens are out there and hearing that Government did not make a provision for their pension, and that it took the courage of a committee to propose the allocation of money to the elderly. I think that should not arise. 

The second thing I would like to talk about is the Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory (DGAL). When the President was being sworn in Kololo, he took oath, which included upholding the Constitution. If there is dispensation of justice in this country, these Government laboratories are supposed to help in the investigation of most of these serious crimes like rape and defilement. If we have not allocated them money and it takes the courage of a committee to ask us to allocate money to a Government department yet we very well know that one of the Sustainable Development Goals is providing access to justice for all, that is not good. 

As long as we do not provide money for the justice system in terms of these laboratories, then we are even encouraging mob justice. The  moment people get to know that when they report a case to police, it will never be investigated because Government has no money, equipment or the researchers in this laboratory to conduct these investigations, they lose confidence and trust in Government. 

Therefore, I would like to implore – I am even constrained, Mr Speaker, to use your word, that if I was the President, I would carry out a shakeup in some of these Government departments because some of these technical staff are actually sleeping on job. Why do I say this? When you look at Government, you – (Member timed out.) 

4.49
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Mr Speaker and the committee for the report presented. I would have loved the report to throw more light on community service. When that scheme came up, many of us were optimistic that it would reduce congestion in the prisons but the contrary is happening. The village prisons are congested and have people with very flimsy misdemeanours; this is the case in the greater Pallisa and Butebo. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to clarify on what is happening to the community service scheme. What is he doing to sort himself out with all the stakeholders because this scheme involves many stakeholders but they seem not to be moving at par? Thank you. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Vote 120, which is the National Citizenship and Immigration Control, is seeking approval for about Shs 77 billion from this Parliament. This entity has gone for two years without a board yet the board is provided for under the Constitution in Article 16. 

The point of procedure I am seeking your guidance on is: Will this Parliament be proceeding well to even consider allocating money to an entity that violates the Constitution that this Parliament is commanded to respect, promote and uphold? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, this Parliament proceeds on the basis of votes. We allocate money to votes not to non-existent votes. That is why we have accounting officers for those votes. So, if a vote is non-existent, that entity cannot receive money but if the vote exists, then yes -  

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Just to clarify, Mr Speaker, I meant a board. For two years now, the directorate does not have a board yet it is established by the Constitution under Article 16. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I thought you were talking about a vote. Well, those would be one of the strong recommendations that we will make so that these monies are handled properly by the institutions that are set up to do that. 

MS AMULE: Mr Speaker, it is not true that NIRA does not have a board. The fact is that we have two of the members out of –(Interjections)– immigrations.  Mr Speaker, it is just that maybe a Member has not read the whole report but it is one of the recommendations that we have put in and I do not think – first read your report, you will find all that we have recommended. Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, I would be glad –(Interjections)– no, I said national citizenship and immigration control. The point I am making is that this board is very important that even the framers of the Constitution saw it very important that it is put in the Constitution.

MS AMULE: Thank you very much, honourable. With the board of immigration, the names are here with Parliament and it is Parliament that approves. Therefore, it is in the process of getting the board which is not there. If you doubt what I am saying, go to page 56 of your report and you will get that statement there. Thank you.

4.54
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Mr Speaker, there are a few clarifications I would like to get from the committee chairperson:

    1. Table 3 talks about domestic arrears. I thought the court awards which you clearly stated as arrears should have been in that schedule.
    2.  Pension and gratuity is paid to people who are leaving the service and in most cases, these are elderly people. For the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs to accumulate pension worth Shs 508 billion, it means we have a lot of ex-servicemen who are languishing in their homes - (Interruption) 

COL KULAYIGYE: Mr Speaker, we may need not to take the issue of pension generally. In the military, the moment you serve nine years at junior ranks, you become pensionable. Now, if somebody joined at the age of 18 years, that means he will be 27 years and he is free to retire. If you are an officer, it is 13 years. Therefore, they are not necessarily elderly. Thank you.

MR ASIKU: Thank you, for that information. Nevertheless, the fact that somebody has left gainful employment, it means that his or her life is now dependent on the pension and gratuity. Therefore, it is imperative that this should be paid promptly.

Secondly, Mr Speaker –(Interruption) 

MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTESA: Mr Speaker, let us read the same script. When you talk of “retirement” and “pension” that is when the entrance was formal. Some of us joined this “thing” without any formalisation. It is what we are working on now but we found people who have been there who were never brought by the current Government but we have to pay them. 

In fact, when we discussed about laying off people, we found that there were more generals from West Nile than any part of Uganda. For every general that you lay off, quite a lot of money is given and it is the same standard. I am telling you because I am in charge not only in doctrine but establishment. Thank you.

MR ASIKU: Mr Speaker, I am raising this question because I come from a region which has people who are entitled to pension and gratuity and they have not been paid for a long time. The other issue I would like to raise is in regard to payment to Savings and Credit Cooperative Organisations (SACCOs). You are aware that in this Parliament, we do not appropriate money to SACCOs. SACCOs are a voluntary contribution and I see in the recommendation where reallocation is supposed to be towards payment of SACCOs. This is an illegality. Look at the schedule for reallocations.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was stated on the record and that is correct. Honourable members, can we pause here? I would like to ask the ministers to respond to some of the issues and the committee chairperson will wind up. Each minister will have three minutes. We want to move to another report. Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, if you have no issue, it is fine. You can just urge us to pass the budget.

5.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Col (Rtd) Charles Okello Engola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the elaborate and comprehensive report. I only have one issue from Moyo which is talking about a small barracks. I would like to inform him that barracks are always built according to the strength of the army which is deployed in a place not because you want a barracks big as this would be the case. We build a barracks according to the strength of the soldiers who are deployed there. We are also looking forward to putting up 30,000 accommodations for the soldiers, which I think will handle that situation very well. 

The issue about cattle compensation which was raised by hon. Tom Alero, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs does not do the compensation of animals. We shall ask the Attorney-General to see how far they have gone with that compensation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The issue about the motorcycles that was taken by –

MR WAIRA: The issue about the motorcycles of our fishermen that were impounded in Nakasongola.

COL (RTD) OKELLO ENGOLA: I will find out whether the motorcycles of the fishermen are in Nakasongola and I will inform you. At the moment, I cannot give you any data about motorcycles in Nakasongola.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is that in every policy statement they attach staff and their ranks, but on the ministerial policy statement for the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, I have not seen the attachment of ranks from Generals downward. Why?

COL (RTD) OKELLO ENGOLA: Rank changes any time. It is dynamic. Today you can be a General and tomorrow you can be something else. What you have found there is what is there now. Tomorrow you will get a different thing again.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Ministry of Internal Affairs?

5.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Thank you, Mr Speaker. On the condition of the police station in Moyo, yes, we agree that it is very inadequate, congested and in the centre of the town. Our plan is that when the funds permit we will relocate this station to the outskirts of the town. There are already discussions with some benefactors who are willing to support us. At the moment, I am unable to tell exactly how far we have gone. However, the idea is to relocate and improve it.

The prisons’ condition is poor and we have tried our best. Generally in the whole country, we used to have particularly what we used to call the “bucket system”, where prisoners used to carry buckets for easing themselves. We have so far done 86 per cent of removing the bucket system and we think that when we get funds, we should be able to do away with that system and give humane conditions to our prisoners.

Electronic passports

When you get that electronic passport, not all the pages have a chip. The chip is embedded in only one page around where your picture used to be. The rest of the pages are stampings for visas. Therefore, if you look at other pages and they do not have a chip; it does not mean that it is not an e-passport. Secondly, if you go to the exit and entry points at the moment in Uganda and you are unable to detect that chip, it is because we have not yet established all the machines in those exit and entry points. However, we are going to do that soon and the moment we do that all that electronic data on you, including your facial and other parameters, will be seen.

Yes, we regret the current huge queue. It is very huge and inconvenient for Ugandans. One of the reasons is that the number of Ugandans who are acquiring passports is high. The last time I talked of 800 but as I talk now the figure has risen to 1,000. 

It is not our duty as immigration to know where Ugandans are going. We ask that question but legitimately every Ugandan adult who has a national identity card is free to acquire a passport. We also know that from the age bracket of the people acquiring passports, many are going for employment in the United Arab Emirates and elsewhere. That docket of screening where Ugandans should go is with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. As immigration, we issue the passports.

Has Kenya helped us to trace and arrest some of the people who they detected at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport? The answer is “yes”. Actually, our high commission in Kenya is overwhelmed. We are getting over 20 persons arrested at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport every week, who have to be repatriated by that high commission. They are overwhelmed because they have to incur the costs. 

Therefore, Kenya is cooperating fully with us on that matter but it is very difficult. Since our borders are porous, it is difficult to know where people are going to pass. Some of them pass through the panya routes and some pass to see their brothers on the other side. I do not want to -(Laughter)

A colleague said parents should report the absence of their sons and daughters who have gone for this kind of labour to the police stations and LCs so that we can track them. That would be the ideal thing. Unfortunately, parents themselves also cooperate in that wrong activity. They are not willing to give all that information. Even when our people have already gone abroad, they are unable to report to our consulates and embassies for purposes of protection.

Therefore, our embassies abroad are not able to track these people and that is why at the end of the day they only surface when they are in trouble. That is the issue on passports. We are doing our best and we should be able to reduce that size.

The other reason why there are many people is because many Ugandans have come out to replace their old passports. They are not ready to wait for the two years. However, we are doing everything around the clock to make sure that this is done. The funds are available for that exercise and we think it should be able to be corrected.

On lost identity card – (Interruption)

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, my issue was that you are asking for around Shs 67 billion to acquire 300,000 booklets. In your opinion, given that we are having lines and lines of people acquiring the passports, is it sustainable that Shs 67 billion should be spent for acquiring only 300,000 booklets, which can even be finished within one or two days?

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister I am grateful that the ministry has opened regional offices. We have regional offices in Gulu, Mbarara and Mbale for passports. However, currently the e-passports are being issued in Kampala only. Why don’t you decentralise to all those regional offices to decongest Kampala?

MR OBIGA KANIA: You are right. Those regional offices are not fully functional because personalising – printing the details or embedding the chips in those passports – has not yet been established in those centres. We are making sure that the headquarters is fully functional and once it is done, we will move to the regional centres.

Alternatively, if we find it is not easy at the moment with the current budget, we will continue to do manual processing in those regional centres but do the actual personalisation in Kampala, until such a time when we are able to do so in the regional centres. It is the question of the budget and the availability of machinery.

Regarding whether that money is sufficient; if the current projection issuance of about 1,000-plus passports per day continues, the answer is obviously “No”; we will not have enough money. When that time comes, we will come and tell Ugandans that we do not have enough money. This is the current money that we have been given.

There is the issue of lost identity cards -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are those passports free? 

MR OBIGA: They are not free.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If they are not free, what is the problem?

MR OBIGA: They allocated money right now. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I am saying is the sustainability - because these passports are not free. Each person who acquires one pays money and that money goes to sustain the process, unless it goes to the Consolidated Fund. 

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, the money that we collect is non-tax revenue, which goes to the Consolidated Fund. If we need it, we will need to come back; we have no leeway to spend it the way we want. Otherwise, that process would sustain itself.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Then why don’t we go that way?

MR OBIGA: This is an issue of the financial regulations and - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you. What we are labouring to explain is that you can apply to Government to have it as appropriation-in-aid. Since it is an entity which generates non-tax revenue, you would use it to make people access these passports. This does not need – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable minister, what you have brought is very important. In fact, non-tax revenue can be appropriated if you put it in the budget. You just say “I need to do a million passports and this is the amount of money.” Appropriate it and this money will be recovered from sale of passports. This is quite easy and you will have the money even tonight.

MR OBIGA: We do not refuse good advice. We take that and when the time comes, we shall use it.

Mr Speaker, there is the issue of identity cards which people lose. The position that people who lose identity cards should pay was a Government position and the reason was to make sure that Ugandans are able to take care of these identity cards. At the moment, with the recent registration which ends on 26th of this month - in about two days’ time, at the sub-county level - our advice has been that if you have lost an identity card, you should go to that centre to re-fill a form, pay the money and then you wait for the replacement either in the sub-county or the district.

We are also aware that because of inertia, many of our people may not have done this. There is a possibility that many other people will not have done this. However, we are going to leave the district offices open, so that people can continue to access lost and new identity cards from the districts. This is done because of the limitations of funds - because we cannot sustain continuous operations at the sub-county level. 

Should there be another need in future to register people at the sub-county level, we shall go back and the same opportunity will be given. My current advice with the available resources is that we should use the two remaining days and when we come to the district, we should continue to use it to replace those identity cards.

The honourable member for Mukono was asking about police stations being near the road. Central police stations are near the roads and towns, where we put confiscated vehicles on the road sides. Yes, that is also another matter, which we are trying to handle to make sure that these vehicles are moved away from the roads so that they do not impede the traffic.

There is the issue of illegal trafficking of persons. I think I have already answered that. We try everything but we cannot stop it at the point of giving people passports. How they use them is a question of sensitisation so that people do not misuse them.

Ugandans should report their children -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, wind up.

MR OBIGA: I am winding up and you have reminded me at the right time. At this stage, I would like to thank you.

MR MUKITALE: Mr Speaker, the Commander-in-Chief and the Minister of Defence and Internal Affairs last week named a national security strategy, which can be proactive and preventive to overstress the national budget of defence and security, to avoid future wars by naming a national dialogue committee of government.

A lot of the pressures the Committee on Budget is raising are to do with teargas. We have competing interests; we want to build barracks and yet at the same time, we are spending money. Just yesterday, as I was looking for our national carrier in the international place, I was seeing another story showing us fighting the Opposition. Mr Speaker, national dialogue is the way to go. 

I am surprised that both the delegated ministers of Defence and Internal Affairs make no reference to how to proactively make sure that there are no future combatants, civil wars and the country can use the money to build barracks and have cohesion. Mr Speaker, through you, I would request that we get assurance from the delegated ministers that the way to go is national dialogue. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That matter will one day come to Parliament. I cannot direct from the Chair. Chair of the committee, you have only one issue on why you are reallocating money to a SACCO.

MS AMULE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I would like to clear the mishap in understanding what this money is about. We are not donating any money to a SACCO. In any case, we have a burden as Government under the Ministry of Internal Affairs specifically, police vote, to pay back the money that police picked from the SACCO, which directly belonged to the serving officers. This money now is an arrear and within our budget, there was nothing catered for to pay this money yet this is the money that any police officer is supposed to go to withdraw and borrow as credit. We, therefore, saw it prudent as the committee to get some money within police itself and say, “No, let us reallocate this money to cater for this huge arrears, which is actually –”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To refund the money that was taken from the SACCO?

MS AMULE: Yes, so that the police officers who are members of the SACCO can have something to access as they are saving.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will put the question to this motion. I put the question to the motion that the report of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the ministerial policy statements of the sector of Defence and Internal Affairs and budget estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)


MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oboth, please, help us. I will give you five minutes. Please, oblige the time.

5.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I proceed, I would like to lay on the Table the minutes of the meetings of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the report that I am going to present.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR OBOTH: I have been given five minutes, which will be enough to present. I am going into the summary of the budget estimates for Financial Year 2019/2020 by Votes, which are in billions of shillings, excluding arrears.

a) Vote 007 Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs 
Recurrent  - Shs 79,993,240,000
Development - Shs 86,302,354,000
Total	 - Shs 166,295,534,000

b) Vote 101: Judiciary
Recurrent - Shs 148,565,100,000
Development - Shs 34,069,500,000
Total - Shs 182,574,500,000 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: 182

MR OBOTH: Shs 182, I beg your pardon. The fonts are not very friendly to the Japanese eyes that I have. 

c) Vote 102 - Electoral Commission
Recurrent - Shs 527,932,000,000
Development - Shs 7,200,000,000 
Total - Shs 535,132,000,000

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have different figures, hon. Oboth? 

MR OBOTH: I may confer with you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is he getting 100,000? You see, he said 100,000 but there is no 100,000. It is triple zero.

MR OBOTH: You see, when you have five minutes to present 58 pages, the triple zeroes become 100 but that was triple zero. (Laughter) The total, I believe, where I had said 100,000 is triple zero.

d) Vote 103 - Inspectorate of Government (IG)
Recurrent - Shs 42,581,761,000
Development	Shs 33,397 …

I seek to be helped.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the same, except he cannot read it. He cannot see the figures. Can you borrow reading glasses, hon. Oboth?

MR OBOTH: I think I will borrow reading glasses. (Laughter) Mr Speaker, the figures are a little faint for me, for some reason.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They are actually very small figures. I do not know why they did it that way. Can you see?

MR OBOTH: No. I think I will ask hon. Kivumbi to read for me the figures. Hon. Kivumbi, come and read from this side. (Laughter)

5.33
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI MUWANGA (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Do the rules permit me to read them from that side?

e) Vote 103: Inspectorate of Government (IG) 
Recurrent - Shs 42,581,761,000
Development - Shs 33,593,213,000
Total - Shs 76,174,974,000

f) Vote 104: Parliamentary Commission
Recurrent - Shs 571,887,849,000
Development - Shs 66,997,481,000
Total - Shs 638,885,330,000.

g) Law Reform Commission
Recurrent - Shs 7,395,397,000
Development - Shs 200,020,000 
Total  - Shs 7,598,417,000.

h) Uganda Human Rights Commission 
Recurrent - Shs 30,047,163,000
Development - Shs 4,071,797,000, 
Total - Shs 34, 118,960,000.

i) Law Development Centre 
Recurrent - Shs 19,234,352,000 
Development  - Shs 11,393,304,000
Total - Shs 30,627,656,000.

j) Uganda Registration Services Bureau 
Recurrent - Shs 28,724,572,000 
Development - Shs 405,000,000 
Total - Shs 29,129,572,000.

k) Directorate of Public Prosecutions 
Recurrent - Shs 46,161,927,000 
Development - Shs 15,175,351,000
Total - Shs 61,337,278,000.

l) Judicial Service Commission 
Recurrent - Shs 12,899,325,000
Development - Shs 492,797,000 
Total - Shs 13,392,122,000.

MR OBOTH: Mr Speaker, with the help from hon. Muwanga, I would like to briefly say that the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee observed that the institutions under Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS), which are under our oversight, have continued to receive low funding. The Electoral Commission where this Parliament approved the creation of six districts for this current financial year have continued to struggle.

I would like to specifically request that this Parliament resolves that the six districts, which are supposed to have taken effect from 1 July 2018 - the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Government of Uganda, should provide a supplementary to make sure these elections take place.

For the next seven districts - and I have conferred with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - those ones are captured in the Budget as for next year. For current budget, there is a shortfall; they needed money yesterday and before this month ends in order to conduct elections in the six districts of Nabilatuk, Bugweri, Kassanda, Kwania, Kapelebyong and Kikuube.

The committee had recommended - and I wish to read for this House - that this should be concluded in the last quarter of financial year 2018/2019 through the provision of a supplementary budget.

Mr Speaker, other needs are as captured in the committee report. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is for the adoption of the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the ministerial policy statement and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2010 and the debate starts now.

There being no debate, I put the question – yes, point of procedure - in the absence of any point of procedure, I put the question to this –(Member rose_)- I do not deal with something. What is something? I now put the question. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Mr Speaker, I would like to move a motion under Rule 58 (k) without notice that, having listened thoroughly and very well, the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs has been accurate with thorough figures. I now therefore, propose the motion that we adopt the report as read on the Floor of the House, and that you should put the question.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, the motion is that I should put the question. Yes, point of procedure before I put the question?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is a very central sector. Members as you are aware, we are now starting on the roadmap to 2021; there are issues of very public importance that I want to raise. 
Yes, we have listened in to the figures but is it procedurally right that we let it pass without the brief comments as you had guided Mr Speaker, to open so that at the end of the day at an appropriate time we can have time to exhaustively debate this matter but at the passing of the Budget, there are those remarks that cannot be allowed to pass unmentioned to.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have discussed this before. The time for this session is not there because we are given a timeline of 30th April where we report these matters to the Budget Committee. We are going to have a debate when the Budget Committee comes back before we approve.

Therefore, is it okay for us to handle these figures that have come from the sectoral committees so that we can forward them to the Budget committee? We would like to create time for the Budget Committee so that we can have a debate on the Budget.  Can I put the question to this now?

Honourable members, I now put the question that the report on the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020 be adopted?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we receive another report?

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE MINISTERIAL POLICY STATEMENTS AND BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020 FOR THE COMMITTEE ON NATURAL RESOURCES

5.41
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Mr Speaker, for purposes of proper time management, I have the minutes of the proceedings for consideration of the ministerial policy statements by the committee and I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR AOGON: I will be trying to do a summary so that we save time by going straight away to the figures then I will make a few observations and recommendations where necessary, the document is duly uploaded.

a) Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment 
Recurrent budget 		-  Shs 21,867,740,000  
Development expenditure 	-  Shs 870,970,083,000. 
Total 				-  892,837,823,000

b) Vote 150 -  National Environmental Management Authority
Recurrent budget		 - Shs 25,113,857,000
Development budget 		- Shs 1,930,000,000 
Total				-  Shs 27,043,857,000.

c) Vote 157 - National Forestry Authority 
Recurrent budget 		-  Shs 26,786,165,000
Development budget 		- Shs 5,888,993,000 
Total 				- Shs 32,669,158,000.

d) Vote 302  - Uganda National Meteorological Authority 
Recurrent 	budget	- Shs 12,573,345,000 
Development 	budget	-  Shs 14,957,321,000 
Total  			-  Shs 27,530,666,000.

e) Votes 501 to 850 local Governments
Recurrent budget - Shs 7,790,000,000
Development budget	-  Shs 51,920,000,000 
Total 		-	 Shs 59,710,000,000. 

Mr Speaker, this committee on Natural Resources covered the following ministries in summary. 

Vote 019 is Ministry of Water and Environment
Vote 150 is National Environment Management Authority
Vote 157 is National Forestry Authority
Vote 302 is Uganda National Metrological Authority 
Vote 500 -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have not gone to page 2 of the summary of the recommendations, have we dealt with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Rural Electrification Agency?

MR AOGON: Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, 
Recurrent budget 	-  Shs 92,223,038,000 
Development 		-	Shs 1,751,733,009
Total 			-	Shs 1,843,926,377,000.

Vote 123 - Rural Electrification Agency
Recurrent is nil
Development - Shs 1,025,762,823,000 

Vote 311 -  Uganda National Oil Company
Recurrent is  Shs 31,480,900,000 
Development - nil
Total is Shs 31,480,900,000.

Vote 312 - Petroleum Authority of Uganda 
Recurrent is Shs 50,271,037,000
Development - nil 
Total 	Shs 50,271,037,000.

Mr Speaker, under Committee on Natural Resources the following ministries and departments or agencies are the ones that we oversee.

The Ministry of Water and Environment, National Environment Management Authority, National Forestry Authority, Uganda National Metrological Authority, Local Governments, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Rural Electrification Agency, Uganda National Oil Company, Petroleum Authority of Uganda.

Allow me to touch briefly on the methodology and in scrutinising the respective ministerial policy statements, the committee used the following methodology.

The members of the committee analysed the Ministry Policy Statements to acquaint themselves with the detailed content of the documents but most of the details that we would love to know about this document is in the Ministerial Policy Statements.

Honourable colleagues, you all know that this committee on Natural Resources deals with very critical sectors, ministries and agencies. These are matters of environment, meteorology. You are well aware of what happened in Malawi, Mozambique where cyclone idai caused havoc. 

This is where you get to see the need to have a strong metrological authority. I would not like to go into every detail because all the information is with you. Where you need an answer we are available to respond.

In conclusion, the committee has adequately considered the ministerial policy statements of the water and environment, energy and mineral development sectors and the rest of the agencies that I have talked about and recommends that the report of the natural resources committee on the budget estimates for financial year 2019/20 be adopted. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Aogon for stepping in the gap for the chairperson and the vice chairperson as they are indisposed and thank you for showing the spirit of taking up responsibility each time such difficulties occur in order to facilitate the work of Parliament.

The motion that I propose for your debate is that, the report of the Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/20 be adopted. 

5.52
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very interested in knowing about royalties on minerals under the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. The ministry is supposed to collect loyalties from miners so that they are able to remit some to Local Government and some to the Consolidated Fund.

We are seeing reports in and out that right now, we are demanding almost Shs 30 billion in form of royalties. What is the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development doing?

If collected, these royalties would have acted as appropriation in the ministry to do other activities in the mining sector or in other areas. I would like you the chairperson of the committee, to tell me what happens. Have you exempted them in collection of the royalties?

When you collect the royalties, there is withholding tax at 15 per cent. That means we have a lot of money being withheld in the mining sector, which is not being collected.

Secondly, we have talked about oil, when is the first litre coming out? Promises have been made. We started with 20 something; 2018 ended and now we are in 2019. Is there oil anyway? Maybe we are just wasting our energy when there is no oil.

We are hearing reports that there is even gas, which we call LPG, which is being extracted and sold. Is it true or false?

The third issue concerns compensation of the land where the pipeline is passing. We hear that you paid people cash but there are those saying they have not been paid. Who did you pay? Why are these complaints coming up about compensation where both the pipeline and the refinery are supposed to be constructed? Thank you.

5.54
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson of the committee for the good report.
On the tree fund, looking at how the environment is being degraded, northern Uganda used to receive rain in early March or end of February but this year we started receiving rain just the other day.

The committee recommends that one billion be set aside as tree fund. However, to our dismay, the committee also emphasised that the ministry is so reluctant in implementing this. We need to take the issue of environment seriously. We need to set aside the one billion shillings and if possible, let the seedlings be supplied to all the districts so that our environment is reserved.

Secondly, on the rural electrification programme, we discussed several times and a supplementary budget was passed for rural electrification. According to the ministry, the minister said all the sub-counties shall be electrified through the programme of rural electrification. 

I would like to find out, because the supplementary budget was passed not more than five months ago, I would like to find out how far the project has moved. Those are the few things I would like to put forward. Thank you.

5.56
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to ask the chairperson; in Buyende there is a weed called “Nankabirwa”. It had taken over the whole of L. Kyoga – Yes, the water hyacinth but locally they call it “Nankabirwa”. I am told it came when hon. Nankabirwa was the Minister for Fisheries – so chairperson, have you considered this?

Secondly, we talked about a cement factory in Karamoja, instead of minerals coming from there - because they distort the roads. How far with the factory?

Finally, we were in Buliisa and Government had already paid some of the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) money but these people had not left the place. Honourable minister, can we know whether the people you paid money have now vacated the area?

As hon. Nandala said, at least we thank Parliament because we saw the planes. We passed the loan and we have seen them. However, with the oil, I think some members especially in the Opposition in my community think Government is selling air. When is the oil coming? We need to know. Thank you.

5.58
MS HELLEN ADOA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to find out from the chairperson why the budget for water is going down every year? In Serere this financial year, we have a budget of 384 against a population of over 400,000 people. 

Beside, we have a project of 1.2 billion in Kagwara Landing Site. We also have a budget of five billion in Atira Sub-County. It shows only five boreholes for the whole year. Last week, we had a problem in Agule Primary School where pupils were collapsing because of heat and there is no borehole in the school. 

In Agule Parish, we have over 10 villages. So many villages do not have the boreholes. I would like to find out why the budget is going down every year in favour of piped water, which we do not see. I need some clarification. Thank you.

5.59
COL FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you are aware, water is life. I would like to confirm from the committee whether they have allocated money to plant trees in all catchment areas and to have nursery beds established at every parish so that we mitigate this dangerous trend that is coming to affect our livelihood. Thank you.

6.00
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for his report. I would like to find out how much money they have allocated for irrigation. 

We are aware that drought is very common and our crops are drying yet we have a lot of water in lakes Victoria, Kyoga and River Nile. What plans do we have to make use of our water instead of leaving Egypt and Sudan alone to benefit from it? Thank you.

6.01
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Sembabule): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is to ask whether the ministry has a master water plan for the water stressed areas. Year in, year out our populations depend on valley dams together with animals. 

There was an effort to combine the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries together with the Ministry of Water and Environment. This was aimed at having machine and equipment availed to communities in the water stressed areas so that people can have their own water, because the communal dams are no longer fashionable and they are no longer being used.

I wanted to thank the Ministry of Water. It has improvised water boozers for those hard-to-reach places but this has not been sustainable. For instance, you will note that in Nakasongola the situation was dire. One truck was moving from Nakasongola to Lwemiyaga and Lyatonde. Mr Speaker, does the ministry have a water master plan to alleviate the plight of these water-stressed areas? Thank you.

6.02
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the Government effort as far as valley dams are concerned for the case of Karamoja. They were constructed in the sub-region some years back. 

However, we have a challenge now, the dams have silted and algae is now developing there. I would like to find out from the minister because even the construction of these dams was by the Ministry of Water. Who is supposed to de-silt these valley dams considering the small budget of the district and who is supposed to remove the algae from these dams? Thank you.

6.04
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. The committee report says that because of changes in climate, the budget performance was very low and it is asking for Shs 1 billion for the environment. I would like to know whether this docket does not have irrigation which can help in making sure that the seedlings that are planted are not affected.

Here, the Ministry of Water is complaining and crying with the rest of the country. What more should we do? If we give you this money, will it address your problem?

Secondly, I would like to know whether this budget has catered for the rampant destruction of wetlands because this is part of the problem that we are facing as far as the climate change is concerned. How munch have you planned for climate change as far as destruction of wetlands is concerned because it one point the committee presented - that you do not have enough personnel.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, I would have loved for this budget to cater for recruitment of more personnel to monitor the destruction of wetlands, which seems to be part of the root cause of this problem of climate change. Thank you.

6.06
LT GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I am not talking as UPDF but as someone from a hard-to-reach area as far as water is concerned. Does the Ministry of Water have something called research and development? They are doing things which were done in the 1960s, which are no longer applicable. 

The valley dams they are trying to create are the ones which were designed before we were born. The population density then was just five million but we are now over 31. The demography has changed and where valley dams used to be - if you look at the map of Uganda and see water sources, now there are buildings on top of water sources. Do not go very far; go to Kitante where we play golf from, that was a river; where is it? Therefore, there should be a better way of looking at things. We cannot reinvent the wheel; we cannot change the population but the water sources that we used to have then are no longer available. 

With the trees we have cut, I do not think we will do anything. Therefore, where is research and development? There are better methods of getting water and the methodologies are there but not captured by the ministry. Individuals are doing it, but it is nowhere in the ministry. I do not know whether the ministry has a holistic approach because jumping here and there is doing nothing. Thank you.

6.08
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. Hon. Santa Alum asked to what extent the budget is going to address climate change and the effects on the depletion of wetlands. I would like to go further and ask; what strategy is there by the ministry to sensitise our people on the need to preserve and actually remove out of the wetlands those who are already there and have them restored and the trees planted?

We have all seen how the seasons are erratic, how the dry seasons are longer and how severe they are. I think everybody now has tasted the song about climate change, but how long are we going on like this? We are of course expecting worse situations. What is it that we are doing to ensure that we restore our wetlands and have forest cover so that we can reverse the situation? Thank you.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Mr Peter Lokeris): Thank you, Mr Speaker and colleagues. First, I would like to assure hon. Nandala that oil is there because he doubts whether it is there or not. We already have six points in place; five billion barrels and five billion cubic feet of gas. This has only been discovered in 40 per cent of the penitential area. Once explorations continue, we will have more of this.

On royalties, at every stage where we give a licence, the forms are filled and money paid directly to the bank payable to Uganda Revenue Authority and it goes to the Central Bank. When it is claimed now that the claimants are there, it is distributed according to the law: 80 per cent goes to the Central Government for the whole country, 10 per cent goes to the district concerned, seven per cent goes to the sub-county concerned and three per cent goes to the owner of the place or the community, for the case of Karamoja. Once the claimants come, that is how it is reviewed – if there are those who are not paid, they are supposed to claim. 

About oil; when will it come? All of us wanted the oil to have come yesterday but what we have seen is that there are many issues involved such as infrastructure. We must have roads to move around and the wells connecting to the central processing plant. We must have the facilities for processing the central processing plants. When you get oil that comes from the wells through the floor lines, which are also pipes, you have to process this oil. You have to remove all the impurities such as water and sand because it is mixed up. Thereafter, you get pure crude oil, which now goes to the processing plant. 

There are now two processing plants - one is King Fisher for the Chinese and there will be one called Tilenga, which will receive oil from the Nwoya and Buliisa areas. 

The other thing is: where will this oil go? We have destined some to the refinery, which will be in Kabale on the hill escapements in Hoima. Then, we have said that the other should be exported through a pipeline. We are trying to put all these things in place so that when the oil is got it has where to go. 

We also have to build a refinery as well as another storage facility here in Buloba near Kampala for the refined oil to flow to those areas. 

At first, we thought these things were easy but we found that the date of 2020 was not realistic. We have discussed with our partners and drawn a plan. We have the timeframes indicating when we shall carry out the projects. We think the oil will be exported after the refinery is built and that has to be by 2022. This is the realistic goal and we are saying by 2022/2023, we shall see oil flowing to all these areas. 

When we discussed with people, we found what they call the “FIDS” which stand for Final Investments Decisions to be taken. We have taken some decisions but others are still taking place. Therefore, it is not an easy issue to discuss set timelines for tomorrow or the other day.

Concerning gas, we have the gas. It is 500 billion cubic feet. Gas can be in the following forms:

    i. First you can get it as compressed gas. It is the one put in cylinders in its natural form and sell it.
    ii. Then, there is liquid refined gas. You have to use a planned cooling faction. This type of gas is condensed and put in cylinders for export. 

That is what will happen to the gas. 

On compensation, I would like to say that we have also done a lot of compensation, especially around the central processing areas. I think over 90 per cent of the population have been compensated. Others are still saying that they want more money but we know they will get the money and go. Those who have been paid are going away slowly and they will go, as we prepare the area. The people to be compensated are registered, so there is no problem. 

On electrification, well, we have passed a lot of money here for rural electrification. Different companies have been contracted to do the job. It is just a matter of time and you will see electricity flowing in the different parts of Uganda. I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 

6.16
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the minister has ably handled the most touching areas like oil and we all pray for the oil because it is a joint responsibility for everybody. 

I would like to thank the members. As the Committee on Natural Resources, we have been in the driving seat but you are the driving mirrors to guide us. The budget is not an event; it is a process. We are in the process and we have done it; we are here together. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I will now put the question that the report on the parliamentary Committee on Natural Resources on the ministerial policy statements and budget estimates for the financial year 2019/2020 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. The time being what it is, we will not be able to proceed anymore. However, I heard that the report of the Committee on Local Government and Public Service is ready. However, we will not be able to handle it now. I would like a confirmation from the Committee on East African Community Affairs - where is the report? Have you submitted a copy to the Clerk? It has to be uploaded on the iPads so that members can see it. 

MR AOGAN: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay a report of the parliamentary sectoral Committee on Natural Resources for the ministerial policy statement and budget estimate for the financial year 2019/2020. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you, chairperson. We now have two reports - the East African Community Affairs Committee report and the one of the Local Government and Public Service Committee. Those two reports are ready. We also now have the report from the Tourism, Trade and Industry Committee to make them three reports. 

However, we have one urgent matter which is a loan on the completion of the CCTV camera installation to cover the gap that has been remaining. The report is ready and it has been uploaded so what we are going to do is to adjourn now but start tomorrow at 11 o’clock. We shall deal with the first parts and come back in the afternoon to finish with the rest of the reports. If we finish with the loan early enough, we might be able to handle some two reports and see how we proceed from there. 

Honourable members, House is adjourned to tomorrow at 11 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 6.27 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 April, 2019 at 11.00 a.m.) 
