PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA12731Tuesday, 16 April 2024On behalf of Parliament and my behalf, we would like to condole with the families who lost their dear ones and we pray that the Lord grants them fortitude to cope with the losses. May we rise for a moment of silence.(The House rose and observed a moment of silence.)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, my attention has been drawn to the decision of the Kampala City Traders Association (KACITA) to close their business premises in protest of the prevailing tax regimes, which the Leader of the Opposition (LOP) talked about last week. Last week, the House specifically deliberated upon the concerns regarding the Electronic Fiscal Receipting and Invoicing System for which the House recommended a constructive engagement between Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and the traders.  In the same vein, we reiterate our earlier recommendation for a dialogue to amicably resolve any of the sticky issues that are being raised because it has gone beyond the Electronic Fiscal Receipting and Invoicing System.Honourable members, you recall that last week we raised various issues regarding the status of the preparedness of Mandela National Stadium, Namboole for the forthcoming African Nations Championship (CHAN) and African Cup of Nations (AFCON). This issue was raised by Hon. Nambeshe and Hon. Jonathan Odur. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 25TH SITTING - THIRD MEETING Parliament met at 9.59 a.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. Over the last few days, we have witnessed the loss of several loved ones: Hon. Margaret Namubiru Rwabushaija, Workers Representative lost her dear mother, and Hon. John Faith Magolo, Bungokho County North, Mbale lost his dear mother. The country has also lost some eminent sons and including Dr Tom Okia Okurut, former Director of the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA). He was also husband to Dr Ademun of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We have also lost Dr Martin Jorem Aliker, a distinguished dental surgeon, former minister, Senior Presidential Advisor, businessman, and community leader. He has been on many boards in almost 40 companies.We have also lost the Umukuka  Emeritus, Ambassador Wilson Wamimbi, the former king of the Bagisu (Bamasaba) as well as the former Deputy Vice Chancellor of Makerere University, Prof. Justine Opio Epelu. 12732THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024 [The Speaker]Yesterday, I went on a fact-finding visit after getting an invitation from the contractor who was in the House, and that is Hon. Oboth Oboth. He wanted us to see what was happening, especially after receiving the money, which they had requisitioned for. Prior to that, I sent a Parliamentary Commissioner, Hon. Mpuuga, to attend the first meeting and we will get the proceedings of the meeting.Yesterday, I took almost half a day in Namboole and most of the concerns that Members raised had either been fixed or were being fixed. Therefore, they are in the process and we are almost good to go. The works accomplished so far are very impressive and I must thank the UPDF Engineering Brigade which has done a good job. Where they could not do whatever is required, they have been able to outsource and bring people who are competent enough, which is a very good thing because we are promoting Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU).Previously, the contractor had asked for one month to conclude the works due to lack of funds, but the fact that the funds were released and they have received them, we gave them two weeks. They also asked us for privacy within the two weeks to finish up what is supposed to be finished. Thereafter, we can be free to go there so long as we do not step on the grass. Any of us who wants to go and visit Mandela National Stadium will be free to go and see what is happening there within two weeks. We shall seek the status update and report from the Parliamentary Commissioner who was at the site, especially on the scrap buses which are on the ground because the scrap buses cannot give vacant possession for the contractor to organise the parking area. That is what is at stake. There are other sports infrastructural commitments which the Government made and, progressively, works should start. I remember the minister said that the works for Akii Bua  Stadium were going to start and this has raised a lot of issues. We need to find out from the minister how far he has gone with the Egyptians that he took to Akii Bua  Stadium. We need to know when the construction of Akii Bua will start. When does the one of Hoima start? When does the one of Buhinga start? When does the construction of all the training grounds start? He committed to this House and it is only sports that bring unity, irrespective of your party, religion, and all other things. We, therefore, need to embrace sports. As legislators, in embracing sports, we must appropriate money for all these facilities – and there are priority facilities. The priority facilities that we have include Akii Bua, which was a presidential directive in memory of the late Akii Bua. (Applause) We also have Hoima and Buhinga stadiums. Most of the training grounds are within Kampala and they also need to work on those training grounds for us to be able to host AFCON. We have also asked the minister that after what was raised by the CHAN team has been corrected, he should write back to CHAN to come and re-inspect Namboole to see its suitability for hosting the games. I do not want you people to knock your heads over these things of the stadiums. They will all be worked on. I see that the Akii Bua team is really in bitter fights because of the  stadium. They are going to be worked on. Do not attack the committee chairperson. We have already made a provision for that money. We are going to work on those stadiums.When we start complaining, what will the rest of the people say? Let us be patient enough. We are in appropriation. Let us work on making sure that the money is available. At the same time, when we tell these ministers to solve the issue of the traders down there, the ministers must go and solve them. Do not wait for us to come and discuss them in the House. (Applause)  Assuming people close their shops – and they have closed – what do you want us to do, as Members of Parliament? COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12733THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024Ours is to legislate. We do not do the administration of taxes. Hon. Obua, you really need to help us. They said the President was supposed to meet these traders: why are you overloading the President? Why don’t you people do your work? The shops are now closed so, what are you legislating about? What are we doing here? Honourable members, we really need to get serious on this. We, as the Legislature, are doing our part. The Executive, you must also do your part. (Members rose_)  Why are you standing up? Have I finished? (Laughter)Honourable members, as I conclude, I will amend the Order Paper to designate one Member of Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF), who was missed the other time. I have seen the dean, Madam Charity. DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO COMMITTEESTHE SPEAKER:  Please, designate. 10.16BRIG. CHARITY BAINABABO (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to designate Hon. Maj. Gen. Henry Masiko to the Budget Committee. Therefore, he ceases to be on the Committee on National Economy. I beg to designate. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you.  (Question put and agreed to.)THE SPEAKER:  (Mr Ssenyonyi rose_) Honourable Leader of the Opposition, first allow your Members and then you come last.  You see, when you speak first, you would have blocked the others. Let me get the procedural issue from “Mr Procedure”. (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, you are the one responsible for enforcing the rules here. The rules require that I am referred to as “the honourable member”. I do not know where to appeal to. (Laughter)However, the procedural issue I am raising is that there is a practice – and I invite you to guide me as a way of procedure. You have reported on the progress made at Namboole Stadium. Our rules protect you and we cannot ask you questions and quarrel with you. You have said that another commissioner will come here and also report. I do not know whether, Madam Speaker, because of the laziness and shabbiness of the Government, the Parliamentary Commission has now has taken over the work of the Government. I do not know how I will ask my Speaker to explain things that I want to be explained about Namboole or ask a commissioner. The other day we had the Deputy Speaker assigned to go and visit Lubowa Hospital. I also had issues. The procedural issue I am raising, Madam Speaker, is whether because of your knowledge that this Government has nearly collapsed, you have taken over and we should no longer ask questions, for example, about Namboole to relevant ministers, but we should now direct them to the Parliamentary Commission. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much, Hon. Ibra. First, in the public gallery – (Laughter) -  this morning, we have a delegation of council members for - what is the word? The Rwanda Community, whose origin is Uganda. You will forgive me; I may not be able to mention the other word. My people, stand up and wave at the Members. I am going to start showing you the Rwandans here. Do not worry, they are here. (Laughter)  This is your Parliament and your country. You are all most welcome. In the public gallery this morning, we have a delegation of the Executive Committee and the Chairperson of the Uganda Rugby Union. They are led by Mr Godwin Kayangwe, the President. You are welcome. (Applause)  We have:12734THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 20241. Mr Godwin Kayangwe, the President; 2. Peter Mr Odongo, the honorary Secretary;3. Isaac Lutwama, the CEO;4. Winnie Atyang, the Coach;5. Leonard Lubambura, Chairman, Eastern Uganda;6. Daniel Canawira, Chairman, Pirates;7. Daniel Tabaruka, Chairman, Kyadondo;8. Jonan Manzi, Chairman, Hippos;9. Adam Kabalega, Chairman Eagles;10. Kevin Nyeko, Chairman, Buffalos;11. Feter Lubulwa, Chairma, Rams;12. Emmanuel Fudribo, Chairman, Warriors;13. Farouk Watmon, Representative, Gulu Rugby Union;14. Andrew Cohen; and15. Yasmin Mohammad. They have come to listen to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Government of Uganda for the successful bid to host the 2024, 2025 editions of the Rugby Africa Cup. You are most welcome.  Hon. Ibrahim, I went through Namboole on a fact-finding mission, not on the issue of the progress. The commissioners of Parliament are your members; so, there is no problem with you asking a commissioner of Parliament. They are actually supposed to work for you and give you information on what is happening for us to be able to check Government.Therefore, let us get a report from a commissioner on what happened.  Where we have an issue, then we can ask the minister to respond. Yes, Hon. Jonathan –MR ODUR:  Madam Speaker, I would like to, first and foremost, thank you for adding your voice and commitment to the issue of the pending stadiums to be constructed outside Kampala, specifically Akii Bua and Buhinga in Hoima.By adding your voice, Madam Speaker, like we saw with Namboole, we have hope that in the budgeting process, we shall provide funds because as it stands, the committee reported that Akii Bua and Buhinga stadiums are unfunded priority. During budgeting, I would be happy to see that they are provided for. The procedural matter I would like to raise is: when we raised the issue of Namboole, our concerns were specifically in the immediate; the ability for this country to host the next schedule of games on 3rd and 10th June against Botswana and Algeria. The Confederation of African Football (CAF) had indicated that those next rounds of games would not be hosted because the stadium is not ready. I have read through the rules and regulations of the CAF Stadium Regulations 2022. In Article 4, on the approvals, any request by the host nation for the stadium to host the games must go at least 75 days prior to the match day. Madam Speaker, 3rd June is about 35 days away from now. That means that the next schedule of games would not be hosted here. Remember, Madam Speaker, you had also indicated that one of our opponents in Algeria registered an objection regarding the country that had offered to host us, that is, Morocco. The procedural matter that I now want to raise is, can the minister responsible come and confirm to us where we shall host the next schedule of games which are on the 3rd and the 10th of June? These are our home games. Where we are going to play those games?  Madam Speaker, you had already directed that the Auditor-General does a forensic audit on Namboole, but from your communication today and I also followed on TV , you appear to be satisfied with the work they are doing - THE SPEAKER:  Before you finish, I was very categorical and I stated that we had given you Shs 80 billion and added Shs 17 billion. We are impressed with the work you are doing, but you are still bringing in variations. However, I am going to ask for a forensic audit. I can replay it on TV because it was recorded. I do not know who could have heard it. (Hon. Iddi Isabirye rose_)   said, “I am going to ask for a forensic audit on how this money has been used”. Hon. Odur, you will conclude. [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12735THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024MR IDDI ISABIRYE: Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for having given me this opportunity to give information on what you mentioned during your oversight visit.  It is our mandate, as Members of Parliament, to carry out oversight, not necessarily as a pleasure, but as a requirement. The statements that you used - You were satisfied to a certain extent, but there was still some work that was supposed to be done. This was actually played. (Hon. Ssemujju rose_)  I am giving information which can either be denied or taken.  I would like to inform this House that I had the privilege of watching you on TV when you were inspecting the stadium. One of the statements that you mentioned was, “You are going to ask for a forensic audit to make sure that...” - THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Jonathan, we have given a lot of money to Namboole to tune of Shs 97 billion.  First of all, the one thing I want us to thank the former minister for is initiating and ensuring that Namboole is fenced off. Hon. Hamson, we want to thank you very much for the fencing. He even chased away the witch doctor.  Number two, he made sure that we got a land title in the name of Namboole to a tune of 128 acres. That is one achievement that we have as a country. You can continue. MR ODUR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have no doubt that Hon. Denis Hamson Obua meant well and was a fit and proper person for that ministry at that time until the appointing authority sent him elsewhere. I want to conclude, Madam Speaker, and welcome your directive on the forensic audit. I also have reservations -THE SPEAKER: But you have an unanswered question. You should be able to answer his question. I do not know where the minister is. Where is he? We want the Minister of State in charge of Sports. Do not disturb the old man; we want the Minister of Sports because he is the one who has been there. MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, I welcome that because I will also seek an opportunity to table evidence that I was challenged, made by the minister. I want the video to be played, if you allow it.I want to conclude that regarding the issue raised by Hon. Ssemujju, I heard the same about the role of our commissioners. We have a committee in this House; the Committee on Education and Sports, and most of the oversight work, as defined by these committees - by sending our commissioners to go and monitor and come and report – Some of the commissioners, like my brother, Hon. Solomon Silwany and the three others who sat in the Commission and awarded themselves money and have refused to come and explain the Shs 500 million, the Shs 400 million - We have repeatedly been asking them to explain and they have refused. For such commissioners to now come and purport that they are going to represent the House in asking questions and accountabilities yet they have failed to do their duty of reporting to this House how they awarded themselves that money - THE SPEAKER: Honourable - MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, I think this is a serious question and the role of this House should not be relegated to the commissioners in their individual acting capacity. Otherwise, it makes Parliament look very relegated.  THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I asked a commissioner, just like I would ask you, to go to Namboole and bring a report. But you are conflicted because you are the one who raised the matter. First of all, Hon. Odur, you must thank yourself and Hon. Nambeshe, that this thing is being resolved because of you people. You still have a long time; you are going to talk about the Banyarwanda. The issue of Namboole has been sorted. Let me hear from the Leader of the Opposition. I wish you were standing to speak about those taxes. 12736THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 202410.33THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have got two quick procedural issues. One, vis-à-vis  your communication, you mentioned last week, when we raised the concern of traders who approached me and a couple of other Members of Parliament, raising several concerns including high taxes, the modus operandi of enforcement, Electronic Fiscal Receipting and Invoicing Solution (EFRIS) and so on - we discussed those issues here and your guidance was that the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry was going to process these matters and get back to us.THE SPEAKER: The Committee on Tourism,  Trade and Industry and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development.MR SSENYONYI:  Yes, but there is an emergency currently, Madam Speaker. Traders are on strike and shops are closed in downtown Kampala, Masaka and other parts of the country. I think that even as we wait for the committees of trade and finance to process, would it not be procedurally right for the Executive to talk to us about this situation because it has a huge impact on our economy? The traders are saying they are going to keep their shops closed until their issues are addressed. Last week, we were told that the Executive was going to meet them so that they can share these concerns. That meeting has not happened and so the strike is on and they are unrelenting. Would it not be right for the Executive to give us an update now on what they are doing because if we wait for the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry to eventually get back to us, it might take quite a bit of time.  The second issue - so you can rule on them together, Madam Speaker. Last week, something bothered me in this House. One of our colleagues, Hon. Ssekikubo, stood to raise concerns about how commissioners sat in a meeting, shared money among themselves, and how money is used in this institution and you, Madam Speaker, referred to his submission as nonsense. I found that wrong, I found that unparliamentary and with due respect, I would like to urge you to apologise and withdraw that statement, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Whereas you found it wrong, there is something that is pending that should be answered first; where the honourable member for Kazo also made allegations. If you want me to apologise to you, I know you are a very big person, you are the Leader of the Opposition. I am sorry to you, the Leader of the Opposition.MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The apology was not just for me, but to the whole House because - allow me to finish this in a minute –  THE SPEAKER: No, I am apologising to the Leader of the Opposition. The House does not fault me for anything. MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Does the House fault me? MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that apology. You see, a few weeks ago, Hon. Wakayima Musoke -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please listen. Let the Leader of the Opposition talk.MR SSENYONYI: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, a few weeks ago, Hon. Wakayima Musoke from Nansana did comment from the back, off record. He was responding to somebody who made some remarks and said, that is “nonsensical”. He was off record and Madam Speaker, you ordered him to apologise and withdraw the remarks, even when they were not on record. My concern was that your submission of “nonsense”, in reference to Hon. Ssekikubo was captured on the Hansard , and it does not make us look good. In fact, I had expected that at the end of that session, perhaps you would address that matter, apologise and withdraw, COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12737THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024and that is why I am raising it now as a very serious concern, because people out there do watch us. They expect us to operate with decorum, but also, Madam Speaker, as you keep reminding us, we have got to operate with decorum, so I was only imploring you to lead by example. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of the Opposition, Mr Sir, I am sorry. Can we hear from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives? 10.37THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama): Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER: You want Hon. Kimosho?MS NAKADAMA: The Minister of Trade is - MR TEBANDEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In a bid to clean this House, in the previous sitting, Hon. Ssekikubo complained that he was trespassed by Hon. Kimosho over allegations of murder and land grabbing, which were not called for by that plenary. Hon. Kimosho was not in the House and you guided that when he comes back, he will substantiate the matter.Madam Speaker, I am seeking your indulgence whether it is procedurally right, since Hon. Kimosho is here, and we cannot let such issues go on since they are tarnishing the image of this House and the Parliament where I sit. Isn’t it procedurally right that Hon. Kimosho substantiates the matter so that we fully clean up the image of this House which is our blanket? Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have an unanswered question of Hon. Odur, and I am happy that the Minister of Sports is here. Let us first get - before it disappears. No, honourable minister, there was a question from Hon. Odur. Can you repeat your question? MR ODUR:  Madam Speaker, my question is that Confederation of African Football (CAF) Regulations, 2022 require that the host federation writes to request an inspection of a stadium not less than 75 days from the match day. That is in Article 4 of the Confederation of African Football (CAF) Regulations, 2022. Our next home games are due on the 3rd and 10th of June; less than 40 days. The question I am asking is for the honourable minister to confirm in which foreign country Uganda shall host its home games, given that Morocco that had offered us a free venue has received objections from one of the teams we are going to play against. Secondly, the minister responsible for sports and I had disagreed on the statements he made when in Lira and I am seeking your permission to bring evidence to this House so that we watch what the minister said, and thereafter, as we had promised, either him or I would honour the gentlemen’s agreement that we made on this Floor of Parliament. Thank you. THE SPEAKER : Thank you, honourable minister. First of all - Yes. 10.41MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance and I hope the minister will respond to this because I am on record in the Committee of Budget for stopping money for Namboole at that time. I want the minister to come out clearly to tell this House, on record, whether you are doing renovation or facelift in Namboole. You should tell this House because people might be impressed by what they are seeing –THE SPEAKER:  We have a report.MR SSEWUNGU:  That the Shs 80 billion. Inform this Parliament whether you are having a renovation or there is a face lift at Namboole. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  We have a report to that effect from our visit. Yes, clarification.12738THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024MR BASALIRWA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, when you were in Namboole, one of the revelations that came out from your interaction related to compensation. There is a gentleman called Fred Kakooza, who is in my law firm, claiming that a couple of people around have never been compensated and that in itself also offends the CAF regulations regarding the construction of stadia. That is an allegation out there, minister, that you need to pay attention to and provide some clarification on the status of compensation around Namboole. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. So you are compensating them for building on their land or for encroaching on Government land? 10.43THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Madam Speaker, first of all, I will begin by thanking you for coming to check on the progress of the renovations of Namboole. I formally received the letter of the Leader of the Opposition, and I was in Namboole waiting to receive the Rt Hon. Leader of the Opposition with you yesterday. I thank you, Hon. Mathias Mpuuga, Hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, and other colleagues who came to check on the progress of the work so far. I also confirm, as per last evening, that the management of Namboole informed me that they had received the balance of the Shs 17.7 billion which we have been waiting for, for the last six months. Madam Speaker, I thank you for the commitment you have all put in to ensure that the Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development releases the money.To answer the questions, I want to go on record that I, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, facilitated the CAF inspectors to come and carry out the inspection. Why? We are aware that the contractor has gone to the last phase of the renovation of the project. I thank them for identifying some of the specific issues which the ministry, as a client, are working towards addressing for the purpose of us completing the works and the renovation of phase one of the project. To be specific to Hon. Ssewungu who asked, is it renovation or a facelift, I confirm that what we signed as a client with the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is the renovation of Namboole - (Interruption)  MR SSEWUNGU:  Thank you, honourable minister, for responding to me very well. Could you help this Parliament get all certificates of completion of the renovation by the company you contracted known as UPDF, as per the laws of Uganda? Thank you. MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I am aware that once the project is completed, I would implore you, like you directed - Even if you need a forensic or a committee, you are welcome because as far as we are concerned, these are public funds. So, Hon. Ssewungu, can you permit me, with the permission of this august House, to the work and we open it up for scrutiny to see what this UPDF has done in Namboole because there is nothing to hide? I want to begin with Hon. Odur. It is true that as far as CAF guidelines are concerned, they have specific guidelines on how they communicate to their respective federations for us to honour which area the game must be played. To them, they carried out an inspection and they have given us their findings. To me, who is a client and the responsible ministry, my work is to work on those issues. I am also going to write an appeal and I want to thank, in a special way, the Rt Hon. Speaker, for personally getting involved, trying to get the consent of the CAF President in person, and also making sure that H.E. the President speaks to the CAF people for purposes of us making sure that - trying to appeal to them to come back and carry out another inspection so that we can be able to play the game in Namboole. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12739THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024Therefore, to answer where the country is going to play the next game, I want to say that mine is to concentrate at a certain level and to work on those impediments which have been identified to be corrected within two weeks. If they agree to our proposal to ask them to come and carry out the inspection, we will be most obliged. If they do not agree to that, then I will come back to this august House and give a communication and have to work with the Federation of Uganda Football Association. It is not the Government that determines where the team must go. I want to remind this august House that you appropriated money for the Government to support the national teams of football. By the way, even if it is playing outside Uganda, it is government money that facilitates the team to go and play. The last question, most obliged – (Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker, and Hon. Ogwang for giving way. Maybe in the future, as I raise the clarification, you should make use of the UPDF who are here, because they do nothing apart from sitting. Since they are the ones constructing, in the future, they should be of help as you labour to explain. THE SPEAKER:  What are you saying? MR SSEMUJJU: I have already said it, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  They are bringing nothing here; that is not the engineering brigade. MR SSEMUJJU:  They represent UPDF here. UPDF is the one that is constructing – (Interruption) THE SPEAKER: There is an order from Afande . BRIG. GEN. CHARITY  BAINABABO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for a Member to display ignorance of the difference between a Member of Parliament and a company of UPDF that was contracted to construct the stadium?THE SPEAKER: The Engineering Brigade - that was a point of order. We are all in a learning process. Actually, I did not even know that you are not a member of the Engineering Brigade. She is a Member of Parliament – (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are here labouring when you have a member of the football association who should give you better information. You are very lucky that my husband is here to give you information. (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU: Can I complete the information I am seeking before your husband gives the information? (Laughter)  Hon. Ogwang stood here more than a year ago - by maybe NRM standards, he said that this stadium would be ready to host matches that we played in Algeria and other countries long ago. The same Hon. Ogwang is saying that the matter of where we play football is not his business. His business is to superintend over the UPDF to complete the facility.I seek clarification on whether this Hon. Ogwang I see here is the same Hon. Ogwang that gave this honourable House – (Interjections) - I am sorry and he knows I do not mean bad - whether this same Hon. Ogwang who told us that the facility would be ready a year ago –You know, I am used to him as a friend; he will excuse me. I wonder whether he is the same Hon. Ogwang saying, “Where football will be played from is not my business” who said that this facility would be ready a year ago, but it is not ready. MR OGWANG: First of all, I do not want you to put words in my mouth because you can go back to the Hansard  on what I said. I would like to say the following:We are the ones who invited the Confederation of African Football (CAF) and it has sent a report to us through the federation. I am happy 12740THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024 [Mr Ogwang]that the president is here; he sent me the CAF report. We read it and we are beginning to work on the issues that the CAF report identified, as a client and contractor. To be honest, we are trying our level best to address those issues for us having the game played at home. I have told you, Parliament, that the Speaker has even tried to get in touch with the president to also speak to the CAF President. That is why the same FUFA president, who is a colleague here, also brought it as a second option for us to address some of the issues raised and appeal whatever issues were pointed out in order for us to have the game at home. Nevertheless, if they do not agree with the appeals we are giving, it is on record that it is the Government which facilitates the national team called the Uganda Cranes to play a game outside home because of the challenges of the renovations of the stadium. I am the minister responsible for Sports. I made that statement in line with the plans which have been laid out, for purposes of completion of the stadium. However, you have seen a delay which was caused by failure to release the balance of the money for the last six months. Is that Hon. Ogwang’s problem? There was another issue which caused another delay. The Ministry of Works – First of all, Hon. Ssemujju, this stadium is in your constituency and was planned in 1972. The Chinese built that stadium and gave it to us as a grant. Getting the drawings of that stadium was a hassle. Fortunately, Hon. Hamson Obua is here. Do you know one officer was refusing to avail the drawings of that stadium for purposes of wanting the Government to pay him money? These are some of the issues which have delayed the renovation of the stadium, not the contractor. The contractor was on site, ready to do the work, but the challenge has been on some of the impediments. The last one is to address the question which my brother, Hon. Odur, raised. Hon. Odur, for your information, I did tell the people of Lango - I first handed them the contractor. The contractor agreed with me and they were sending a second technical team to go back to Lira to carry out what they call a “topographical survey”, which I want to confirm that they have done. When did they go to Akii-Bua Stadium? It was done within a period of one week after our visit. I do not know whether the contractor has gone there; they have to make it public that “I have gone back to Akii-Bua to begin doing the technical work”. That is not for Hon. Ogwang. Madam Speaker, I really would like to appeal to my colleagues from Lango that the Government, under the leadership of Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, is going to construct Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium – (Applause) - and that has been a long-awaited pledge for the people of Lango. It is on the hand side of Parliament and I am working with the contractor to ensure that Akii-Bua Olympic Stadium is built. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us conclude so that we go to the next item. MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, I have two points of clarification. The first one, under Article 3 of the regulations of CAF, is that there are two inspection regimes available. The member association, in this case FUFA, can do a pre-inspection report and report to them. If they are satisfied, the stadium can be approved. I would like to know from you whether you have already invited FUFA to do the pre-inspection report before you even think about –(Interjection) - yes, you will. That is the first one.I do not like us going back and forth. I had asked that if possible, I would play the evidence of whatever you said in Lira. It seems that your memory has missed something. You did say –THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the fact is Akii Bua is going to be constructed. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12741THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024Whatever was said - the money is already in the budget - MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to answer a technical question which he asked. As of now, I am aware of that and as far as the CAF guidelines are concerned, we are working to address the issues which they raised before we communicate to FUFA to ask them to invite a technical person employed by them and trained by CAF to carry out the inspection. What value would it add to me that I received money last evening and went ahead to invite the same person to come and carry out the inspection when I have not addressed the challenges which were identified? Can you give me a week or two to finish handling the issues they have raised? Then I can formally invite that person to come and carry out the inspection and communicate to the head office while the Government also uses other procedures to appeal to them to have the stadium re-inspected and accepted for purposes of us playing a game here. Honourable colleagues, it is in our best interest that the game is played at home and we all want that to happen. What I am asking is for you to stand with me and for all of us to do whatever it takes - for the UPDF Engineering Brigade to do whatever it takes - to ensure that whatever issues were raised are addressed such that we have the game played at home. That is what I call upon us to do. Sports unite all of us and that is the purpose of sports in the world. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister? 10.59THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the communication from the Chair regarding traders –THE SPEAKER: Can we first finish with football? Let us finish sports and then we can go there. Can I first hear from the President of the Federation of Uganda Football Associations (FUFA)? (Mr Lumu rose_)  I beg your pardon. MR LUMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. When you were communicating, you said that there are scrap buses in Namboole, which might hinder the progress of the work. I am wondering who owns those buses. THE SPEAKER: We have a report to that effect; you are going to get the answer. MR LUMU: I do not know whether the minister can help. THE SPEAKER: We have a report to that effect. Can we hear from the FUFA president? 11.00MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende): Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to provide information for the benefit of the discussion going on. First, I thank the honourable colleagues for the support they have given us, as a sector. (Applause) Most importantly, Hon. Jonathan Odur has raised an issue of regulations – and these are articles and regulations on how CAF operates. I would like to confirm to this House that he is correct: CAF has a minimum number of days by which they are supposed to communicate where the games are going to be hosted. However, it is also true that the CAF Executive Committee has the power to override some of those provisions. We have gone for this provision and engaged CAF. The way CAF operates is that they inspect the stadium according to the current status. When they were here, the truth is that we could not have a match in the stadium, because of the uncompleted work. If you go to Namboole today and you take a selfie, it looks good. However, for a football match to be played, certain technical issues must be accomplished. For example, even the substitute benches have not been put. So, it could be looking good, but until it is put and 12742THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024the inspector ticks the box, a match cannot take place. When CAF was here, according to the inspection they did, it was not practical that a football match could take place. Our appeal to CAF is that they exercise their executive powers such that they can allow us to be able to complete the works, as the honourable minister has explained, and then they do the inspection again such that we could have a chance to host our games at home. CAF operates in such a way that you must enter – and it is a computer system - where you are going to host the games from. That is supposed to be done 75 days before the match, which we did not do as a federation because Mandela National Stadium was not active in the system to be picked – because it had not yet been approved. According to the CAF practice, automatically, if you do not mention where you are going to host the game, they mention it for you. In this case, the last place where we played our games was Morocco. I would not be surprised if CAF came out and fixed our games in Morocco, come June. That is in case they do not accept for us to be re-inspected and they pass the stadium that would be hosting our games. Allow me to use a few minutes to explain the smaller picture and the bigger picture – (Interruption) MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, FUFA president. The clarification I am seeking is on whether the Government consults you – because you have said they called the inspectors well knowing that the work was incomplete. Now, they are all over the planet: His Excellency and his family must be involved to call CAF. Do they consult you such that we do not make the same mistake of inviting inspectors before the work? MR OSHABE: Thank you, FUFA president. To seek further clarification, we recently saw the completion of Nakivubo Stadium and we celebrated, as Ugandans, saying that we have another facility where such matches can be hosted. When Nakivubo was being constructed, was there technical advice to the extent that we could host a match of that magnitude? MR MAGOGO: Madam Speaker, my second submission was on the smaller and the bigger picture. That explanation should cover the questions that are being raised. First, the way civil engineering projects are structured is that there is a client, contractor and consultant. In this case, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs is the contractor and the Ministry of Works and Transport is the consultant. The challenge we have is that the consultant should have the expertise to advise the contractor to do the right things. I am on record – and I would like to go on record, again: constructing a stadium is a specialised type of engineering that requires expertise. If you do not have the expertise, you should hire the people with the expertise; this is a common practice. (Applause) No one has the expertise as far as stadium construction is concerned in this country better than FUFA and, therefore, CAF. CAF and FIFA work through federations. These projects have been executed as if they were the usual civil engineering projects. We, as a federation, have made an appeal that for the construction of stadiums, we get involved right from the beginning to advise - (Applause) - so that we do not make the mistakes that have been made. Even if Mandela National Stadium is looking good – in the remaining days, the money committed can make us able to play at home – but there were still mistakes made simply because of the lack of the expertise of the consultants because the contractors follow [Mr Magogo]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12743THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024what the consultants design and, eventually, advise. I, therefore, appeal to this august House that such specialised projects - we are the people that CAF works through. As you have seen, the inspection is done by us, first, and then, eventually, by the CAF. It will only be proper – because there is a lot of construction of stadiums going on by the private sector and the Government – that it becomes a practice that we are involved, as the federation, to advise such that we do not get some of these challenges. To be specific about Nakivubo, we were not consulted. CAF has done an inspection and it has a report about the stadium. As we speak today, we cannot host an international game there until certain things are done in accordance with the standards. I beg to move. (Applause) THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, first, I thank the president of the federation, Hon. Ssalongo  Moses Magogo, for the information he has given. However, there are certain things I will be forced to put on record because he is my brother and I am happy that he has raised certain things, as far as the consultations are concerned. I want us to listen to each other because I must answer the statements he has made as the Minister of State for Sports. Let me begin with Namboole. First, for the entire renovation of Namboole, we have been working with the Federation of Uganda Football Association (FUFA). That is why I am saying I am here and fortunately, he is here. Honourable members, please listen to - (Interjections)  - why am I bringing this forward? I am aware that they have the expertise. That is true. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister. I sent my advanced team on a fact-finding so we should be able to get that information from the report that is going to be presented. I do not want you to look ugly between yourselves Otherwise, you already look ugly. (Laughter) Let us get it from the report. Before we come to the issue of the traders, there was a question asked by Hon. Tebandeke. Are we going to finish today? MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, the minister has told Parliament that the FUFA President has told a very big lie. That is what the minister has said and this matter remains on the Hansard . If the FUFA President has told a lie, can he withdraw and apologise? THE SPEAKER:  I am saying, let us hear the report from the team that went to Namboole and then we will know who is correct and who is not. Honourable members, what I want to hear is the matter that was raised by Hon. Tebandeke about Hon. Kimosho. 11.12MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter raised by Hon. Tebandeke accrues from last week’s sitting where I raised a point of order in this House to Hon. Theodore Ssekikubo that I have, from time to time seen and heard in the news that he is a land grabber and as such, he facilitates land grabbers in his area. Unfortunately, when I raised the matter, at the same time, I had a meeting of the Committee Physical Infrastructure that I was chairing so I had to rush there because the minister and the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) had already entered. It is not true that after making the statement, I ran away.I want to be categorical that if there is any clarification as he imputed here that I need to substantiate, I request that when he is in the House, he comes clear on what he wants me to substantiate and I will do. What I also want to clear is the point that he referred to me as a hatchet man. I almost got angry, but I forgave him because people use language that they commonly trade in. So, 12744THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024remembering the videos that I have been seeing and what he is alleged to be doing, I felt that he is in the business of hiring hatchet men and that is what informed him to call me a “hatchet man” because that is his language daily; that is my assumption. I still want to go into that when he is here. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. What we can do is to wait for Hon. Ssekikubo –MR ATWIJUKIRE:  When he is here, let him be on record on what he wants me to substantiate. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we will wait for Hon. Ssekikubo to be here and I want to re-echo this to my boss, the Leader of the Opposition. As a leader, we enjoy to lead by example. This House is guided by rules and the rules are the guiding principles. If, in the opinion and judgment of a presiding officer, the Member holding the Floor is acting in total disregard of the rules and guidelines of the presiding officer, the presiding officer has a prerogative to guide the House, as I did when Hon. Ssekikubo did in totally disregard to the Speaker’s guidance. Even the Leader of the opposition, my boss, when I tell you to sit down, you do. You have never defied it and I must thank you for that. Going forward, I request and urge Members to always comply with the guidance and the ruling of a presiding officer to bring integrity and sanity to the House instead of bringing it into disrepute. Let us respect each other. If you are not talking - if I tell you to sit down, it is very simple; it is common knowledge that even my small balongo  will understand. If I say, “Tenywa sit down,” he will sit down. Workers - Traders, there is a trader there. 11.16MR GYA VIIRA SSEMWANGA (NRM, Buyamba County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the First Session of the 11th Parliament, this House resolved that the Government comes up with a comprehensive taxation policy. As per Rule 220 of our Rules of Procedure, the Executive has to come up with an action-taken report on the resolutions of Parliament. Since the First Session, we have not heard anything from the Executive.  This august House has been tirelessly working on the issues of taxation. In the motion that was moved here, we had issues to address deepening and widening the tax base. If every tax to be introduced, for example, taxing in weight and others is to be put on the same traders, we shall not help the economy from getting money. In my communication with the traders in downtown - who are my friends - they informed me of another reason for their demonstration. The properties of these people downtown are being taken by moneylenders yet this House has been receiving and debating the State-of-the-Nation Address year in, year out. One of the strategic bottlenecks is the high cost of credit; the turnaround time in commercial banks. It is all those problems, which force traders to go to moneylenders and get money even at 120 per cent interest rate a year.Madam Speaker, I request this House that let the Executive come up with the progress of the taxation policy because it solves all the problems these traders are talking about.Secondly, I request this House that since we are undergoing the budgeting process, let us consider capitalising public banks so that they can have enough money and the capacity of controlling the banking market. In the East Africa Region, public banks in Tanzania are leading the market by 27 per cent, 21 per cent in Kenya, but here in Uganda, it only 7 per cent. How are we going to control the interest rate? Bank of Uganda has done its work. It has cut the interest rate, but even when it cut to 6 per cent, the interest rate of commercial banks remained at 18 per cent. Now it is at 22 per cent and you have to spend three months processing a loan. [Mr Atwijukire] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12745THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024This forces traders to go to moneylenders at 120 per cent. I beg that we consider all these issues with the stakeholders. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I hear from the minister? There was something raised by the Leader of the Opposition that you need to answer, including that. 11.20THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) ( Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, on your communication regarding the traders and the same issue augmented by the Leader of the Opposition on the strike of traders mainly due to issues of taxation, cost of working capital and hawking by foreigners and wholesalers; as Government, we are now engaging the traders.As I speak, there is a meeting; Hon. Mwebesa and Hon. Mbadi are meeting Hon. Kasaija and other leaders of the traders to come up with a solution to the issues being raised. I would like to request this House that we make a statement tomorrow on the progress that we are achieving. However, I have no doubt – (Interjections) - okay, should we make a breakthrough and the House allows, we will make a statement this afternoon, but not later than tomorrow. I have no doubt that this listening Government and working NRM Government will have a solution to the traders because we do know how much this affects –(Interruption)MR SSEWUNGU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking clarification from the minister. The biggest challenge with the traders is the new system of tax collection, the EFRIS. What do you lose if you first halt this system, a petition is brought and you go to the committee of Parliament and see where the challenges are? Then, these people will start working.However, they will not continue working unless this tax collection system is still on. They are saying it is oppressing them. As a minister, they have petitioned you. I heard the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development raising the same thing. Let us first halt this tax collection system and then afterwards you sit, train them and have sanity among the traders. Otherwise, they will not continue unless this collection system is not sorted out because it has a lot of challenges. You cannot get someone riding boda boda carrying salt and you ask him from him a receipt from that tax collection system. Someone who does not have Shs 150,000,000 on his business returns is also put under the same. He is not just under V AT; you are doing the same. Honourable minister, can we agree? I know you can do that. First halt it and meet the traders other than saying for everything, “Unless the President comes out. If he doesn’t, we shall not move.” You are killing Mr Museveni for nothing. He cannot do anything solvable. It is you to do that work. MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker, those are the same solutions that we are looking out for. As I said, once the meeting is done and there is a possibility to make a statement this afternoon, we will do so, but not later than tomorrow. We will update the leaders of the nation and the country on the progress we are making to resolve the issues of traders. I have no doubt that we are going to resolve these issues. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Let us have these issues resolved. Let us debate the report when it comes. Whatever we are doing now is premature – Hon. Ayoo, bed ping  – Honourable members, we had already given instructions to the minister. Let us get the report, debate it and give our orders. When do we have the report? This afternoon? MR BAHATI:  The best time would be tomorrow so that we are able to present a concrete way forward on this matter. THE SPEAKER:  So we will have the report tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. 12746THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024MR BAHATI:  Yes.THE SPEAKER:  We will debate all those issues. On the issue of Hon. Gyaviira on capitalisation of local banks, which one will you capitalise and which one will you leave out? We only have Housing Finance Bank, which we have just recapitalised and Post Bank. Others are private banks. Are you telling me you are going to recapitalise Centenary Bank? Let Government have its own bank recapitalised and work on the interest rates, not looking at ours – Centenary Bank. You need to handle the issue that has been raised by –MR BAHATI:  The cost of capital including capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank (UDB) –THE SPEAKER: Yes, and regulation of interest rates. MR BAHATI:  Okay. I only did not get your guidance properly when you said “bed piny .” (Laughter)  THE SPEAKER:  No, that is Hon. Ayoo’s other name - yes, Hon. Patrick Oshabe.11.26MR PATRICK OSHABE  (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I think it will be appropriate - last time you gave us hope that the President was going to sit on this matter and complete it. The minister is here giving us hope that there is a meeting that is going on. That is good news because we want our traders to continue trading.As you return, honourable minister, come with information to us. One, what is the cost this country incurs every day the traders close their shops in terms of tax collection? You might come back here and tell us, “We will resolve this next week.” If you could inform us about the impact of every day’s closure - what is the cost in terms of tax collection, what is the cost in terms of doing business in the country? Lastly, this would be the time where we see ministers, especially the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives sensitising the public about what is going on. Madam Speaker, on television and radio, they come, but the information they give out is not proper, especially to the trader in the village, Kassanda. They do not know about IFRIS. When it comes to closing of shops, they also ask, “Should we also close?” Everyone is going to close without proper information. Therefore, I want to plead with you. This is the time - morning, evening, every minute - to inform the public what they need to know about what is going on and what Government is doing about it. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, there is a lot of uncertainty on how much tax is being paid; these people are saying they do not know how much they are supposed to pay. We have passed Bills here, and we are again going to pass other tax Bills. We pass these Bills, but people do not get to know how much they should be paying. Therefore, people need to know how much they are paying so that they accept that yes, we have to pay whether we want it or not. Next STATEMENT BY A PARLIAMENTARY COMMISSIONER ON A FACT-FINDING VISIT TO MANDELA NATIONAL STADIUM, NAMBOOLETHE SPEAKER:  Following our fact-finding visit to Mandela National Stadium, Namboole, and in line with the earlier undertaking made by the minister, I will allow an update to this House by the Commissioner. Pursuant to Rule 54(1) of the Rules of Procedure, I invite the Commissioner to give us the findings since he has been there for some days.11.30MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (NUP, Nyendo-Mukungwe Division, Masaka City):  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Initially, I had thought that I would augument the debate STATEMENT12747THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024outgoing on the subject matter, so that those who will read the Hansard  do not have their head spin over how matters have been cascaded on the Hansard.Madam Speaker, allow me to be brief because a lot of what I had captured has found itself on the floor of Parliament by virtue of the minister’s submission and your recognition of the issues you saw observed. Secondly, it is an interim observatory statement following the agency with which these matters captured the attention of the House and therefore did not go into deeper investigations of what is and what is not at the facility. On Friday 12 April 2024, the House’s attention was drawn to concerns that the Confederation of African Football(CAF) had in an interim inspection report made a declaration to the effect that the Ugandan major national stadium at Namboole was not ready to host international matches given the inordinate delay in the completion of the ongoing renovation civil works on the complex.The Rt Hon. Speaker directed the sports minister and that of finance to meet with the agency to resolve the impasse and with directives to the Commissioner of Parliament, to attend a stakeholders meeting at Namboole and report to the House. Madam Speaker and colleagues, the CAF report on the stadium that was laid on the Floor by Hon. Nambeshe had the net effect of cancellation of Uganda’s opportunity to host major international football matches, including CHAN and CAF qualifiers in June 2024 and derailing our assessment for eligibility to host the African Cup of Nations(AFCON) in 2027. The National Stadium was officially opened in 1997, albeit at 75 per cent completion. Until the ongoing innovation that we are commencing in March 2022 by the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs, through a memorandum with the Ministry of Education and Sports, the stadium was never fully completed to the full operation phase. Assessment and costing of innovation worksIn the interim visit, I made for two days, after the assessment of the desired civil works for the upgrade of the stadium to international standards by the Ministry of Works and Transport together with the UPDF Engineering Brigade, the renovation works were phased in three stages;The short term, which is ongoing, costs Shs 94,049,239,595. Phase two, which is the medium-term intervention, to cost Shs 84,996,761,256. Then the long term, which is phase 3, costing Shs 108,541,395,375.  Costing a whopping Shs 287,587,396,226 to renovate the stadium to its entirety, to international standards. Madam Speaker, the Government has so far been able to provide all the required finances for Phase One at this stage, albeit with some delays, which is largely the responsible for the current crisis that necessitated the direct intervention of Parliament.Response to major CAF concerns In general terms, Madam Speaker, all the issues raised by CAF were valid and they are basic requirements for certifying a particular sports facility to host international events. During the two days’ acquaintance with the stadium and its facilities and the ongoing innovation works, I can confirm, and attest to the fact that the remaining innovation works can be completed in a period of between two to three weeks, save for the delivery and installation of the imported floodlights that require the next 30 days, way beyond the prescribed time. However, even for the floodlights, management and the contractor assured us that they have in place a temporary arrangement to install leased floodlights that will supply the required 2,000 lux that will serve the purpose for the interim period as required by CAF. 12748THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024I wish to report to Parliament that the rest of the requirements on the CAF checklist, for some reason, were not inspected, including the smart stadium facilities that enable automated ticketing and seating. Many fittings are available in the stores of the stadium and I was able to inspect them. We have advised the contractor in the meeting to utilise the appeal window, which the minister mentioned, to install them in order to make the stadium ready for re-inspection, if that is an arrangement feasible and available. I was shocked to inspect stores with materials gathering dust and CAF was demanding for the existence. Probably between the contractor and the supervisor, somebody slept on duty and they put us in this mess and crisis.Recommendations and the way forwardIn the interim, the minister for sports must ensure that supervision of the contractor is enhanced, especially to ensure delivery of the outputs on the agreed timelines. In the meeting, we agreed to a work frame with very strict timelines of delivery and installation of what is available and being demanded; and it somehow speaks to what the FUFA President said that, if they were involved some of these should be already in place because they are in stores and are not considered as immediate and appropriately required.Two, the minister should report to Parliament on a weekly basis on the progress made until the requirements are fulfilled and the right to host international matches is restored and confirmed by CAF. Even when they do not confirm, the minister should report so that we can find what is appropriate for him and his team. Three, there is a need for an interim audit of the funds so far released for the innovations for Phase One. The audit should not be limited to the deployment of the funds, but the entire procurement arrangement, quality of work and value for money before starting the second phase. Madam Speaker, because this is an interim report, allow me to make this last statement which I did not include; related to the parking space so that is on the record of Parliament. We were able to have a meeting with the owners of Pioneer Bus that owns a scrap yard at the facility parking space which is one of the impediments for approval of the stadium for eligibility to host matches. The key director, Mr Albert Muganga, was part of the meeting together with the Ugandan Land Commission that offered the company a lease, which as a lawyer, I considered out of legal space. The Office of the Attorney-General was also represented.The Pioneer Bus people have no problem with removing their scrap and by yesterday, they reported that they are looking for space and we gave them this week to remove their scrap from Namboole so that compliance - at least  for the parking facility - is restored.I hope that when the matter of Pioneer Buses comes to Parliament, we will be very strict in investigating circumstances under which Pioneer bus owners ended up acquiring a lease of 49 years on the land and now they are in court requiring compensation of over Shs 25 billion for business loss. I hope Parliament will interest itself in how all this happened such that we are able to save the taxpayer from this nugatory possible expense. This crisis, in finality, should have a permanent lesson to all charged with management of public  affairs to appreciate and understand the gravity of their actions and how they impact on public confidence in leadership in this country. I beg to submit. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. First of all, the land belongs to Government, that is, Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.  According to the meeting that we had with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the board said that they were not [Mr Mpuuga] STATEMENT12749THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024consulted before ULC subleased their land and as we stand now, the lease expired.I would like the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities, and State Enterprises (COSASE) to take this as a priority and;1. Find out how ULC subleased land which belonged to another entity without authorisation;2. Find out how much money they collected as Non-Tax Revenue (NTR) on the land that was sub leased; and3. How did the buses come to be parked in that area as if it is a parking yard?MR SSEWUNGU:  I would like to thank you, for your guidance. However, in everything we are saying about Namboole, we are leaving out the hotel in Namboole and many people are dodging it. When we were in the Public Accounts Committee (PAC), there were a lot of issues regarding that hotel. Someone had hired it privately, but that hotel was meant for players. It has a fully-fledged swimming pool; a three-star hotel. And as we talk about renovations, the issue of Namboole Hotel is always left out and yet it is very key.THE SPEAKER:  For your information, we were in the same committee. The hotel has been renovated, retrieved from the initial from those people and it is now in the possession of Namboole. It has 72 rooms. MR SSEWUNGU:  Most obliged Madam Speaker. I want to hear that word “the hotel” whenever we are talking about Namboole, because it is the component of that place. Otherwise, it is disappearing without me hearing anything about it.THE SPEAKER:  No, the hotel is there.MR SSEWUNGU:  The way the assets were disposed of is not known, but since you have stated, I agree with you, but Hon. Ogwang -THE SPEAKER:  There are 72 rooms in that hotel and all of them were vacant. There is a restaurant and everything. (Laughter)  Yes, Hajji - honourable members, this report was informative. All I would like you to do as a House is - an issue of the buses. Before your boss -11.43THE LEADER OF OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi):  Madam Speaker, this question of the buses has become quixotic. Maybe the minister needs to guide us because it appears to me that they are struggling with evicting the buses because of who the potential owner is. Maybe they need to let us know the owner of these buses is so that we can prevail upon whoever this person is. What is so hard about getting them out of that place? one of the reasons, as we learnt was that Confederation of African Football (CAF) said that, “you people do not have parking space for spectators.” The parking space is being occupied by these buses which as you told us are scrap. So, they are not of any use. Minister, what are you struggling with? Help us to help you so that we get to know the owner. Maybe we can prevail over whoever this is, if you are struggling with prevailing over who the owner of these buses is. 11.44THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Sports) Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my brother, the Leader of the Opposition. I would to thank the former Leader of the Opposition, who is now a Parliamentary Commissioner, for the report. As of now, I do not have any undertaking with Pioneer Easy Bus Company both as a ministry and as the owner of the facility.Actually, according to the information I was given by the management of Namboole, that company owes me money - No, let me use that word - “they owe me money”, but the board in its needs wisdom, reached a point and said, “for all intent and purpose, please get out your buses.” 12750THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024Unfortunately, I wish to request this August House to help the country- have - the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development sort out the issues they have with Pioneer Easy Bus. Even now, I have asked the management of Namboole to go and secure a court order to have these buses leave my premises for the purpose of me addressing the challenge, which CAF raised. 11.46MR RICHARD LUMU (DP, Mityana County South, Mityana) : Madam Speaker, you said that the Ministry of Education and Sports was complaining that it was not consulted when the lease was being given. I wonder -THE SPEAKER:  The management of Namboole together with the minister –MR RICHARD LUMU:  Yes, they were not consulted which is okay. I wonder what steps they took to evict them ever since they saw those buses there. Because if you were not consulted, it simply means that they were encroachers, according to you. So, until now when this matter has been brought to Parliament to be debated, what did you do?MR PETER OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I am ready to lay before this august House documents of “Namboole” going to court requesting for a court order to evict those buses.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I want to guide the House this way - who did you say is the consultant of the project? MR OGWANG:  The consultant is the Ministry of Works and Transport.THE SPEAKER:  What is the role of the federation?MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, the federation is charged with the responsibility of managing football across Uganda.THE SPEAKER:  In the case of Namboole?MR OGWANG:  In Namboole?THE SPEAKER: Yes.MR OGWANG: Their role is advisory. That is their role because this is a government project and we work with them in those terms.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, much as their role is advisory, they are responsible for football in the country. Maybe if you had involved them, we would not have got all these because what CAF found not to be there is there, but not fixed. Maybe it is because you did not consult them. So, what you need to do, as the Commissioner has said, is to make use of these people to advise you.MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, with your permission, I have – not one, two, three, four, or five times, but on many occasions – involved the federation as far as the renovation of the stadium is concerned. The good thing, Madam Speaker, is that I have evidence. It might not be Engineer Moses Magogo, but I have correspondences to that effect. He is the president of the federation. He is as big as I am, but I have the evidence.THE SPEAKER:  He is not big. (Laughter)MR OGWANG:  No, he is a federation president, for goodness sake.THE SPEAKER: You are a minister. The problem, Hon. Ogwang, is that you want to deal with the FUFA president as an in-law –(Laughter) – which does not work. MR OGWANG:  I confirm that he is my in-law, Madam Speaker, for the record. That is true.THE SPEAKER:  Now, can you go official for the good of this country?MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, most obliged. If you want me to go official, I still confirm that I have been communicating with him. I thank you.THE SPEAKER: There is a motion – point of information?[Mr Ogwang] STATEMENT12751THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024MR MAGOGO:  Madam Speaker, to undertake these serious projects, like the civil engineering ones, advisory is optional. These are technical issues; a supervisor is appointed. It is, indeed, true that we have been called to meetings and we have advised. However, taking the advice is optional – it is either taken or not taken. I think the most important point here is that we are going into a phase of the construction of sports facilities. It would only be important for this august House to guide, going forward, for it to be a mandatory requirement that when these projects are undertaken, it is not an option, but a requirement that the federations technically provide this information, as required.THE SPEAKER:  Motion?11.52MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, you talked about the ugly situation arising out of what was in the presentation of the FUFA president and the minister. It is apparent that there is a fundamental problem between the ministry and the federations.As we speak now, we are talking about FUFA, but this goes beyond FUFA. Madam Speaker, I will inform you, as Hon. Andrew and I shall indicate later on, that Mandela National Stadium is also going to host the Rugby Africa Cup. Therefore, it goes beyond that –(interjection) – I am laying the background, my young brother. I, therefore, Madam Speaker, would like to move a motion that this august House enjoins the Ministry of Education and Sports to ensure that in the construction of sports facilities, sports federations become the supervisors and consultants, going forward. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Is that seconded? (Members rose_)MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, can I seek the guidance of the Attorney-General as far as that move is concerned? The reason I am bringing this up is – first, for the record, my ministry worked in constant touch with all the federations, through the National Council of Sports. Secondly, as far as the renovation of Namboole and other sports facilities are concerned – and I am ready to challenge my brother, the engineer, here - the good thing is that I have facts. His office did facilitate a meeting between the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Federation of Uganda Football Association, as far as AFCON is concerned.We came up with a document that defined the role of each party as far as AFCON is concerned. So, when we come here and say we are not working together, I get beaten up. In addition, contractual matters are matters of advice from the Attorney-General – the role of a supervisor, consultant, and client. I would like to request Parliament to allow the Government to perform its duty. We will continue to work with the federations as has been the case. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, there is a law that we have just passed. Unfortunately, the minister has not brought the regulations. Secondly, in the law that we have, the federations, through the National Council of Sports and the Ministry of Works and Transport, are advisors to the projects that concern sports. It costs you nothing. You are not doing them a favour. They are actually doing you a favour – and working for Ugandans. Let them be the advisors on what should be done. Does it have a financial implication? It does not. So, we should make sure that the federations advise on what should be done. Yes?MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, as a way of the procedure, I would like to advise – [ Mr Ogwang: “Madam Speaker, I want to confirm; they do advise. That is true. We work with them.”) - Hon. Ogwang, I am on the Floor. Madam Speaker –THE SPEAKER:  Bring for me a letter, which you have written to them and ask them thus: “I want you to be the advisor of the project that is ongoing”. Please, lay the letter tomorrow.12752THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, you had given me the Floor, but the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Sports) is grabbing it. (Laughter)  As a way of procedure, there is the legal and administrative issue of handling this matter. I would like to request you, Madam Speaker, to ask Hon. Peter Ogwang to take advantage of the FUFA president’s presence here and, maybe with the help of the Government Chief Whip, go and sort out this matter and come out cleaner than they are looking now. They can go and see what role FUFA can play and they return and tell Parliament that “we have agreed as follows”. Otherwise, they are bogging down the work of Parliament, discussing details that are never discussed in Parliament, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, there is nothing private here. You passed the law in this House and whatever is in the law must be implemented. That is one. Secondly, the advisors are advisors. I want evidence to the effect – whom you appointed as an advisor, a consultant, and so on.Furthermore, I would like you to have the scrap that is at Namboole Stadium out using the legal mechanism. Can we have that scrap out of that place? Three, the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises) (COSASE) should thoroughly investigate the Uganda Land Commission (ULC) on how they got that sublease, how much money they got, and where they declared it from.  I am talking to the deputy chairperson of the COSASE. MR ALLAN MAYANJA:  Most Obliged, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  We need to know how much money has been collected. Now that the lease has expired, how much money is Mandela National Stadium demanding from Pioneer Easy Bus Limited? MR PETER OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to thank you for the guidance you have given. I want to begin with the latter. The lease expired. It was given five years.THE SPEAKER:  I have already made a ruling. MR PETER OGWANG:  Two, I am going to lay on the Table -THE SPEAKER: Come back and lay tomorrow.MR PETER OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I want to say this because the documents I am going to lay on the Table should be on record. One, I am going to lay on the Table my conversation with the federation. Two -THE SPEAKER:  Appointing them - MR PETER OGWANG:  Not appointing them because I do not have the powers to appoint them to be the official supervisors of the works in Namboole. However, I have documents where we sat in a meeting during a retreat and agreed on the roles and responsibilities of each party that is working towards achieving this. I am going to bring it and lay it on the Table. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Laura? 12.00MS LAURA KANUSHU (NRM, PWD Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to find out from Hon. Mpuuga whether he took into consideration the fact that the stadium has been built to international standards regarding accessibility for the spectators, users of the stadium, and the parking that you talked about when he was looking at the stadium. Did you take notice of those things? I am sure you know that we have an international and national obligation to make sure that the stadium is fully accessible to people like me. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Before Hon. Mpuuga comes in, we raised an issue of a ramp. STATEMENT12753THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024MS KANUSHU:  Madam Speaker, it is not just about a ramp. Accessibility has standards - THE SPEAKER:  Listen! We raised an issue of a ramp and the engineer said it was beyond a ramp and they were working on it. MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable member is right to ask that question. One of the statements I made in my brief statement is the fact that they have installed smart stadium facilities, meaning the stadium can be accessed without hustle because they have installed access points in all areas. In one of the challenge areas, CAF was asking for a lift in particular spaces and the contractor and the supervisor showed us a space where they are going to put a lift, where need be. It is one of the things they must comply with. The beauty is that the lift at that kind of stadium is not a comprehensive engineering work. They can put an interim lift for compliance in the interim. So, your question is valid. The smart stadium facility is an access technology facility where you can buy a ticket from where you are seated. When you reach the stadium, you simply swipe, your seat will be indicated and you get it. Therefore, no hustling at entry. It was tested by Madam Speaker and it was proven that it works. It is part of the security and ease of access as well as making it easier for spectators to enjoy the facility. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much. In the VIP gallery this morning, we have Hon. Mutuluza Peter, the former Member of Parliament for Mawokota North, Mpigi District. You are most welcome. We also have in the VIP gallery, Hon. Aleper Simon Peter, former Member of Parliament for Moroto Municipality. He is also a central executive committee member; he is here too -  even a P.1 kid can - of DFCU. Thank you so much. Honourable members, I have guests who have been sitting here from 6.00 a.m., waiting for their petition. How I wish we could first dispose of it. See how this Banyarwanda is behaving. Have you seen him? 12.04MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I am just seeking your indulgence. We have handled a lot of issues on Namboole.Madam Speaker, I am seeking that the minister provides regulations because we have passed the law, but it cannot be put into practice without the regulations. All the challenges we are having here are because of the regulations.  Namboole Stadium should be taken by National Council of Sports, but without regulations you cannot move. Many laws have been passed here, but there is always a delay in bringing regulations. This makes them ineffective because when it comes to court, there are challenges the judges face. Thank youMR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I want to thank Parliament for helping us to have the National Sports Act in place. As far as the Ministry of Education and Sports is concerned, we have constituted a technical team which is leading the process of the formulation of the regulations. So, I want to say this.Resources notwithstanding, is one of the impediments which is affecting the final delivery of the regulations.  Thank you, but we are working within our main Budget to ensure that the process of regulation being in place is addressed. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you so much. As we start with the petition since it will not take long, the rugby team should bear with us. We are coming back to you in a short while. 12754THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024PRESENTATION OF A PETITION OF THE COUNCIL FOR “ABA V ANDIMWE” ON ALLEGED INFRINGEMENTS BY GOVERNMENT ON THE RIGHTS OF BANYARWANDA WHO ARE BORN AND RAISED IN UGANDA.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, petitions are avenues through which citizens of a country get remedies from Parliament on specific matters. To institutionalise this avenue, the citizens engaged Parliament under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure and the details of the structures of the petitions -The Member of Parliament who is representing the Banyarwanda in the House will now read the petition. That is, Hon. Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga.12.06MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I said last time, there are very many Banyarwanda inside here hovering and rotating. I am moving under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, and the petition reads: “The humble petition of the Council for Abavandimwe, a duly registered association representing the Ugandan Banyarwanda Community, presented on their behalf by Hon. Ssewungu Joseph Gonzaga, Member of Parliament Kalungu West County;SHOWETH AND STATES as follows:1.  THAT the Banyarwanda feature in the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as one of the Indigenous tribes of Uganda;2.   THAT the Ugandan Banyarwanda became an indigenous tribe following the annexation of Rwanda’ s border territories (Kisoro, Kigezi, Ndorwa, among others.);3.  That the 1926 colonial population census found a sizeable population of Banyarwanda living within the boundaries of Uganda;4.  That the Ugandan Banyarwanda are facing serious citizenship rights violations at the hands of both the National Immigration Registration Authority (NIRA) and the Ministry of Internal Affairs – Immigration Department where they are denied national identity cards and passports; 5.  That many Ugandan Banyarwanda have returned from abroad for either study or work to renew their passports, acquire or renew their national identity cards and have been told that they do not qualify to be Ugandan passport or national identity holders; at times this has led to loss of jobs or study opportunities for these persons;6.  That the Ugandan Banyarwanda have not only been denied passports and national identity cards, but the previous passports held by these persons have been confiscated, which has caused pain, suffering and psychological torture, and has exposed them to abuse and violation and denied them their right of association; 7.  That the Ugandan Banyarwanda have been denied opportunities for employment both in Uganda and abroad since they are unable to provide national identity cards or passports to confirm and substantiate their identity as Ugandans; 8.  That not only have the Ugandan Banyarwanda been denied employment opportunities, but they are unable to open bank accounts, register companies, register phone lines in their names which is denying them a right of livelihood and also costing the country revenue from the foreign remittances; 9.  That some Ugandan Banyarwanda whose passports expired are stuck in the Middle East and other countries around the world without any assistance from the Ugandan Foreign Missions and Embassies because they are deemed not to be Ugandan citizens; PETITION12755THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 202410.  That some of the Ugandan Banyarwanda have been unable to travel abroad for better or specialised health care, which has cost them their lives; 11.  That despite their meeting with the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Director, Immigration Department and several other attempts to meet the officials from National Immigration Registration Authority and the Ministry of Internal Affairs – Immigration Department, nothing has been done to address this plight; Now, therefore, your humble petitioners pray that – 1. The relevant committee of Parliament investigates the segregation and violation of the rights of the Ugandan Banyarwanda in Uganda and makes a report; 2. The House urges the National Immigration Registration Authority and the Ministry of Internal Affairs – Immigration Department to issue national identity cards and passports to the Ugandan Banyarwanda based on their recognition by the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda as a tribe in Uganda; Your humble petitioners are duty-bound and will ever pray and hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.”Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, honourable Member of Parliament for – (Members rose_)  - honourable members, they do not debate on a petition.  MR SSEWUNGU:  I was only concluding. Thank you, Madam Speaker. To make the record clear, we are seriously saying that the segregation is within the Ministry of Internal Affairs, not among Ugandans. When they come, and I want to correct this because in Uganda these days everybody is an editor on social media. Please note that we are complaining about segregation in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Immigration Department. Otherwise, the rest we are enjoying. That is why I am a Member of Parliament. I know Members will take this in good faith.  Lastly, Madam Speaker, it is very painful that someone gets a letter from the LC II chairman, gets clearance from the LC II and LC III chairpersons, he pays money for the passport and at the end of the day, he is thrown out, and denied a passport.  Therefore, we pray that this petition finds your favour and interest, Madam Speaker, and is handled as you will direct. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, thank you very much. Honourable members, pursuant to Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure, the petition stands – please lay. MR SSEWUNGU:  Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.  THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. The petitioners have appended their signatures. Hon. Tebandeke, the Rules of Procedure as per Rule 30, does not allow a petition to be debated upon. If you have an issue regarding the petition that has been laid on the Table, please go to the committee and present your issues. Honourable members, pursuant to Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure, the petition stands referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. The timeframe of 45 days as per Rule 30(10) stands.  (Hon. Basalirwa rose_) But I have already referred it. Please raise your procedural issue. MR BASALIRWA:  Madam Speaker, I am alive to Rule 30 and your guidance.  While on the Floor, I sought clarification, but I could raise it as a procedural issue, your referral notwithstanding.  Some time back, I read in the papers that there was a community before the courts over an issue related to this. I just wanted to find out 12756THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024whether the subjudice rule would not catch us with this referral. That was the clarification I wanted to seek so that we are very clear on it.  THE SPEAKER:  The subjudice rule will not suffice. It is to the pronouncement of the Speaker that it will do, but it will not.  So let the petition go to the committeeMOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA FOR THE SUCCESSFUL BID TO HOST THE 2024/2025 EDITIONS OF THE RUGBY AFRICA CUPTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, in furtherance to our earlier deliberations on sports infrastructure, recently, Rugby Africa accepted Uganda’s bid to host the 2024 and 2025 editions of the Rugby Africa Cup at Mandela National Stadium.  I now invite Hon. Ojok Andrew Oulanyah, who doubles as the Vice President of the Rugby Union, to move a motion.  MR SSEMUJJU:  I want the mover to move this motion, just because it is him, but I am uncomfortable with the precedent this Parliament is setting.  So when we win a bid to host, must we come here and thank the Government?  Do we pay tribute?  This is the first time that we now want to thank the Government for winning a bid. To pay tribute. I actually thought they should be doing it every day.  We can thank the team for representing and winning for Uganda. I fear that we are setting a very dangerous precedent, but because of the mover - Madam Speaker, I am reluctant - (Interruption)MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, for purposes of context, the Uganda Rugby Union was at the forefront of ensuring that Uganda wins this bid, which they successfully did, and which ideally should be the context of this motion –(Interjection)-  I am giving context because somebody is raising an issue -(Interruption)THE SPEAKER: There is an order.  MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I was so constrained to raise a point of order against Hon. Asuman Basalirwa because he is my MP from Bugiri. However, the point of order I am raising is that the Hon. Asuman Basalirwa is a seconder of this motion. Is it for him to seek clarification on the same motion that he is supposed to second? THE SPEAKER: Hon. Silwany, are we still in the same House? ( Laughter ) Did you understand what the honourable member was saying? He is not seeking clarification. No, he is not seeking clarification. He is clarifying to the person who sought clarification. Honourable Government Chief- Hon. Patrick, you will come.12.19THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, this House needs to recognise the fact that a bid is a competition among countries within Africa. Not only Uganda applied, but many African countries applied, and Uganda won the bid to host this competition and therefore, this is a vote of confidence in the Republic of Uganda. It is befitting that through this House, fellow countrymen and women get to know that the Rugby Union of Uganda, the Republic of Uganda and the National Resistance Movement will be hosting a competition at a continental level. So, that is the gist because the bid is a competition and our nation won.12.20MR PATRICK OSHABE (NUP, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you read the way the motion is stated, the motion is to pay tribute to the Government. If the motion was to pay tribute to the rugby union, we would be very comfortable, even for Andrew, to be the one to present it. However, if it is paying tribute to the Government, when the government ministers are here, then we do not understand why it is crafted this way when it is Andrew, the vice-[Mr Basalirwa] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12757THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024president of the rugby union- let us change the motion, Madam Speaker, so that Andrew fits in well. We should not appear as if we want to oppose the rugby union. Thank you. 12.21THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to my friend Hon. Nsamba and my brother, Hon. Ssemujju. If I have understood their concern, they are not comfortable that the motion is to pay tribute to the Government. However, you see, once the motion is Tabled, it will be put to vote. We will vote and you will make your nay heard and we will make our yes heard and then the Speaker will determine whether the motion to pay tribute to the Government passes or does not. I subsequently pray that we proceed with this motion.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what is important in this motion are the prayers because when you look at the motion, the prayers are that Parliament collectively congratulates. Where does this rugby club belong? Doesn’t it belong to the Government of Uganda?MR MAGOGO: Madam Speaker, I would like to provide the information again that whereas it is the rugby union that wins the bid, we cannot host without the Government guarantee. So, the Chief Whip guided very well that this is a competition and Uganda is a winner. The entity that is representing us is the Rugby Union but without the Government guaranteeing, then we cannot have this bid coming to Uganda. I beg to submit. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just like AFCON-FUFA won, but who guaranteed it? It was the Government of Uganda that guaranteed and even signed the documents of guarantee. When you hear Hon. Ssemujju talking like that, he is about to join the Government. (Laughter)  MR OULANYAH: I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and also thank my elder Hon. Ssemujju Nganda, for allowing me to proceed. Madam Speaker, for clarity, this motion is moved under Rule 56 of our Rules of Procedure:“WHEREAS Objective 17 of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, mandates the State to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;AND WHEREAS the Africa Cup is a two-year rugby union tournament involving the top 16 African nations organised by Rugby Africa, the administrative body for Rugby Unions in Africa, under the authority of World Rugby, which is the world governing body of rugby unions; RECALLING that the Africa Cup tournament was first held in 2000 with five teams taking part in the event and has been held ever since, with the last tournament being held in 2022; AWARE THAT, the Uganda Rugby Union, which is the body responsible for the management and development of rugby union in Uganda, submitted a bid to host the Rugby Africa Cup for the years 2024 and 2025 on behalf of the Republic of Uganda; NOTING THAT the bid was unanimously accepted by Rugby Africa and endorsed by World Rugby, giving Uganda the opportunity to host 2024 and 2025 editions of the Rugby Africa Cup;FURTHER NOTING that by hosting the Africa Cup in 2025, Uganda will also earn the right to host the Rugby World Cup qualifiers for the first time in the country’ s history, thereby improving Uganda’ s chances of qualifying for the Rugby World Cup based on home advantage and also the recent form of the Ugandan teams; COGNISANT of the benefits that will accrue to Uganda for hosting the 2024 and 2025 editions of the Rugby Africa Cup, including raising the global profile of Uganda, increased investment in sports infrastructure and social services, 12758THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024increased revenue and stimulating sport development as an economic and community development tool;NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that;i.  Parliament collectively congratulates the Government of Uganda for the successful bid to host the Rugby Africa Cup for the years 2024 and 2025;ii. 2. Parliament collectively congratulates the Uganda Rugby Union for their contribution towards a successful bid to host Rugby Africa Cup for the years 2024 and 2025;iii. And finally, Parliament urges the Government to provide Shs 2,546,276,000 to the Uganda Rugby Union for the preparations to host the Rugby Africa Cup slated to run from July 18th to July 29th, 2024 for this year’ s edition.” Madam Speaker, I beg to move. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Hon. Andrew, for the motion. Is the motion seconded? By Prof. Mushemeza, Hon. Tony - Tony what is your other name? By Afande, by the Leader of the Opposition, by the Prime Minister, the Government Chief Whip, the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Minister of Karamoja Affairs, the Minister of Education and Sports, the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities the Minister of Local Government, the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Budget, Hon. Magogo, Hon. Ssewanyana, Hon. Luttamaguzi, Hon. Nsamba, Hon. Ssimbwa, Hon. Hanifa Nabukeera - The whole House has supported this, including Hon. Ivan Kanyike. Would you like to speak to your motion and then we have it seconded?12.32MR ANDREW OULANYAH (NRM, Omoro County, Omoro) : Madam Speaker, on 28 October 2023, Uganda, through the Uganda Rugby Union expressed its interest in hosting the Africa Cup for two consecutive Years; 2024 and 2025. This presented an unprecedented opportunity for Uganda to host the most elite Rugby event in Africa, for two consecutive Years. In the edition of 2025, the tournament also doubles as a qualifier for the Rugby World Cup to be held in Australia in 2027.On 19 February 2024, Rugby Africa, after ratification and review of Uganda’s Readiness by the World Rugby, awarded hosting rights for 2024 and 2025 editions of Africa Cup to Uganda, ahead of Tunisia and Namibia.  The Africa Cup is the most prestigious 15th rugby tournament on the continent. I would like to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Uganda Rugby Union, to extend our appreciation to His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, the Minister of Education and Sports, World Rugby and Rugby Africa. We also extend our appreciation to you, Madam Speaker and this Parliament, for dedicating and committing your heart to the sports sector in this country.We thank the Minister of State for Education and Sports, in charge of Sports, the National Council of Sports, the Uganda Rugby Union which is here and all stakeholders who made this bid possible.  This is not just about rugby, but an opportunity for us to showcase the beauty of Uganda to the rest of the world. Many tourists are expected to come to Uganda, which is known for its hospitality, cultural diversity and breath-taking tourism destinations. This year’s Africa Cup edition will run from 18th to 29th July 2024, in Kampala. We extend our appreciation to the Ministry of Education and Sports, for making Mandela National Stadium-Namboole ready to host this rugby tournament in July. The eight participating countries in order of continental ranking are: Namibia, Kenya, Algeria, Zimbabwe, Uganda, Ivory Coast, Senegal and Burkina Faso. [Mr Oulanyah] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12759THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024Uganda, currently ranked 5th in Africa, is one of the forerunners, in not only winning this Year’s edition, but also qualifying for the 2027 Rugby world cup in Australia, not only because of the home advantage, but also because of the strategic initiatives that the rugby union has undertaken. For instance, Uganda Rugby Union has signed a memorandum of understanding with the Blue Bulls Harlequins  in South Africa, for strategic high-performance residential training of the selected national team players. We are also making use of the Teryet High Altitude training facility  in Kapchorwa, Sebei Subregion, under the Ministry of Education and Sports. The Uganda Rugby Union is committed to the realisation and delivery of the Africa Cup to showcase our country, while at the same time leveraging the existing infrastructure and the home advantage to not only lift the Africa Cup, but to also qualify for the Rugby World Cup. This year’s edition of Africa Cup however, requires funding, to the tune of Shs 2,546,276,000, to cater for the costs of accommodation, security, transport, medical, venue preparation, facilitation for official liaison officers and other incidental expenses. Further support will be required in 2025 as Uganda hosts the inaugural World Cup qualifiers. We therefore request the indulgence of this august House, to ensure the successful hosting of the tournament. I beg to move.  (Applause) THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Andrew Oulanya. Who is seconding? Hon. Basalirwa-12.32MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri):  Madam Speaker, I want to thank you and I stand to second the motion, moved by my brother. Rugby as a sport, is an area where we can take advantage as a country. Increasingly, it is a developing and very lucrative sport.Looking around, even in Africa here, some of the highest-paid sports personalities are in rugby. Cheslin Kolbe of South Africa, in a season, is earning about $1.1 million. For those of us who play rugby, a season has 10 months. If you look at the Gross Domestic Production (GDP)of this country, even the best Agriculturalist, a commercial farmer, cannot earn $1 million in a year. Globally, the highest-paid player in rugby, Finn Russell  from Scotland is earning about $1.3 million. That is about Shs 5 billion in a season of 10 months. Madam Speaker, winning the bid to host the rugby tournament in this country is an opportunity for two things; 1. To continue to showcase the country after the Africa Cup bid.2. An opportunity to popularise this sport. As I will indicate, when presenting the report on sports and what happens in the games-even in the East African Inter-Parliamentary games, there is a call to include rugby as one of the disciplines. I, therefore, beseech colleagues to consider the prayers in the motion. Fortunately, unlike other sports, rugby is not a very expensive sport to run. That is why even the figures there, are figures that by all stretch of imagination are manageable. I therefore beg to second the motion.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Dr Bhoka.12.35DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the presenter of the motion and the seconder and I add my voice to congratulate the Government of Uganda and the Uganda Rugby Union for the opportunity to host the tournament in Uganda. As we congratulate the Government and the Union, Rugby is perceived in this country as 12760THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024an elitist and centralised sport that is mainly played in urbanised communities. It is also my prayer that the Ministry of Education and Sports as well as the National Council of Sports and the Uganda Rugby Union, promotes rugby and makes it a sport played in West Nile, Karamoja, Kigezi, Rwenzori and across the country.We have also talked about investment in the infrastructure hub and software for promoting sports. As we congratulate the Uganda Rugby Union and the Government, it is my prayer that Government invests in sports facilities across the country including West Nile, where we have a stadium that has been developed through local initiatives. Not so far ago, there was a statement made on the Floor of Parliament, for the ministry of Education and National Council of Sports to consider supporting the initiative taken by engineer Joel Aita and his group to promote the facility in Arua, so that Arua and West Nile will be able to host such events. I beg to move. 12.37PROF. ELIJAH MUSHEMEZA (Inde -pendent, Sheema County South, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the mov -er of the motion approached me to second the motion, I accepted – and I do accept – to sec -ond the motion for both historical and econom -ic reasons.Rugby is a very interesting game to participate in, and even to watch. Thirty years ago, while at Makerere, I played rugby. I did not have the body mass at that time, but my skill was in the areas of speed, surprise and superiority. (Laughter)  For that historical reason, because the game is very interesting, I support the motion. Secondly, Madam Speaker, one of the challenges we have in executing our budget in this country is the cash flow. Any activity that brings in income to our economy should be welcomed. This Rugby Africa Cup is going to attract investors. It is going to attract making networks in the areas of trade and friendship. So, the investment is worth it. This is an area we can say has a high investment return. So, I request honourable members to support the motion and even the prayer of investing Shs 2.5 billion. Thank you.12.39MR TONNY AYOO (NRM, Kwania County, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank Hon. Andrew Ojok for presenting the motion, on behalf of Uganda Rugby Union. Rugby is one game that has not taken shape in this country. In most cases, it is played around Kampala. Even in schools, rugby is not played. Supporting this motion for the Government to accept, this time, to host the Rugby Africa Cup editions is one opportunity for rugby to be showcased and for the whole country to take interest in the game. Madam Speaker, the budget of the ministry, under sports, rose from Shs 17 billion to Shs 48 billion. Unfortunately, in the proposal this year, the budget has been reduced to Shs 43 billion. When the rugby union requests for additional funding for them to host this year’s tournament, this is now where Parliament should concentrate on to ensure that money is released, so that we can host without a lot of hurdles. Just this week, we pushed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide money for the completion of Namboole. So, as Parliament, we are going to endorse the motion to ensure that money is provided. I used not to like the game of rugby; I used to fear it. However, when I was invited two or three times, I even started following it on television because it is a smart and interesting game. When, with the Government Chief Whip, Hon. Denis Hamson Obua, I attended one game where Uganda was qualifying for the World Cup – at the Lugogo grounds – it so happened that it rained. The whole Kyadondo Rugby Grounds was flooded, yet we were hosting an African game. [Dr Bhoka] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12761THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024After the grounds flooded, they had to run all over the place looking for water pumps to start physically pumping water from the field, when we were all seeing. Unfortunately, the pumps failed. (Laughter)  I asked Hon. Obua, who was then the minister for sports: “Hon. Obua, you are the minister in charge of sports. Is this how much you are doing for rugby in the country?” Madam Speaker, Hon. Obua did not answer me. The only thing he told me was that we must make sure the facility for rugby is built in the country. You handed over to Hon. Ogwang. Hon. Ogwang, we are not going to continue using Namboole, which is for football and many other sports. We must have a ground for rugby built in the country. That is when our commitment, as the Government, is going to support this sport. I second the motion. Thank you, Madam Speaker.12.43MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to second the motion. I would like to thank the Government of Uganda and the Uganda Rugby Union for successfully winning the bid to host the 2024 and 2025 editions of the Rugby Africa Cup. I thank the Government because of the good environment that we have. That is why other countries have put confidence in us to host this game. The mover of the motion noted that our bid was unanimously accepted by Rugby Africa and endorsed by World Rugby. This is the trust that other countries and the whole continent have in Uganda. This signifies progress. It also signifies the confidence that we have been talking about, in Uganda. Most importantly, rugby has been regularly a male-dominated game worldwide. However, the Lady Rugby Cranes recently won gold medal at the All-Africa Games in Accra, Ghana, just after winning the Safari Sevens in Nairobi last year, ranking them number one in Africa and number four in the world. This is no mean achievement by the Ugandan ladies. Madam Speaker, the team is set to represent Uganda in Poland, Madrid, Monaco and in the World Challenger Series in the next two months, making them very good ambassadors of our country. Many times, our names are mentioned or known for bad reasons, for example, over corruption, human rights abuse and others. However, in rugby, we find our flag being held high in a good way and this can sanitise the country that we all want to enjoy. Thirdly, Madam Speaker, the Uganda Rugby Union has, within their own structures, been supporting the tournament. It is my humble consideration and prayer that the Government of Uganda, this time around, comes to support the team and the game, which will be played here.I would like to note that most of our female players come from the north and east. What about other areas of the country? For example, in western Uganda, we have very strong young girls there; the Bakiga are known for their strength. (Laughter)  It only requires us to tap the talents, which are enormous in this country.Madam Speaker, I would like to urge the Government, particularly the ministry for finance - I am looking around, but I do not see them. Many times, money is not released timely. It is my humble request that this time around, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives the rugby team money so that this milestone that is raising our flag high is realised with the rugby team.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. On top of the Bakiga, we also have the Banyankole. (Laughter)12.47MS KENNY AUMA (UPC, Woman Representative, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to thank the mover for the motion. Aware that the rugby cup tournament was first held in 2002, by hosting this tournament for 2024-2025, we will make the rugby tournament very popular in Uganda. I was one of the students who played rugby when I was in my secondary school, St Katherine, 12762THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024Lira. Most of the schools in Uganda do not play rugby, therefore, as one of the students who used to play rugby; a very interesting game, I request this Parliament, first, to include the rugby game in the East African games that we usually play as Members of Parliament. I will also be one of the people who will contribute and participate in playing rugby and represent Uganda at large. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mourine Osoru - 12.48MS MOURINE OSORU (NRM, Woman Representative, Arua) Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand in support of the motion. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you are going to speak for two minutes each. MS OSORU: I support the motion. Madam Speaker, sports in any form must be supported. THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker - THE SPEAKER: Whenever we go for the East African games, the cheerleading master is Hon. Ssemujju because he does not even know how to hold a ball. (Laughter) MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I have been playing number seven in the parliamentary team and even scoring; Hon. Peter Ogwang knows it. THE SPEAKER: Hon. Peter Ogwang, do you confirm everything? MR PETER OGWANG: No, I want to confirm that Hon. Ssemujju used to be our number seven and the lead striker is here. MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, I also stand to confirm that of recent- THE SPEAKER: Of recent - MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Only that he had a minor injury, but he is our reliable number seven. (Laughter)  On record, he has made many assists through crosses and he has won many duos for me to score. We therefore appreciate the contribution of Hon. Ssemujju. THE SPEAKER: As the Presiding Officer, in all the international games that Members go for, he always goes as the cheering chairperson and you have done a good job. (Laughter) MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, the biggest prayer in this motion is being submerged by the debate; that is a procedural issue. THE SPEAKER: No. MR SSEMUJJU: We have two months to go - THE SPEAKER: Listen. MR SSEMUJJU: If you can allow me to raise it - THE SPEAKER: Listen. I know what you want to raise and I am going to ask the Minister of Education and Sports to commit because it affects Article 93 of the Constitution. MR SSEMUJJU:  Can I raise it now? THE SPEAKER: Okay. MR SSEMUJJU : The biggest prayer I am seeing here is that the federation is pleading for Shs 2.5 billion to host a tournament that is two months away. I thought that the Government would immediately help us deal with that because the other day, we had the basketball team stranded in Rwanda; it had to be aided by Gen. Muhoozi Kainerugaba who sent Shs 90 million. Madam Speaker, before that matter is submerged by the debate of thanking the Government, His Excellency and the First Lady, the Minister of Education and Sports, can the Government help us deal with a specific issue to allow the team to prepare? Two months to go, they are pleading for money. [Ms Auma] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12763THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us first thank Gen. Muhoozi Kainerugaba for supporting the club in Rwanda. Join me to thank him. (Applause.)  This has come from Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju. MS OSORU: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, we should support all forms of sports in this country since it is mostly young people who are involved and the energies they are putting into these sports - I request the Government that we should not allow it to come to waste. As a culture in this House - we had the EAC Inter-Parliamentary Games in 2022 and last year, reports have never been laid on the Floor. I request the Chairperson Parliamentary Sports Club to bring us a report regarding our performances over the past two years. Secondly, when we were talking about sports, the Government talked about the construction of other stadiums. Madam Speaker, Ms Dorcus Inzikuru who comes from West Nile has been a golden girl. His Excellency promised that the West Nile would have a stadium in the name of Dorcus Inzikuru. To date, it has not surfaced. As we talk about rugby, I support that Parliament should give the Shs 2 billion, but also let us include Dorcus Inzikuru when the time comes because the ministry has only been talking about other stadiums forgetting the Inzikuru Stadium that has been there right from day one when she was a golden girl. Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, please take note. Can we have our medals and trophies from the chairman laid on the Table tomorrow? (Applause) 12.53THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): The medals - you have guided, but the chairman is looking at me with bold eyes; Chairman, Parliamentary Sports Club, that is yours. (Mr Basalirwa rose_) THE SPEAKER: Yes. 12.54MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, the report of the recently concluded games in Kigali is ready. Both individual and group medals are available and with your indulgence, they can be presented tomorrow. In Juba, the reason the report was not presented is that up to now, the disciplinary committee has never concluded some complaints; fortunately, Hon. Francis Mwijukye is a member. To date, in some disciplines, we do not even know who won what in Juba.  It is the reason we could not present an incomplete report because some results were missing. Fortunately, some of the disciplinary committee members are here. They might, at an appropriate time, have to answer why they slept on the job. THE SPEAKER: We shall have the one of Kigali first as we wait to hear from the disciplinary committee of South Sudan. Hon. Isaias Ssasaga and then Hon. Allan Ssewanyana. 12.55MR ISAIAS SSASAGA (FDC, Budadiri County East): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rugby is a growing game. It has been widely appreciated both in the primary and secondary schools. If you look at the recently concluded zonal games for secondary schools, you will see all schools in the region have been effectively participating in them; many schools have embraced rugby. The biggest challenge is that most of these institutions regionally do not have the standard required playgrounds. Rugby is a very delicate and sophisticated game; it involves the use of the whole body parts to play it. It is a physical game that stimulates the whole body, which is very good, but - (Interruption)-  yes, it does so. (Laughter.)  Maybe to clarify - THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow Hon. Isaias Ssasaga -  just know that he is a Mugisu. 12764THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024MR SSASAGA: Maybe if you look at the mental capabilities of the children who participate in rugby and their academic performance in schools, it is very good on record and you can go and check that. The biggest challenge is that most of these institutions do not have regional playgrounds. Because the game is very delicate, it requires a very soft ground, more or less like the carpet of this Parliament, and a well-drained playground. It requires a playground with any minimal stones. That is why I agree with the support of the Shs 2 billion to go and improve the existing playgrounds. I remember in 2016/2017, we had the National League of Rugby and it was postponed during heavy rains. Therefore, since we still have heavy rains now, there is no doubt that if the conditions are the same with the existing rugby grounds in Katabi, here in Namboole, Makerere, Uganda Christian University (UCU), the few ones that we have, if the conditions are the same, then we may not be able to host. My appeal to the honourable minister is that now that more primary and secondary schools have come on board to embrace and participate in rugby, do whatever it takes to ensure that at least zonal grounds are put up in every region of Uganda. This will encourage institutions to come up and participate because that is where we can get the young players who can come on board to play rugby for this country. Madam Speaker, somebody talked about the West not participating. If you go to the national team, which goes for the Federation of East African Secondary Schools Sports Association (FEASSSA) games, always for East Africa, to represent this country, you get children from all other parts of the country, including western Uganda. What is important is to facilitate the ministry to ensure the playgrounds and other logistics are in place to support those institutions. Thank you. 12.59MS NANCY ACORA (Independent, Woman Representative, Lamwo ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to congratulate the Government of the Republic of Uganda for having won the bid. However, the Ministry of Education and Sports should also put into consideration the fact that some of this budget that comes as an emergency should be planned for every financial year, to enable us work towards achieving some of this co-curriculum activities at school and at the national level. Parliament should not be put in this kind of emergency. Now that we are looking at Shs 2.5 billion and Uganda is limping economically, the taxpayers out there may think that Parliament always just approves anything and yet, these are some of the things that can make Uganda achieve Vision 2040. I beg to submit, and I beg my brother, Hon. Peter Ogwang, to consider this. Thank you. THE SPEAKER : Thank you. Hon. Allan? 1.00MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join this Parliament to congratulate the two rugby teams for winning the gold in Ghana and winning the hosting rights for the 2024 and 2025 editions of the African Rugby Union. I urge all Members of Parliament here to join in the race to promote rugby in this nation. The way you do football and netball is the same, as leaders, we should do rugby because rugby as a game, has promoted Uganda very highly. I remember when we went to the Commonwealth Games in Australia, our Rugby Sevens team performed very well. When we went to the All-Africa Games, it performed very well. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if your time gets over, do not switch on. MR SSEWANYANA:  Sorry, Madam Speaker, I had forgotten. MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12765THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024THE SPEAKER: You had forgotten because you have been away for some time. MR SSEWANYANA:  So the mind has forgotten so many things. Madam Speaker, I thank you for this additional time. We can also, as Members of Parliament, organise these tournaments in our regions in any way. That is how we will get concerned about the playing fields, and the nature of the game. By the way, one of the Members has said that it is a scary game. No, rugby is like any other game. It has its own rules and it is very comfortable being played. It is there in some schools and there is a tournament at the national level for schools from the Rugby Union. We can also enjoy it, organising it to ease work for the Rugby Union. Otherwise, I congratulate you because it is not easy to get All-Africa Games here. We have seen how we struggled in football with the Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON); up to now we do not have the qualities to organise AFCON. We are struggling with them, but you have the qualities before the Government could intervene. We thank you very much. Shs 2 billion is too little. We can order like they ordered for Shs 17 billion to be wired to your account tonight. That is how the Government will – (Member timed out.) THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member for Aruu –1.03MR CHRISTOPHER KOMAKECH (Independent, Aruu County, Pader):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to congratulate the Government of Uganda and the Uganda Rugby Union for holding our flag up high. This shines the name of Uganda with other countries like South Africa. Madam Speaker, with unemployment at 2.9 per cent in Uganda currently, with youth grappling with drug addiction at 60 per cent, I believe it is high time Uganda takes sports and Rugby as a mechanism of curbing unemployment. Rugby earns revenue for this country, and if the Government takes seriously the policy of employing youths in sports, and later on, these youths are employed within Government entities, it will lead to the reduction of drug abuse in the country and employment. Thank you so much for the opportunity. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Feta –1.03MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua City ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in congratulating the Government of Uganda and thank the mover of the motion, Hon. Andrew for bringing out the key issues that we need to do. Rugby is a game of bravery, speed and is a fun game. It is a game we need to promote as a country, and it is important that we put our appeal to the honourable minister to provide facilities across the country. We should have facilities in Western, Eastern, and Northern Uganda, and particularly West Nile, the only region with English names in this country. We brought to the attention of the minister the issue of Inzikuru Stadium, Barifa and that is a very key issue. Madam Speaker, you need to join us in reminding the honourable minister that Barifa was a pledge of the President and that the stadium has been hanging for very many years without a clear position of the Government on Inzikuru Stadium. It is high time, as we promote sports in this country, we should be able to do it across the region and we will be glad. A person like me would be a very good rugby player, honourable minister, I am sure you know. (Laughter)  Therefore, support us to support you in promoting sports. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Isaac Otimgiw - 1.06MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me way. I welcome the committee 12766THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024report, and I thank my honourable colleagues of the House for always standing up for the sports sector. We have continuously, over the years, increased the budget to the sports sector of this country because we want our fellow countrymen sportsmen to do well.I thank the National Council of Sports that rugby and Uganda motorsport were among the two federations whose budget was increased to Shs 3 billion in this financial year, so I thank them for making sure that was done. I do welcome the report and think that the Shs 2 billion should be provided on time so that all the preparations can be made so that we do not get the same problem that we are facing right now with other federations, like the hosting of AFCON. Thank you.1.07MR REMIGIO ACHIA  (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk):  Madam Speaker, I join my brother, Hon. Andrew and the House in thanking our Government. Hosting rugby is a vote of confidence in our country by the people of Africa and the world that Uganda is peaceful, calm and a place you can go. I think that is very good to hear.Madam Speaker, the Shs 2.5 billion is nothing –THE SPEAKER: The chairperson has spoken. MR ACHIA:  Madam Speaker, I think you should use the strategy you used for the Namboole to get that thing. I am supporting this motion for one thing. My eldest son is a very good player. I always go down to Lugogo, even when it rains, to watch them. At first, it scared me. I would get panicky seeing these people heaping on each other. However, these days, I see my son throwing them one by one and I think he has become very strong. One thing, which is missing is that we are holding this international event in two months. You have seen - when it is South Africa or Namibia hosting it, it is advertised. You get tired of watching it on DSTV or NTV . It is advertised internationally. Even when you reach a different country like when you saw AFCON in Cote d’Ivoire, it was all over the world – in the newspapers and television. How can we have this event - we have just learnt it is in two months today. It is an international event. We are going to miss the tourists. How are we going to get the money?Madam Speaker, we are blessed that now we have the facilities to have international conferences. Where is the marketing strategy in ministries when such an event has been accepted? Are we even marketing AFCON? I have not seen even us flying it on our Uganda Airlines, saying that we are hosting AFCON; Tuko pa moja , my brother -1.09MR FRANCIS LORIKA  (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Hon. Ojok for bringing this to the House. I want to inform this House that rugby is a very lucrative sport. It is a sport that attracts wealthy fans - people who spend a lot of money, and those who have the capacity to support our revenue base. It also attracts very many celebrities and so, I am glad that we have an opportunity to host this. I believe it will come with a lot of benefits. I also want to inform the Government that we are losing a lot because rugby has been left to private organisations and companies like Bell that advertise and get a lot out of it. It is time for us to take it up and support the game to nurture talent all over the country. Also, it is a sport that brings people together to make decisions collectively. That is what we need to push as a Government so that we can be able to learn to work in harmony and also keep our communities healthy.In terms of revenue, I believe we are going to benefit. That is why we need to put a lot of emphasis and resources into supporting this programme. Thank you.[Mr Otimgiw] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12767THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 20241.11MR BONIFACE OKOT  (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to congratulate the Government of Uganda for successfully winning this bid. In the year 2004, the mover of the motion, Hon. Andrew Ojok and myself joined St Mary’s College, Kisubi, where we played rugby. He was a very formidable rugby player. Around that time, there were just a few schools that were playing rugby. I want to say and also appreciate, that now when you look at the national schools competitions, you will notice that even schools that come from upcountry, even from the subregion that I come from, Lango; you find schools like Lango College and Comboni College are also formidable rugby playing schools now. What this means is that rugby is increasingly becoming a game of interest to many young people. It is an opportunity for us to provide meaningful employment for most of these young people. Secondly, Uganda, even with our minimum investment is the fifth ranking in Africa in rugby. Imagine we invested more than what we are investing now. It means that Uganda has a comparative advantage over many other countries in terms of rugby. I think that as a country, we should start investing reasonably in areas where we have a comparative advantage over all the other countries. Finally, this House constantly speaks about regional cooperation and unity. We are talking about the unity of Africa. I think the biggest unifier of all our people is sports – (Member timed out.)1.13MS HARRIET BUSINGE  (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to congratulate Uganda on the milestone. I too stand in support that the Shs 2.5 billion be provided to the Union. I remember when the Chief Government Whip was still in the ministry docket, some secondary schools got kits for rugby. I applaud you, sir. However, it appears as if that has faded because much as we are promoting rugby, it is within our knowledge that this is a game that is not common. It is not in the public domain. Personally, much as I am Member of Parliament, even if you took me to rugby, I would not know what to do. Our schools do not have that. In Runyoro-Rutooro they say, “akasojo kacumita kakyari kato,”  meaning that when it is still young, that is when it pierces the best.  (Laughter)  If we instil this in schools, then it is automatic. (Interjections)  Madam Speaker, people have loved the Runyoro thing. Clarification - that it is sharper when it is still young.  (Laughter)  So, let us instil - I know Hon. Solomon is trying to interpret it in his way. Definitely, I know that when I am talking about the young, he may not be in that bracket, but he is still trying to fix himself in there.Madam Speaker, I propose that the giving of rugby kits in secondary schools and probably primary schools continues. I also request our ministers that whenever you bring things like this and every time we have to fix it, we should have time to plan, kindly. (Member timed out.)1.15MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE  (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Buhweju, who are the champions of the Ankole Football Tournament, I support the motion. The honourable minister knows that I am a very good supporter of football and rugby and so when I speak, I know that rugby needs to be supported by all of us. Two, I also need to put the record straight. When my colleague said that the disciplinary committee slept on the job - Madam Speaker, you know that I have perfected all the assignments you have given me. I was a Commissioner here, I served very well. The people of Buhweju are very happy. 12768THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024On the issue of the disciplinary committee, we will be going to Arusha soon with the chairperson to come up with a report on South Sudan so that this thing is put to rest. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Mpindi - 1.16MR BUMALI MPINDI (Independent, PWD Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion and congratulate Uganda for the successful bid. I hear people praising Shs 2.5 billion being enough for a successful organisation of this event, but I want to put it on record that if this Parliament can, they should raise it because organising an event requires a lot of money. I also join those talking about advertising this event.THE SPEAKER:  So, you are saying that Shs 2.5 billion is not enough? MR MPINDI:  In my view, it is not enough. Because we get this event-THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Bumali, this is what they have asked for. How do you give what has not been asked for? Speak from an accountant’s perspective, somebody who knows figures.MR MPINDI:  We need to look at the broader picture of advertising. We get these chances, but these events are not advertised. I do not think that in their budget, they have captured the issue of advertising. This event may not come back soon, but we are not advertising for AFCON. These opportunities come once and they help us to advertise our country. That is why I am saying that the Shs 2.5 billion is not enough because it has no component of advertising. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Meddie -1.19MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Indepen -dent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also congratulate the sports fraternity and mainly the Rugby Union of Uganda and the ministry for having successfully acquired the rights and status to host the African Championship in the field of rugby. Rugby is a game that has been played in Uganda dominantly by St Mary’s College Kisubi (SMACK) and Buddo. I hear Namilyango, Mengo Senior Secondary School and many others. It is a game that has been associated with a lot of versatility from players. I agree, we have to do a lot in promotion of these games, but I would like to re-echo the point of Hon. Bumali Mpindi. From the background that we are going to host the 2027 AFCON, it would be very much important that we use this to attract the best out of Uganda as being (i) good hosts, (ii) the kindness of the people of Uganda. However, let us work on our infrastructure immediately, if we are to sell. Most of the countries that are going to participate in rugby are the same countries going to participate in the AFCON. So, if you have Egypt, Morocco these other countries qualifying and are going through these potholes, they will definitely send back a different message. First of all, we thank the Speaker, Parliament, the honourable minister and the UPDF because you warned us seriously not to touch this thing. I humbly request -THE SPEAKER:  Which thing?MR NSEREKO:  Which is okay, that button is now dangerous. I would like to implore my colleagues to use this as an opportunity to call upon Parliament, leaders and rally our countrymen about the event. Let us fly the flag, our national jerseys, the club jerseys of the Kobs, MTN, and whatever other clubs, to show the country that our national [Mr Mwijukye] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12769THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024team has been performing very well. Let us go and cheer them. However, if I may ask, how many of you even know the actual date that these events are going to be held? Honourable minister, can you clarify and give us an example of the starting team of rugby? (Interjections) - no, you name for us seven players that you know. I am honest –THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Linos wants to name for us.MR NSEREKO:  Hon. Linos, knows them. It is -(Interjections)-  you name them. Since the honourable minister cannot name seven rugby players, I know he can name the football players, but he cannot name rugby players because - okay, of the name of the coach? (Laughter)THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Jonathan?1.23MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Madam Speaker, I rise to support and endorse this motion in its entirety, but would like to state that prayer number three, which is urging the Government to urgently release Shs 2.5 billion is a big embarrassment on the side of Government. That Parliament is deliberating on a Motion to ask the Government to provide Shs 2.5 billion to the Uganda Rugby Union, shows a bit of laxity on the side of the Government. The first two players are okay, but this should go back to the minister responsible for sports, that in future, such requests should not even come here. It is something that can be handled outside Parliament. I have a feeling that by the time such a motion is moved, it means that there was a lack of goodwill on the side of the Government to facilitate this team. Secondly, I would like the mover of the motion and the minister to clarify when he makes the third prayer of Shs 2.546 billion - the heading of the motion talks about two editions; 2024 and 2025. Are we going to come back in 2025 with the same motion urging the Government to again provide that amount of money for that edition? If that is not the case, then an amendment should be proposed to prayer number three so that the amount of money that is required for both editions is captured in order not to return to where we are. I would also like to draw the attention of the Government to the flooding in the Bypass around Namboole - the venue for this tournament will be Namboole, but every time it rains, the entire roundabout connecting the bypass is submerged. It will be extremely embarrassing if that problem is not solved. I invite the people responsible to ensure that the drainage is worked on to avoid embarrassment when the visitors come. If it were allowed, there would be a fourth amendment; “Parliament urges the Government to invest in a phased manner more funds to the rugby sector to enable the country leverage on the benefits that will come with it.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Just for your information, this bid was won in February 2024; so it is not laxity on Government because it is not something that was won some time back. Hon. Linos, Dr Abed, -1.26MR LINOS NGOMPEK (NRM, Kibanda North County, Kiryandongo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion and congratulate our Rugby Union for excelling in international duties. We have always talked about sports when teams have gone out there and performed well, but eventually, after, we forget about talking about or mentioning sports in the House. I request Members to interest themselves in loving sports because sports bring many tourists to the country and promote our country to the outside world. Let us not commend them only when they have won something, but we should always talk about and promote sports. When we go to our constituencies and mention rugby – my 12770THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024sister from Hoima said that in Hoima, there is nothing like rugby, but there are different kinds of sports that we can promote and help our children to excel. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. That is the goalkeeper. 1.27DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like to add my voice in congratulating the Government and the Republic of Uganda on this wonderful achievement. However, there are some undertakings that we need to make, as a country to leverage these opportunities. We have had Non-Aligned Movement, the G-77+ China and very many other opportunities.About two years ago, the African Union started a programme; they call it “Single African Air Transport Market”. This is supposed to facilitate connectivity on the African continent. Today, 37 countries have signed. A total of 22 have even signed instruments of implementation. However, Uganda has not signed that agreement. We have many opportunities, but how are people going to come back to visit this country for tourism and trade when we do not facilitate or do what we are supposed to do? Recently, Madam Speaker, you sent us to Zambia. It took us the whole day to travel back. For more than 12 hours, you are flying from Lusaka to Entebbe. The Government cannot sign – and we are talking about Pan-Africanism! I would like the Ministry of Works and Transport to come to this Parliament and give the reason why Uganda has failed to sign this important instrument that is going to facilitate trade and connectivity.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. (Member rose_)  You are not going to start - you come running when the session has been – we started at 10.00 a.m. Shadow minister, you are my friend, but today, I am not allowing you to speak because I have been sitting here from 10.00 a.m., while you only wait for that particular time when your issue is coming up . (Laughter)I do not know whether voters have sent you people to come for just a minute and take off. What about us who sit here for the whole day? We have been here the whole day. FUFA?1.30MR MOSES MAGOGO (NRM, Budiope East County, Buyende):  Madam Speaker, I join colleagues to congratulate the Government of the Republic of Uganda and the Rugby Union for winning this bid. I would also like to say that these particular events that we are hosting are an opportunity for our country to bring in visitors. Therefore, we should treat them as Uganda hosting people who are coming to this country.I, therefore, implore the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiques to take interest in these matters. However, we look to be shooting in a different direction, as the sports people, while the ministry for tourism is completely not bothered about what is going on, yet we are bringing tourists. When they capture the figures of the visitors through the airport and residents in the hotels, they include people who have come here for sports. Secondly, I am a bit worried about the Shs 2.5 billion figure that has been raised by the Rugby Union to host Africa – eight countries for a competition of that level. Probably, they have included the details of the competition, but not the entire cost of hosting. I also implore the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – incidentally, sport is done on a calendar that we do not have control over. These funds should be released in time so that there is enough time to plan. When these funds are not released in time and then, we get into a competition and start running around, it becomes very difficult to plan for success. [Mr Ngompek] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12771THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024I would like to conclude by thanking the House for supporting sports. I am really excited that today we are discussing rugby. We have been discussing football all the time, but today, we have discussed rugby – and there are very many other sports disciplines. Honourable colleagues, thank you for supporting the sports sub-sector and the young people. I would like to conclude by thanking you, Madam Speaker, for being a converted sports enthusiast of this country. (Laughter)  If it had not been for you, we would probably not have been accorded this time to be discussing rugby, a sport that comes from a school that made me. (Laughter) Somebody was talking about schools. I did my high school in Namilyango, a school which is known for the sport of rugby. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students of Bugema University, Mbale. Please, stand up. You are most welcome. They are represented by Hon. Connie Galiwango and Hon. Seth Wambede. You are most welcome and thank you for coming. (Applause)Honourable members, hosting and supporting this sport comes with opportunities to this country, including promoting a positive image for the country. So, as Members of Parliament who love our people, love Uganda and speak about Uganda, we need to support sports because it is only sports that markets this country. However much you do not like Uganda, for now, speak about the sports and the sports will speak for Uganda. Uganda Rugby Union, I congratulate you for winning the bid and I congratulate Uganda. (Applause)Could we get a commitment from the minister - my little minister has really suffered? (Laughter) 1.34THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Madam Speaker, first of all, I begin by thanking Parliament for the support, which you are giving us, as the sportsmen and women of this country. I think we need to clap for ourselves. (Applause)I have a few observations to make in line with the discussion, which has taken place. Number one, I congratulate my brother, Hon. Andrew and the entire rugby leadership - I see the President, Deputy President and the entire Rugby Union leadership up there. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I request them to stand up for recognition. (Applause)Madam Speaker, ever since I joined the ministry, I have worked closely with the Uganda Rugby Union and that is the reason the leadership of the Rugby Union requested the Government to guarantee by writing a commitment letter, I did it, on behalf of the Government. No wonder, the Rugby Union of Africa agreed that we must be given the hosting rights for 2024 and 2025. So, that is the first commitment of the Government. Number two, when the renovation of Namboole was taking place – initially, it was athletics, football and other sports. Rugby was not included – and they are aware and can speak for themselves. When I came in, I implored both the consultant and the contractor to include all the measurements of the field to particularly take into account the rugby sport.Madam Speaker, I hardly request for a clap, but for this one, can Parliament clap for me for taking this initiative for the purposes of this sport? (Applause) As it happens, this sport has sold the country. I would like to talk about rugby. If there is any sport or federation that has sold Uganda the most, it is the Rugby Sevens because they fly the entire world. As you must have heard from one of our colleagues, they have a competition in Hong Kong, Monaco, Sydney, Australia, Uruguay, Dubai, name them and everywhere. I would like to thank Hon. Andrew and the leadership. That comes with a cost.12772THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024I would also like to thank the private sector, specifically, some of the companies that have invested in supporting sports in this country and it is the reason – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Allan is here saying they are not for the Council for East and Central Africa Football Associations (CECAFA) only. MR PETER OGWANG:  No, that one I want - THE SPEAKER:  First of all, I would like to inform you that my school is the best in the Uganda Secondary Schools Sports Association (USSSA) – Honourable minister, confirm. Isn’t it the best in volleyball?MR PETER OGWANG:  I confirm, Madam Speaker, that you are the defending champions of the Federation of East African –THE SPEAKER:  The Uganda while Amus College School is the best in football.MR PETER OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, you will head the team as it represents Uganda in Serbia. That is a by the way. THE SPEAKER: You see, Hon. Allan has been away for some time and so, he has forgotten. (Laughter)MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I have the following requests to the House:One, we are talking about Shs 2.5 billion for the Rugby Union, next financial year. I request that you support me with that budget in the Budget that is coming. I have no problem.Two, I have also received a request from the Uganda Golf Union because these are sports that bring big players with big money into the country and they can be viewed across the country.Three, I have a marathon. We are coming up with what we call the Kampala Marathon. Madam Speaker, I will come back to the House because in my considered view, if our children go to Boston, New York, Valencia, and Madrid - why not bring such opportunities to Uganda for purposes of marketing our country? As I conclude, I request -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, one thing that we need to confirm to you is that that amount of money is in the ministry’s budget estimates, not reallocation by Parliament. When we make the reallocation by Parliament, you are the same team that goes back to Cabinet and says “Parliament reallocated our money.” Put it in your budget estimates and we will give it to you in your ministry, but not as a reallocation.1.40MR MUHAMMED NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala City):  Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has talked about the Kampala Marathon and we really welcome that as leaders from Kampala, the Capital City of this country because we have had marathons in different cities. It is one of the things that is very attractive. Please, let us, therefore, work together on this so that we promote our Capital City and put it on the world map. I know Hon. Linos - and more consultations from our head of athletics – Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Can you conclude, honourable minister?MR OGWANG:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course, on a sad note, as one of the honourable colleagues mentioned here, we get what we call ceilings. Already, I have about Shs 4 billion less than the Shs 48 billion I have been having because of the ceiling that came from finance. When I get less than Shs 4 billion, it entirely goes to the subventions. What are the subventions? This is the money I directly send to the respective federations to support sports for sports development in the country. That is what brings me to the House.Therefore, I again appeal to you for purposes of supporting this specific activity -  Let us work together to ensure that Shs 2.5 billion that has been requested is incorporated into the National Council of Sports in next year’s budget.[Mr Ogwang] MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION12773THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 2024Last, but not least, is about the facilities. Honourable colleagues, we should not just talk if we do not all get together to provide money for infrastructural development. Our message to all of us is that if we have talent – our challenge has been investing in sports infrastructure so I call upon us to look at how much we put into sports infrastructural development every year. For instance, the budget for the NCS for infrastructural development is Shs 1.5 billion. What miracle can Shs 1.5 billion do? The power to appropriate is vested in you, so mine is to call upon you. We have the talent; so can we invest more in terms of sports infrastructure? Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, the power to appropriate is with us, but the power to decide on what comes for appropriation is with the ministries. Therefore, bring it from your ministry and we shall appropriate it. We cannot be the ones to cook for you and serve at the same time.MR OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, most obliged. I thank you all and I congratulate the Rugby Union for the support and the motion, which my brother, Hon. Andrew Ojok has moved in this House. I thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Andrew and everyone, thank you. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport, yesterday, we visited Namboole, but there is a road that has small patches that need to be worked on. I request that you get time and go there with the Ministry of Education and Sports and see how best you can work on it.MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, this road is from Bweyogerere coming towards Jokas Hotel and back to Kireka. It is a ring road. I would like to implore that for purposes of AFCON, it is included as a project for us to work on. It is from Bweyogerere and it runs behind the stadium. THE SPEAKER:  I have said go and visit the road. That is one. Honourable Minister of Works and Transport in charge of roads, for the Kampala-Jinja Highway, we agreed that we do not have a road. At least, patch the potholes because you cannot tell whether there is a pothole or not. It is in a terrible state. Give us an assurance on that road.1.45THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Gen. Edward Katumba Wamala):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a contractor right now on that road and as I speak, he is concentrating on the Njeru sector. From Mbiko to Njeru near Nile Breweries, there has been a very bad spot and he is concentrating there. Definitely, once that is done, he will come back because he is on that road full-time; from Mukono up to the end.The only challenge, of course, which I told you earlier, is my not paying the contractor. THE SPEAKER:  But we need that road to be worked on.GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA:  I even sent my concerns to my Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. THE SPEAKER:  No, we need this road to be worked on.GEN. KATUMBA WAMALA:  But there is a contractor on the road.THE SPEAKER:  Okay, but we need to see the results as soon as possible because we cannot afford to move on a road as terrible as that. Thank you. I now put the question that the Motion for the Resolution of Parliament to pay Tribute to the Government of Uganda for a successful bid to host the 2024/2025 edition of Rugby Africa Cup, be adopted by this Honourable House. (Question put and agreed to.)Motion adopted.12774THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024BILLS SECOND READINGTHE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we have a Bill on the Karamoja Development Association for repeal, 2024, but I have also got information that all the Ministers of Karamoja are new and have not harmonised with the Members of Karamoja.  I am requesting that we give these people time to harmonise and come up with a position on Karamoja Development Agency (KDA). Then they will report to that effect. What do you think, Government Chief Whip? 1.48THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua):  Madam Speaker, we would have no objection because in the mini reshuffle, all the two ministers superintending over Karamoja were dropped and we have two brand new ministers. I pray in the circumstances you give them the opportunity to peruse through the Bill and also have an understanding. The Bill is due for repeal of KDA. Thank you. THE SPEAKER : Thank you. What are you standing for? 1.49 MR ABRAHAMS LOKII (NRM, Jie County, Kotido):  Madam Speaker, I rise under Rule 142 of our Rules of Procedure, which talks about petitions. I recall that on 20th February, a petition relating to the repeal of the KDA Act was presented to your office. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, you want to discuss what we have said should be handled first. MR ABRAHAMS LOKII:  I thought by referring to the Rules of Procedure, the petition must be tabled and committed to a committee. That is basically what I am appealing for. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  This is a Government Bill. Hon. Ogwang-MR PETER OGWANG:  Madam Speaker, I want to implore my colleague to accept the advice, which you have given because, as you are aware, the Government has come with a position that this specific agency should be repealed. For purposes of making our colleagues to understand, maybe they better put a good justification for them to return the Bill before Cabinet. I want to appeal to you, my brother, I think this is a leeway that you be part of the team, which is going to engage the two new ministers for the purpose of us looking at the way forward as far as this concerns.  I would like to implore you to let us work with senior elder and the Chairman of Ateker Clan who is now a minister and my sister here. I thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Members of Karamoja Parliamentary Group were invited in the committee. Not so, chairperson? I am giving you a soft landing, you want to make it hard.  Hon. Achia, sit down. Why are you people spoiling your own thing? 1.51 MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, the honourable members and professionals from Karamoja Sub-region appeared before our committee and, therefore, their submissions are part of our report. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable members, the two ministers of Karamoja - go back and sit and agree on the position. You even said you want to meet the President over this.  I am giving you time. Instead of appreciating the time being given, you are just- Honourable members in the public gallery, we have students of Kyanja High School, Mpigi District; you are most welcome. Please, stand up and we see you. They are represented by Hon.  Teddy Nambooze and Hon.  Hillary Kiyaga Innocent “Hilderman”. You are most welcome. Thank you so much for coming. 12775THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA TUESDAY , 16 APRIL 20241.52 MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):   Madam Speaker, I would like to weigh in on the matter raised by the honourable colleague from Karamoja. As I heard, a petition was presented to you and under our rules, you have the discretion to refer the petition to the line minister or to the committee. The petition has, however, to be received formally as part of business of this House. In the circumstances that you have guided, I wanted to implore you to allow the petition to be briefly presented and then, the reference can be made so that this House does not stand in any way of the interest raised in the petition.  Then the committee can process and bring the report once and for all. THE SPEAKER:  You are welcome. 1.54  MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nabilatuk): Madam Speaker, with due respect to my Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs, it is true that we appeared before the Committee on Presidential Affairs as Karamoja Parliamentary Group, and other witnesses also appeared, but as I recall, there was no petition presented formally to the committee. THE SPEAKER: He says the petition was presented to me. MR ACHIA:  The matter before us, I think that since you have given us this window of harmonisation, we will come back to you to handle that. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  By the way, there was no petition. They came to talk to me as “ Ateker ” – (Laughter)  - and we agreed. There was no petition. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Kinaawa High School, Kawempe District, represented by Hon. Ssegirinya Muhammad and Hon. Malende Shamim. You are most welcome. Thank you for coming. Welcome. Honourable members, can I hear from the Government Chief Whip? All the business we have is your business. We have 38 Bills. We will not handle any other thing apart from the Bills. Can I hear from you in terms of the availability of your Members? First of all, I am happy that the ministers today have been more than usual. Can I hear from you? 1.56THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Denis Obua):  Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for this morning that has led us into this afternoon. I would like to state that under Rule 112, every Member of this House is enjoined to attend Sittings of the House unless leave of absence has been granted to him or her by the Speaker. Secondly, Rule 112(5), states, “In exceptional cases, the Whip of a political organisation or a political party may inform the Speaker of a Member’ s absence and the circumstances leading to such absence.”  As Government Chief Whip and the Chairperson of the National Resistance Movement Parliamentary Caucus, I have not received any notification from any Member of the NRM, and therefore, I expect all Members subscribing to the NRM to personally attend to all businesses of the House. Therefore, I notify my Members on the Floor that we should be in the House because Bills introduced by the Government will require a quorum. I pray that the Whip on the other side should equally be compelled to do the same because I can see many blank spaces. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Based on that, Government Chief Whip, I expect all your Members in the House tomorrow at 10.00 a.m. I will want to see a list of your Members that have attended. Hon. Justine said that she will come even at 8.00 a.m.12776THE KARAMOJA DEVELOPMENT AGENCY (REPEAL) BILL, 2024MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, since you, as the custodian of the rules has directed, I pray and also expect all our Members to be in the House. Therefore, we shall endeavour as an office to notify all our members to be physically present in the House tomorrow at exactly 10.00 a.m.THE SPEAKER:  Please remember that we have 38 Bills to pass and we must pass all of them. I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.(The House rose at 1.59 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 17 April 2024 at 10.00 a.m.)