Tuesday, 17 April 2012

Parliament met at 2.42 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Today, we should work expeditiously to finish all the items which are on the Order Paper because we surrendered one day to a national cause last week, and I want to thank you for sending off Professor Kakoma in a dignified manner. So, today I will be very strict on time. However, there were some issues some Members thought were burning in their constituencies which need attention; each of you should use one minute.

2.43
MR BAKER SSALI (NRM, Buikwe west, Buikwe): Madam Speaker, I want to put to your attention the fact that during the IPU conference, the people of Buikwe District did not enjoy it very much because they were attacked by some big caterpillars. The reason why they were attacked is because Mabira forest has few trees and those caterpillars live on those trees down there, but now they ended up eating food in people’s gardens. They have eaten cassava, potatoes and all the crops that are there. 

We reported this issue to the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Disaster Preparedness, but we only got 50 litres of insecticide which was not enough for the whole district. Fortunately enough, the rain came and they have helped us to kill those caterpillars. 

My prayer is that Government should come to our rescue and provide feeds and other farm implements to our farmers - some of the people had received feeds from the NAADS programme - because they have lost all the crops; they have nothing to plant during the rainy season.

MR BAKALUBA: Thank you very much honourable member for giving way. As he has mentioned, in Buikwe District, it also happened in Mukono District. My constituency was also affected by these big caterpillars. They destroyed banana plantations, cassava, maize, beans and everything. Our prayer is that Government should come in to assist with crops to enable to us replant once again. 

A school of about 400 students has closed because of these big caterpillars. Government should come in and find out the cause of these caterpillars. Is it Mabira forest which was destroyed and other forests around or there is something else?

2.46
MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga South, Kampala): Madam Speaker, over a month ago, I stood here and raised a matter of public concern after being reliably informed that Uganda Museum, the centre of Uganda’s cultural heritage, was in danger of being demolished after the sale of the land on which it sits. The Leader of Government Business was directed to report back within a week, which has long passed. He has not reported up to now. 

In the same deliberations, Members raised concerns about the reluctance of Government to make available reports on various big fires which affected Budo Junior School, Kasubi Tombs, Kanungu and Kicwamba. The Leader of Government Business assured this House that the respective reports would be made available. Since his pronouncement, we have not heard any news to that effect and the people we represent would like to hear what exactly happened. I would like to know what is happening from Government side.

2.48
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): I rise here to raise a matter of national importance. In West Nile, there is a problem of boarders affecting about four districts; Yumbe, Moyo, Koboko and Arua, and you are already aware about others which were raised in this House before such as Adjumani and Amuru. 

We would like to appeal to you to help the people by asking Government, particularly the ministers of Local Government and Lands, to go down there and solve the problems of the border because right now the situation is so bad. People from Yumbe came and displaced people from three villages in Moyo.

MR ATIKU: The issue concerning borders of districts in West Nile has got a long history which we shall not exhaust here. In 2003, a similar thing happened in Arua, where houses were burnt; people were shot with arrows; and a similar thing is actually cropping up. 

This morning, somebody called me from Arua and informed me that people were planning to lay roadblocks within West Nile. For instance, hon. Fungaroo who is talking here, will find it difficult to pass via Arua-Yumbe to Obongi and yet that is the only route he takes to his constituency. It is really very important that Parliament comes up, first, to pronounce itself about this matter, and we hope that it will be addressed such that people can calm down. 

We as West Nile MPs think that maybe in the near future, you grant us leave so that we go on ground to assure them that something is being done. That needs to be done immediately if possible. Otherwise the situation is not good; you will hear that some of us have been lynched because when we are going to our constituencies, we pass through different constituencies. It is not good to hear that people on the ground are preparing to lynch one of us or putting our lives in danger.

MR FUNGAROO: To pick it from there, today, 77 heads of cattle were snatched from Obongi and brought to Yumbe; 15 people were arrested on their own land while grazing cattle. They were arrested by the people of Yumbe, brought to the Police, after being badly beaten; phones and money were taken. The Police in Yumbe has failed in its role as a Police Force in Uganda because most of them are also sons of Yumbe; they behave like the ordinary people. 

The risk he has talked about is true; Yumbe people have ever burnt houses in Arua, and they have burnt three houses in a place called Ewanga, which they want to annex to Yumbe. If we create new districts, it should not only be the pronouncement made that a district has been created called Yumbe or Moyo, but the actual boundaries should be made. There is a plan in Yumbe to bring a motion here to increase the number of constituencies for Yumbe. Now they want to increase the area by getting some from Koboko, Arua and Moyo so that when they come to you to request for new constituencies, they have a justification to say that we have a big population, give us another constituency. So, help us solve this problem and restore peace for the people of West Nile and Uganda at large.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you Madam Speaker for the opportunity. The issue of border conflicts is degenerating into insecurity. You find that in Koboko our land starts from either side of Maracha and Yumbe.

The Maracha people have claimed a whole village in Mt Lirru. Mt Lirru has been a cultural mountain for Koboko. When a baby is born, the umbilical cord is brought out and shown to Lirru. That is our source of identity and also wisdom, but the Maracha people are claiming it and yet the boundaries are very clear.  I would like the ministers of Lands and Local Government to come to our rescue. 

In 2010, one person was shot with a bow and arrow; luckily enough he got cured. In 2011, the same thing happened. When it comes to a planting season like this, they come to grab that land in Koboko. So, the issue is serious.

The same is happening on the side of Yumbe, we have a health centre in a place called Najipara Parish in Koboko. People of Yumbe are claiming it to be in their land. So, the issue is very serious. I have been to the Minister of Lands and was sent to that of Local Government, and they sent me back to that of Lands. I do not know who is supposed to help us so that people from Entebbe can go and demarcate those original boundaries.

What brought confusion, when we returned from exile, the UNCHR decided to make its own boundaries for distributing relief and now people of Yumbe and Maracha think that now those are the boundaries. That is how we are suffering; the issue is not only in Koboko; there is a problem between Arua and Rhino camp; Arua and Yumbe; everywhere. We would like to urge the Ministry of Lands and that of Local Government to come to our aid to solve this problem once and for all. When I was campaigning, they said “Baba Diri, if you do not solve this problem, there is no third term for you.”  

2.55
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Fort Portal): I am rising on an issue of national importance, concerning the plight of the former Internal Security Organisation staff. Eighty hundred of them, between 1992/1995, they were laid off from work and they demanded for their terminal benefits; they moved to the courts of laws. The court awarded them their terminal benefits and up to today, they have not been catered for despite the demands, notices and even reminders to the office of the Attorney-General; nothing has been done for these people.

I am wondering about the behaviour of the officer of the Attorney General in this regard. I know very well that we have seen a lot of complications being given to other individuals, but imagine Internal Security individuals who really touch on security! Is the intention of the Attorney-General to cause insecurity in this country by denying these individuals their hard-earned pension? I need an explanation because we cannot continue like this. These are junior people, but they deserve their pay. 

Today, I came with the badge, “Justice for all” and you launched this project Rt. Hon. Speaker. I feel happy today to stand on behalf of these individuals whose privileges have been denied.
Their families have suffered; they cannot educate their children; already 150 of them have died without getting their benefit; and nothing has been done.  I need an explanation, and allow me to lay on Table a petition of these 800 former employees of ISO.

Madam Speaker, what I am laying on Table is a petition from the office of the representatives of former ISO employees and it is headed, “RE: Unpaid Terminal Benefits of Former ISO Staff Retired 1992-1995.” It is signed by their chairperson, Jeff Lawrence Kiwanuka, the secretary Kamugisha Bernard, and Kitandwe Jamal, their coordinator. I lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Rt. Hon. Prime Minister there are issues of the caterpillars in Buikwe and Mukono and they are seeking for seeds. There are issues of land in West Nile. Every week we seem to be getting a complaint from there. Now it is bigger than what we had last week. I do not know what the Attorney-General is doing now that the financial year is ending. When will he pay these people? Can we have some answers quickly?

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: I have three responsible ministers; for example, on the issue of border conflicts, the Minister of Lands is here. On caterpillars, the Minister of Agriculture is also here  and on Internal Security, the paper has been laid. On various reports that have not come, I want to assure my colleague that we are working hard to bring the reports. A lot of interruption has taken place probably that is why some changes -(Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, with due respect to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this House demanded for a comprehensive report on the fires that have gutted those places. It also demanded for an express report on the reliable information I received as a Shadow Minister of Water and Environment over the planned sale and disposal of the Uganda Museum, the centre of heritage for the Ugandan nation. We are not joking here, we need seriousness. (Laughter)

LT GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I do not appear to be joking. I do not know. (Laughter) Generals do not joke by the way. You better know. (Laughter) I am saying, and I am serious, that all the reports you are asking about are being worked upon and report on the museum will also be brought. I was telling you when you interrupted that as of the last two weeks, there were so many interruptions that were unforeseen. Therefore, it is likely that it caused a delay of these reports. So, I would urge my colleague to be a bit patient and bare with us that we shall bring the reports. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Daudi Migereko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is true we have received unprecedented reports in regard to conflicts involving particularly the new districts. This is something we had not foreseen, but we have come up with a plan involving Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, Local Government and Internal Affairs to move on the ground and try to make sure that we comprehensively deal with the issues that are causing the conflicts involving communities in these areas.  For instance, on the 6th of May, we shall be in Katakwi and Napak together with the Ministry for Karamoja Affairs and thereafter, we are supposed to be in the Acholi-Adjumani area and all these other areas we are going to cover them.

What is happening is really unprecedented and we need to move on the ground as fast as we can, and I want to make an appeal to the political leaders who appear to have authority over these people to help us reign on these people. Hon. Wadri, I know you can help us with some of -(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I wish to thank hon. Daudi Migereko, the Minister for Lands. Mr Minister, we do appreciate the concerns that you are expressing in matters of border conflicts. There are some border conflicts which have lasted for more than five years. Your ministry officials, especially the Commissioner for Mapping and Surveys, has even gone on the ground, opened the border posts, but you have not, in liaison with Ministry of Local Government gone ahead on the ground to officially declare the official boundaries. 

The point I am talking about - my brother hon. Bernard Atiku will bear with me. He was a councillor in Arua District Local Council; there was a conflict between Terego and Madi-Okollo, which was very bloody and even matters went to court, and this has been on since 1999, even before I came here. These documents are available, but when will you, Mr Minister, in liaison with Ministry of Local Government, go on the ground and say, “You people, do not fight. The official boundary as established by the GPS is this”, so that we put people to rest. Otherwise, people have lost property; people have lost lives; and the sooner you came with your official documents and with all those technical reports of the Commissioner for Surveys and Mapping, the more it will be useful. 

The problem between Madi-Okollo and Vurra is there. People are on one another’s neck. So, really, you need to come on the ground, leave alone what is happening between Maracha and Koboko, and between Yumbe and Moyo. These are really issues which even we as Members of West Nile Parliamentary Group are concerned about. We have met and deliberated on this a number of times and even this evening, we are again going to sit to talk about this. But please, as Government, come to the rescue of these people. Go and explain issues much as we may be able to help you in appealing to our people. I think it is more important that as a ministry you come up as an arm of the Executive to give assurance to the people. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable minister, please can we urge you to act expeditiously. I do not want to hear that my Members were killed as they were travelling to their constituencies. I cannot afford to fly them; they must drive, so you have to solve the problem.

In the meantime, I will ask the Clerk to make an adjustment in the terms of reference for our Committee on Physical Infrastructure to add these areas so that they also bring us a report when we come to receive your report. We should also have the position of Parliament.

3.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Prof. Zerubabel Nyiira): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, it is true, over the last few weeks, there has been a problem of caterpillars. These caterpillars are very much known to occur during the time when the weather is very dry, and especially after the burning of grass, because these caterpillars which are attacking the food crops are actually forest pests. 

When the burning of grass has taken place and the forests have been denuded, they try to find where to get food from. Therefore, the concern that has been around is actually the caterpillars, which are either army worms or the caterpillars which attack forest plants. 

Now, the Ministry of Agriculture, having received - in fact the honourable colleague who brought up this issue, in his constituency, is where we first heard the report of the caterpillars which ate the forest trees and eventually were able to attack the crops themselves. 

Now, the Ministry of Agriculture was able to come and discuss this matter by advising the people on TV, on radio and giving them advice to allay the fears that they have. The most important part is because they appear during a time when the grass is sprouting, and when the rains are not there. The moment the rains come, the caterpillars become moths and butterflies and eventually, they disappear back into the forests. Therefore, much as there has been this fear of national concern, definitely, within another one week or two of the rains coming back, we should see these caterpillars disappearing.

In the meantime, the Ministry of Agriculture has been able to supply chemicals, which the farmers spray along the forest lines to be able to ensure that the caterpillars do not move into the gardens, and a number of districts have received -

THE SPEAKER: Prof. Nyiira, you know they were asking for seeds. They said all their crops had been eaten. They wanted your ministry to give them seeds. That is what they are asking for.

PROF NYIIRA: If they are asking for seeds, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the request can actually be passed over to our ministry and we can see how much we can assist through NAADS.

THE SPEAKER: Please, present your request. Hasn’t the Attorney- General come on the issue of 800 ex-ISO workers? Minister for Security. 

3.10
THE MINISTER FOR SECURITY (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament. It is true, the matter raised by hon. Ruhunda is true. There was a court ruling to award the former Members of the Internal Security Organisation terminal benefits. The court ruling was very rightly lodged in the office of the Attorney-General. 

One time, I enquired about the progress or action taken about this court ruling. The Attorney-General told me they had received it, but there were the usual problems of budgetary constraints and were working on that issue so that the ex-members of the Internal Security Organisation are paid what is due to them. 

The matter raised by hon. Ruhunda is true. Those members deserve the payment because they worked for it and hopefully, the Attorney-General working with Finance, will expedite it. We hope we do not have this perennial problem of under-funding certain sections, so that important people in our society, are not subjected to undue suffering and duress. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Can I, therefore, instruct our Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, which oversees that sector, to see what is happening and report to us.

3.12
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not a beneficiary -(Laughter)- but I am very familiar and concerned about this issue. I just wanted to thank the honourable minister for giving the good news that Government is ready to pay these poor, patriotic sons and daughters of Uganda because they have been waiting. Of course, interest has been accruing and I have been involved in my capacity as an advocate, handling these matters. I will follow up the matter with the minister and the Attorney-General to settle this once and for all. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Item No.3.	
 
MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF 
THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE 
SUPPLEMENTARY SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, this matter had been presented; we had a debate and were about to conclude. 

3.13
MR ACHIA REMIGIO (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, we received the Report of the Budget Committee on the Supplementary Schedule No.1 for the Financial Year 2011/2012 and what remains is the debate and adoption of the report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Didn’t we have a debate? (Interjections) We did. We debated it and we were about to vote. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, we never voted. We were trying to raise the issue of the authenticity of the minority report. After the other side realising that they were defeated; they raised the issue of quorum. You advised your clerks at Table to determine the quorum, then adjourned. You suspended the item and adjourned the sitting. Personally, I had issues I wanted to put right in the report.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, two minutes.

3.15
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you. Madam Speaker, when you go to page 8 of the report; it is not “Internal Security Organisation”, it is “External Security Organisation” because the Internal Security Organisation operates under Vote 001. It does not have an independent vote. That is a correction we can make in the report.

I want to support the request of the Supplementary Schedule No.1, particularly concerning Vote 159 because the issue of terrorism is becoming a reality and a serious threat every day of our lives. When we see Government agencies demanding for money to at least help the citizens not to fall victim of these terrorists, as Members of Parliament who represent them, the only option we have is to say, “Yes, go and carry out the job.” 

You remember what happened on the ground; after members of security were put to task, they said they were not well-facilitated and it was not easy to detect these terrorists. I have been reliably informed as the Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs that the terrorists, particularly on the sub-Saharan soil, are using Uganda as a route to other African countries. When they demand for this money, my committee sees it wise to support them and I, as a person, will not only support but also vote for it. Thank you very much.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, I think we need to be guided. First of all, there was an issue raised that we could not proceed because there was no quorum; indicating that the debate had taken place exhaustively -(Interjections)- and we were remaining with final solutions. Otherwise, there is no way one can raise the issue of quorum during the process of debating. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, leave me do my work. 

DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I want to raise an issue on Vote 137 - Mbarara University of Science and Technology, where the Ministry of Education wants Shs 0.090 billion to raise salaries for Cuban professors in Uganda.

Mbarara University was begun with the help of Cuban professors. But right now as we talk, the number of Cubans in Mbarara University has gone very low, but the number of blacks or Ugandans is a bit high. Remember that we are losing a variety of - you remember we wanted to increase salaries of Cuban professors from US$ 700 to US$ 1500 when Ugandan professors in Mbarara are neglected. When will Uganda ever think of increasing the salaries of fellow blacks? I am of the view that this thing is frustrated because the moment they increase salaries for the Cubans, the blacks will go to Rwanda. Now, when the Cubans go back, who will run Mbarara University of Science and Technology?

The good thing is that the Clerk to Parliament was in Mbarara University of Science and Technology and she knows what is going on in Mbarara. Honestly, let us learn to treat our own blacks like we do the whites. Why should you increase the allowances for houses and you forget the blacks?

In Mbarara, Rt. Hon. Speaker, you were Chairperson of the council; I saw you there. The Cubans have got houses. The Cubans have their electricity paid for; they even pay for their water. But the blacks must rent from outside. 

I am very disappointed to see that the Minister of Education, hon. Bakkabulindi, is thinking about increasing salaries for the Cubans and forgetting his brothers, the blacks, like me. This is dangerous. Thank you.

3.23
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a problem with the way supplementaries are brought to this House. The Constitution is very clear, particularly when we look at Article 93. But when you look at the Budget Act, Section 12, and also look at the Financial Regulations Act, Section 38, there is a big contradiction. 

I understand what is brought here has already been spent. Yet there is a procedure under section 38 of the Financial Regulations. I would like the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance to explain to us how this is being done. It is brought here hurriedly and it is passed when actually what we are doing is not in conformity with the law. So, I need the advice of the Attorney-General. If I am wrong, I seek guidance, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Well, we shall ask the Attorney-General to guide us in the future. Now,  hon. Alaso and then hon. Okot.

3.24 
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My understanding of the spirit of supplementary budgeting is that it is premised largely on unforeseeable circumstances. In the case of this schedule we are dealing with, one of the unforeseeable circumstances was the nodding disease in Northern Uganda.

Therefore, my expectation is that to agree with the spirit of supplementary budgeting, it should have been a request from the Ministry of Health to deal with the unforeseen problem of the Nodding Disease. That should have got a supplementary allocation rather than the State House budget which was foreseeable; capital and recurrent, which have gone up by a factor of over 150 percent. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore this House – if we as Parliament of Uganda cannot find money for those children who are nodding and are tired under trees with their saliva oozing out of their mouths and they are dying unattended to, who else in this country will find money for those children? 

Secondly, on the question of the PRDP, I am shocked by the proposal of Government to use PRDP funds for assessments of compensation. This is against the spirit of the PRDP; PRDP is an affirmative provision for a region that has gone through war for the last 20 years. You cannot take away from the needy to give to the rich. This is the warning the prophet gave to David when the committed adultery –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let her finish the issue of the wife; just half a minute.

MS ALASO: Yes, by picking Uriah’s wife, David sinned and there was judgement on David and the entire nation. So, I would like to implore this House not to pick from the people who have suffered the war in Northern Uganda. Do not ignore the suffering children of Northern Uganda. That is not justice; that is not fair. God forbid, He will judge us harshly if we do that.

3.26
MR JOHN AMOS OKOT (NRM Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this report, it has been indicated that Shs 20 billion has been released to compensate some few from Kitgum, Lira and Apac –(Interruption)

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, hon. Okot is a Member of this committee and our rules are clear on that matter -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is really a common issue. Why do you stand; what are you defending? It is already your report; it is other Members to debate your report not you. I have said that many times; if you are part of the committee you do not debate.

3.27
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The supplementary budget was presented almost two months ago, being the 17 April 2012, and the presentation was done on the 16th February. It is my humble opinion that we as Parliament get a speedier way of disposing of issues. 

Madam Speaker, supposing somebody was to get money for treatment out of this supplementary budget, will his/her health wait this long? Just like the case of the Nodding Disease that we are talking about. Better still, for the case of Wacha-Olwol, the former titular head of state, who in his statement presented to this Parliament on 15 March 2012, the Leader of Government Business said ex-gratia should be paid to Wacha-Olwol as soon as possible given the fact that Wacha-Olwol is currently very sick and old. I expected this to be reflected in this supplementary budget No.1 or will it come in the supplementary schedule No.2? 

On the issue of the Nodding Disease, the report says, supplementary has on one ground emergency. But the way the committee report presents the issue of the Nodding Disease, it is as if the money will be spent on developmental expenditure. Why move longer to supplementary No.2? When will it come and will the children still be alive? This is a fundamental concern which the committee should have bothered to find out.

On Vote 019, Minister of Water and Environment, this report is not clear on the Shs 5 billion got for gravitational water for Kanungu. Is the committee okay with it or not? The committee is very ambiguous about this money. What is their view on this issue? Do they recommend that we pass it or not? My submission is that we are only two months away from the main budget and  we would, therefore, propose that we move this to the main budget of 2012/2013 [HON. MEMBER: “The money is already spent!”]- if the money is already spent, then this is the problem we have because the kind of delay that I am talking about will promote a postmortem budget and eventually, money will be spent and Parliament passes it later, which is one thing we need to discourage as Parliament. With a few suggestions and clarifications, I beg that the Supplementary Schedule No.1 for financial year 2012/2013 be approved.

THE SPEAKER: Can I also for the record remind the Minister for Water that the President promised to give the people of Bugiri water from the Sibyabona Hills using a gravity scheme, but I do not see it in any budget – Bugiri in Busoga. (Laughter) 

The Leader of the Opposition.

3.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We know that a budget is always passed after it has been analysed for quite a long period. It is unfortunate that we have laws that govern public finance that we are not following. 

Hon. Jack Sabiiti raised the issue of Article 93, which is clear in the Constitution and the regulations we have like the Public Finance and Accountability Regulations of 2003 clearly state how supplementaries are supposed to be handled. 

Madam Speaker, I want to draw your attention to Section 38(4) and this is how it reads, “Notwithstanding that supplementary estimates may have been submitted to Parliament for approval, no action shall be taken by any accounting officer, which places a commitment on public funds before Parliamentary approval is obtained.” Even the committee on budget in its concluding remarks says, “While the supplementary expenditure request is within the law, supplementary budgets affect the outputs and outcomes originally intended for the budget. Supplementary expenditures undermine the entire budget process when target outputs are not realised. In future, the committee recommends that Parliament should be provided with cost-benefit analysis of supplementary expenditures before they are passed.” This statement never started today; it has been there since I joined Parliament in 2001, where we have always been saying that supplementaries must have cost-benefit and must follow the required agreed outputs.

Why do we pass the budget? I think that the budget is quite a ritual which we should stop today because we have the laws that govern public funds. So, if we are passing and changing it, then I think it is not right for us. 

Article 157 of the Constitution talks of what we call contingency funds and you know that Madam Speaker, you are one of those who made the laws on contingency funds. The purpose of contingency funds is to handle emergencies. Why is it that our contingency fund is not operating? It is because we have decided to resort to supplementaries for which we do not follow the law and I will give a simple example, Madam, Speaker. We gave State House the other time we were passing the budget about Shs 100 billion. Today, they are asking for another Shs 100 billion. Why didn’t we foresee this Shs 100 billion? This is double of what we gave. 

I think our planning is very poor. Why should we change on the way? We are talking about the Nodding Disease, which is a very serious issue, but nobody is acting on it. Nobody!! So, does it mean that State House is better than those people suffering from the Nodding Disease? If that is the case, then this country is in a big problem. You have cried about water in Bugiri, but many people are suffering as a result of poor planning in Uganda and these supplementaries are the ones bringing problems. They have even cut money for water and taken it to State House. They have cut money for agriculture and taken it to State House, which is dangerous. Where does the money for State House go? 

I think the State House money is not being put to proper use and I will give an example of the development fund, where in the past budget we gave them Shs 10 billion and after six months, they are asking for a development budget for Shs 10 billion. What broke down? Has one of the roofs in State House broken? If you go and read through what it is talking about, it is talking about electricity. Is this fair? Is electricity now a development thing yet it is supposed to be part of a recurrent budget? 

I think that our committees should also become serious. When scrutinizing these things, look out for what is development and what is not. I think it will be ideal – have you gone to see those places if there is need for this money to be called development when it is a recurrent expenditure?

Madam Speaker, what does this mean? My suspicion may be wrong, but I think that it is right that State House is being used to fund activities that are not Government-related, for example, the NRM Party activities –(Interjections)- yes! And this is where the problem is, and I will give you another example. 

Recently, in the newspaper, if all of you read, there was a man called Kisolo Moses from Mbale handing over a card and he was given a huge envelope. I do not think the President sold cows to give him the envelope –(Interjections)- so, he must have got the State House money and given -[HON. TINKASIIMIRE: “Order.”]

THE SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I thank you. I greatly respect hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the Leader of the Opposition in this House. The honourable member is misleading this House by saying the President handed over an envelope. It could be true that he handed over an envelope as he saw it because that was a defection from his party. The order I am raising – how did he know that there was money? Is he, therefore, in order to start misleading –(Interjections)– I am reliably informed that this was another card from NRM converting this Member and not money as he wants to mislead this House. Is he in order, therefore, to mislead the House by insinuating that there was money in the envelope?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not attend that meeting and not I was not a witness and, therefore, I am unable to rule on that matter. Please conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thank you for the wise ruling. If it was an NRM card, it should also have been handed over in the open to be seen. You get a blue one and you get a yellow one.

THE SPEAKER: Leave that matter, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I want to call upon colleagues that Uganda is for all of us. What we have to do should be for our people. I don’t want you to assume that since you are a beneficiary, you want to assume that everybody is a beneficiary. This country needs water, this country needs roads. If you have been to Bukwo, I don’t think you would have accepted this Shs 100 billion to go to State House. It should have gone to do the road from Kapchorwa to Bukwo. If you have been to Karamoja, I can tell you it is the worst place. The problem is that many of you are just rotating around Kampala and you don’t go to these villages to see the problems – 

THE SPEAKER: No. Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I will not allow you to insult Members of this House. I know that they have been travelling. I meet them, I go with them.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would plead with you that many of them should go to Kapchorwa and Bukwo and others should go to Karamoja and see; and I can tell you that when they come back, they will say that the situation is bad. Some of our colleagues visited Jinja Hospital over the weekend and it was in a bad state; they could not even handle accident cases. This is very bad. It is very unfortunate for us as Parliament to appropriate resources not taking into consideration areas which are more deserving. 

Over the weekend, I also went to a Health Centre IV called Rwasande in Kasese. While there, children, men and women were in the same ward. There are about five children on one bed and I hope you can go there and see if it is true. 

I have heard a colleague of mine say we should shift the money to Kanungu, but at the end he said, I want this supplementary approved. What are you talking about? Call a spade a spade. If you don’t agree, say I don’t agree. Maybe I am saying this for now, but in the future things should change. 

Madam Speaker, I want to conclude like this. We have the loan. I think the Attorney-General should come up and tell us. We agreed 3 percent, but even the 3 percent does not mean that it has been put in the overall budget and shift it to one area. I would imagine the 3 percent means for each sector - 3 percent for health and 3 percent for State House. But State House takes the whole 3 percent of the budget. We are not against State House, but I thought the President should be more careful in the budget process and see that he does a good job and not mismanage public resources in such a sector. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate the Leader of the Opposition and other Members objecting on how we handle the supplementaries. I think that it is time we really reviewed it. Why don’t we, after this, sit down and review how we work and come up with new parameters which are acceptable? Lamenting and lamenting will not help us. Let us take it up. I would really appeal to Members to take up that challenge and review. 

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like first of all, to appreciate the concerns of the Members regarding this supplementary schedule. I want to thank the committee which issued a very good report concerning this supplementary schedule. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to, first of all, clarify the issue raised by hon. Sabiiti on the manner of presentation on these supplementary budgets –(Mr Okot rose_) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he has a problem and I thought I should allow him to raise a clarification. He is not debating the report. I think he has an issue which he says he is not satisfied with. I know you did not sign, but did you attend the meetings of the committee? 

MR AMOS OKOT: Madam Speaker, I need to raise this because it is a matter which is important, that is why when I raised it, you said I would maybe wait and raise it as a point of clarification. Under Vote 006, regarding the compensation of Shs 20 billion, when we were discussing this, the team from Kitgum called the Acholi War Debt Claim Association raised this matter, but in the process, they even proved that they never got any compensation out of this Shs 20 billion, but in this report, it is clearly stated that the compensation went to Kitgum, Lira and Apac, yet ideally, the people who got this compensation money are Lira Municipality. I consider it wrong, if this report is adopted the way it is, that the compensation went to the people of Kitgum yet Shs 10 billion was used to compensate the people of Lira. Besides, the remaining Shs 10 billion has been designated to do the verification in Teso and Karamoja sub-regions. I feel, even though the MPs representing the people of Kitgum are here, they will raise the same complaint. Therefore, I would think, if this report is supposed to be adopted, then the word Kitgum should be deleted from it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you will be able to satisfy the House that Lira, Kitgum and Apac benefitted from the Shs 10 billion. If they did not, we will have to delete Kitgum. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, as I said, Article 156(2) of the Constitution provides that, “If in respect of any financial year it is found that, (a) the amount appropriated for any purpose under the Appropriation Act is insufficient or that a need has arisen for expenditure for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act; or 

b) that any monies have been expended for any purpose in excess of the amount appropriated for that purpose or for a purpose for which no amount has been appropriated by that Act, a supplementary estimate showing the sums required or spent shall be laid down before Parliament and in the case of excess expenditure, within four months after the expenditure is spent.”

Madam Speaker, this supplementary schedule No.1 was laid before Parliament on 16th February and it was on the basis of that law that this expenditure was incurred. Need arose and the Minister of Finance in accordance with its Constitution did expend this money because it had not been appropriated in the first instance and, therefore, laid this supplementary expenditure before Parliament for explanation and also for appropriation. 

Madam Speaker, the committee considered this schedule and raised a report and during the debate, a few issues have been raised, which I want to specifically address. 
One is on the provision of salaries for Cuban professors at Mbarara University of Science and Technology. These Cuban professors are assisting the Government of Uganda, but it is also not true that the salaries of the lecturers and professors in other universities are not being addressed. Before this matter reached Parliament, I can report that we were dialoging with the staff of Makerere University, Mbarara University of Science and Technology - we will have their issues handled in the coming financial year. 

In the Budget Framework Paper, which we presented before Parliament, we have provided Shs 40 billion for the remuneration of science teachers, including university lecturers.

The other issue that has been raised is about the Nodding disease. I would like to report that Government has taken very serious concerns about the Nodding disease that has affected our people from Northern Uganda. As a matter of fact, a number of meetings have been held by Government. Also, money has been released – this will be reflected in Supplementary Schedule II to the Ministry of Health, which is at the tune of Shs 2,750,000,000 meant to attend to the Nodding disease. So, it is not true that we are not attending to this issue.

There was also mention about the adjustment of the PRDP funds to address compensation of the people who lost their property during the war. I would like to clarify that one of the strategic objectives of the PRDP is compensation of property lost during the conflict. This is clearly stated in the PRDP documents –(Interruptions)

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the minister for giving way. The Nodding disease is surely decimating the children. So, it ought to get urgent attention by way of giving 100 percent budgetary allocation for the requirements to be put in place to check that decimation. But now the minister is talking about just Shs 2 billion only yet the Ministry of Health required Shs 7 billion. So, in the circumstances, will the disease wait – we approved Shs 7 billion, but you have now released only Shs 2 billion. Will the disease wait for Government to set itself before it kills another child?

Honestly speaking, we need to see seriousness, on the part of Government, in containing that situation, rather than attempting to give a piece-meal intervention when the disease is spreading to epidemic levels in the North. I need a clarification on that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a debate on the Nodding disease. So, please you respond.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, we had a multi-sectoral meeting. It included the ministries of Health, Disaster Preparedness and other ministries. It was in that meeting that we agreed that for the first phase in handling this disease, we should have Shs 2.7 billion released since during this budget period - even though we have to approve Shs 7 billion, some of that money will go towards the provision of food items, blankets and other essential items to the families that have suffered this attack.
So, it was only fair that we looked at the budget and made a decision that for the remaining part of the budget period of this financial year, such money is released with the rest being provided for in the coming financial year –(Interruption)

MS AOL: Thank you, honourable minister for giving way. Madam Speaker, last Sunday I was at a place called Odek. I would like to report that the people there complained a lot about this Nodding disease. Many of them complained that they have to walk long distances – it looks like attention is not being given to them. So, does it mean that despite what we approved here, you decided to cut it so that you can release only that very little? Are you aware that the Shs 2.7 billion you are talking about is not commensurate to the problem on the ground? Kindly clarify on that. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The information available to us in the Social Services Committee of Parliament is that actually, the money so far released to take care of the Nodding disease was from the internal budgetary reallocations in the Ministry of Health, and in terms of drug supplies, reallocations at the National Medical Stores.

We have also been informed that the first phase requires about Shs 4 billion to handle the specifics of the Nodding disease. The committee also, on page 8, talks about the same thing. It says the Shs 1.5 billion has been raised from the internal reallocations at the Ministry of Health, and Shs 750 from the National Medical Stores. 

In the circumstances, who is telling the truth to this House? Is it the honourable minister who is purporting that they have already found Shs 2 billion, which will come in Supplementary Schedule II or it is the Chairman of the Social Services Committee who is talking about the reallocations at the ministry?

Madam Speaker, I thought that the President of this country is the Fountain of Honour and is a very dignified officer indeed. I also think that the President would have no objections – he went to Mulago Hospital and saw these children. Can we propose to the Ministry of Finance that given the fact that the President loved these children and even visited them at Mulago Hospital, they get just between Shs 2 billion and Shs 3 billion from the Development Budget of State House and send it there to deal with this problem? You can actually put that money on the State House Vote in the Supplementary Schedule II. I don’t care what you use that money for at State House, I care about what you do for the children who are suffering with the Nodding disease. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking is on Vote 019 - Ministry of Water and Environment – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you re-opening?

MR YAGUMA: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: No, no.

MR YAGUMA: Yes, because you are doing a supplementary budget for Shs 5 billion to start in the first phase of the three phases. That means that there was no original budget for this Kanungu Water project. But during the last rainy season many of our schools were destroyed, according to reports that were presented to this House. 

Actually, in my constituency, I have about 27 schools in which classrooms were destroyed. The Leader of Government Business is here together with the Minister of Education and Sports – the reports are here. How do you start on a new development project, which is not an emergency, and you leave out all those emergencies? I want a clarification on that.

THE SPEAKER: Chair of the committee, please clarify to satisfy the Members, if you can.

MR ACHIA REMIGIO: Madam Speaker and honourable members, actually, there are two concerns here that my colleagues have raised. I will certainly respond with respect to my report. I think hon. Tinkasiimire, hon. Bitekyerezo, hon. Jack Sabiiti, hon. Alice Alaso and the Leader of the Opposition, raised this matter.

The issue is very clear, Madam Speaker. Article 156, which talks about emergencies, says that Government can lay on Table in situations where there are emergencies - and in this case the report is very clear. In all of these discussions, what we saw as an emergency was the question of the Nodding disease. 

I remember in the last Parliament the government brought regulations to operationalise Article 157 on the Contingencies Fund and we rejected it. We told them to go back and come back with a Bill to operationalise the Contingencies Fund. I think what we need to insist on right now is for Government to bring a Bill to operationalise Article 157 of the Constitution with regard to the Contingencies Fund, to handle all these other over expenditures. But Article 156 talks about situations of an unforeseeable nature. Unfortunately, right now, it is that Article that Government uses to bring supplementaries before this House. (Laughter)

My honourable members, as the report is very clear, not all the emergencies were enumerated here. I am very happy to report, and the committee observed and clearly recommended that in future, Government, apart from operationalising Article 156, should, if it needs to come with all emergencies, spell out all the emergencies. 

In this case, Madam Speaker, you ruled on the issue of the Nodding disease. That debate happened on the 28th February, and we ruled on it. We told the minister that we want to see the Shs 2 billion in the next supplementary Schedule No.2. We are happy to hear from the Minister of Finance that they have actually released the money.

So, let’s wait and see whether that will be reflected in Supplementary Schedule No.2, which is coming. Apart from that, honourable members, I think this is water under the bridge. We just have to –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have already said that I have noted the serious concerns and reservations of the Members about the management of the supplementaries and I have said that we should set up a committee after this bit so that we review to the satisfaction of all of us. Let us set new parameters because it seems we have been caught in a straight jacket.

Honourable minister, please close, I have other work on the Order Paper.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, to conclude on the Nodding disease. It is true the total requirement was Shs 7.1 billion and it was to be provided in two phases. I did say, and it is true, that the sources of funding for supplementary budgets can either be through reallocation or when there are new funds. In the case of this supplementary funding, we made a reallocation from the resources of the Ministry of Health to the tune of Shs 1.1 billion. Secondly, in addition to that, we have provided in schedule No.2 another Shs 2.75 billion, still to address that evil. 

There are so many stages that Government is implementing: They have put in place screening centres; there are drug supplies; there is provision of food; and they provide some blankets to the families where the Nodding disease is identified. So, it is really a whole package and not a one-off. 

On the issue of compensation to the people of Northern Uganda, these people are in three categories. The first category is the Acholi war claimants; Teso and Kitgum; Lira and Apac. The Shs 10 billion was released to cater for the group that covers Kitgum, Lira and Apac. It is not true that it covered only one district. 

However, Members should appreciate that the requirements for this category of people is much higher than the Shs 10 billion. It is actually to the tune of Shs 54 billion. We are now undergoing what they call verification because the Auditor-General has to verify some of those amounts, after which –(Interruption) 

MRS AOL: Thank you honourable minister for giving way. We are all concerned about this compensation and it would be right for us to go with the right information. It is wrong to say that Kitgum and Apac got the Shs 10 billion. The Shs 10 billion went to Lira, and not to the people, but just very few individuals who were land owners, and who had camps on their land; as if we did not have thousands of camps in Acholi sub-region. Not even one has been compensated. 

Instead of rushing to compensate the animals – I think there was some vested interest in compensating land owners of Lira Municipality. I think that needs to be dug out. So, that is the information I want to give you; not animals, but land to very few people, about seven, I think. Shillings 10 billion –(Interjection)- yes, you people know best, but it needs to be dug out. Thank you.
   
MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to put it on record that the Shs 10 billion did not go to all the people of Lira. I want to put it on record that the Shs 10 billion went to a group of people who went to court. When they went to court, the Attorney-General consented out of court and they used the Shs 10 billion to pay that small group that had gone to court.

Actually, all the Shs 20 billion was meant to go to that group. The Shs 54 billion being quoted by the minister is the amount in the consent judgment in only one case. The case in which that Shs 10 billion has gone to is a chief vs the Attorney-General. 

So, I do not want the record to show that the people of Lira have been compensated because the people of Lira would then be jeopardized in the national budget. While it was indicated that the first group was to be paid; the President’s letter indicated Kitgum, Apac and Lira. As of now, this letter has been abused and only a clique of people have been paid. We need –(Interjection)- not Lira Municipality. 

I also do not want it to be on record that Lira Municipality was paid. Actually, as of now, the amount of money that has been paid deserves investigation. I already have petitions from some of the people whose names were on the list, but were not paid. I have petitions about those whom they know got money in their names. 

We asked the Attorney-General to give us the list of the beneficiaries of the Shs 10 billion, but up to now, there is no list tabled. As the people of Lango, we want to be given the list of people who got the Shs 10 billion. Otherwise, people from Lira Municipality were not paid, but a group of few people, an elite class, who negotiated with some people in the Attorney-General’s office, are the ones who got paid.

The people of Lira and Apac districts have not been paid. So, let it be on record so that this House does not jeopardise the people of Lango’s payment.  And I speak with authority because I have been following this matter for which I have even appeared before court on behalf of my people of Lango. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if it is true that the Shs 54 billion relates to those who went to court only, it means the balances of these people are not part of this compensation and so you are not addressing the general compensation; you are addressing those who went to court.
   
MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the committee report on page 10 has the following observations: First of all it says, “The Budget Committee noted observations of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee as follows: 

That the people of Acholi were the first to go to court seeking compensation for the property lost during the war. However, they have not been compensated to date. 

Secondly, the verification exercise for Acholi sub-region has not been completed due to disagreements over the claimants in the sub-region. 

The verification for Teso has not been conducted due to lack of funds and the Ministry of Justice needs some money to do the verification.”  

Madam Speaker, the total number of the people to be compensated is still coming, but so far, we have received claims of up to Shs 54 billion. And for this money to be paid -(Interruption)

MR TODWONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent the people of Nwoya County in the Acholi sub-region. Is it in order for the honourable minister to persistently mislead this House that verification in Acholi was not properly completed when we know that in the ministry and even in the office of the Attorney-General, there are documents that categorically put three categories of Acholi who should be compensated?  

The first ones are those who were initially paid partially by Government; the second group are those who were ably verified by Government, but there was no money to pay them; and the third is the group that they are now seeking money to go and verify. So, is it in order for the minister to insinuate that verification is not complete in the Acholi sub-region? 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members the minister is reading from the report of the Budget Committee, which is a committee of this House. In paragraph 3, our committee reported that the exercise is being completed; he is not the source; he is just reading what is in the report.   

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, when we were considering this Supplementary Schedule No.1, we asked specific committees to go ahead and validate the information provided under the Supplementary Schedule No.1. What happened is that just as was with Presidential Affairs, the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs went ahead with that verification and what we found out - and we were also happy to receive members of the Acholi community - I think honourable member, you remember the group you brought. 

We received all this paper work and what was clear is that the assessment for some groups was complete and for some, it wasn’t. So, we let the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs handle that to which they presented a report that was adopted by this House with amendments as regards to issues to do with the Acholi. As you can see from the title, the observations in this report are from the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs report which was adopted. 

The information we had then was that there was no complete assessment of the people to be paid and it was also clear that the beneficiaries in Teso and other areas had not been verified. So, that is why in the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs report, we passed a budget of Shs 300 million for the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to go and verify the remaining persons. 

THE SPEAKER: Can the minister, please wind up? We have got other work. Honourable members, if we adopt this report, we shall be accepting that many groups have not been compensated. That is what the report said. Please, conclude.
 
MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, additionally, I would like to state before the House that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs/ Attorney-General’s Chambers is handling this matter of compensation and they will provide information on the exact number of people who have been compensated and those that remain to be compensated. Government will provide funds so that the matter is put to rest. 

The next issue is about the Shs 5 billion for water; Vote 019 -Ministry of Water and Environment. 

Out of Shs 11.2 billion that was required for construction of Kanyampanga Gravity Water Scheme in Kanungu District, a supplementary funding amounting to Shs 5 billion has been provided to enable the Ministry of Water and Environment start the first phase of the project. The two phases remaining will be funded under the ministry’s budget for the coming two financial years. 

I would like to state here that when ministries present their requirements in the budget, they prioritise what they would like to spend on and the Ministry of Finance sits down with them depending on the amount of money that is available, and we prioritise what is to be spent or what is to be included in the budget immediately. What is not funded at that time remains an unfunded priority. So, in case more money is found, the sectors can make requisitions to the Ministry of Finance to provide for this money. So, it is under that arrangement that the Ministry of Water and Environment requested that Shs 5 billion be provided to start on this gravity water project. The rest of that will be funded in the coming financial years. 

The issue of Nodding Disease has been handled and I would like to say that it is not true that the health sector is ignored. The health sector is one of those that Government attaches importance to and it actually has some of the highest percentages. Up to about 15 percent of the Government budget goes to the health sector. We understand -(Interruption)   

DR BITEKYEREZO:  Madam Speaker, I thank you so much. I happen to be a health worker and I am a member of the Social Services Committee. The funding of the health sector by Ministry of Finance right now stands at almost 9 percent, including money which we get from funders and donors. Is it in order, therefore, for the Minister of Finance to tell this House that the Government of Uganda is funding Ministry of Health up to 15 percent and even above to meet the Abuja Declaration? Is it in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I really think that you shouldn’t insult the people of Uganda. It is common knowledge that we have failed to meet our commitment under the Abuja Declaration. So, we are very far from the 15 percent; don’t repeat it anywhere. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to correct what I said. I intended to say that our intention as Government - I withdraw that. It is not 15 percent, but our intention as Government is to commit more funds towards the health budget. 

I would like honourable members to understand that this is not the only schedule towards funding supplementary requirements and in the process, there is Schedule No.2, which we shall be presenting to this House and also to inform the House that most of this funding that we include in the supplementary budget is requested by the sectors and then we, as Ministry of Finance, do provide the funding. With that, I thank you very much for allowing me to do this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopt the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

SUPPLEMENTARY RECURRENT EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I propose the question that the total sum of Shs 161,715,629,000 be provided for as total Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2011/2012.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have a supplementary Schedule here, but under 002 - State House, page five, you will see 221 003. It has no description and it has got Shs 220 million. When you go to page 11, under program for monitoring and inspection, the same items appear, which have a total of almost Shs 4 billion, but they have no description.

Madam Chairperson, again on the same page five, under output 1611, there are medical expenses totalling to Shs 37 million, Shs 45 million, Shs 32 million, Shs 10 million, but if you go to the next page, it is also talking of medical expenses. I want to find out the difference between this medical on page five where you have medical expenses in the second table and the one on page seven. When you go to page 11, there are medical expenses. What are these different medical expenses with different figures because they are under the same programme? So, what was the purpose? Was it purposeful to hide some medical expenses and figures?

I want to propose that we stay this if there are no figures. If you look at page 11 –(Interjections)- you will pass it in your own way. We stay this until we get details of these expenditures which lack description, instead of passing figures without naming them. Even on page 11, there are no figures.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Chair, the supplementary schedule the hon. Nandala-Mafabi is referring to was the first one, which was submitted and the committee correctly identified errors and we sent the Minister of Finance, hon. Jachan Omach, to go back and reconcile the figures. On the 27th February, he brought to the committee a corrected version of the supplementary schedule No. 1 with a letter and I can read the letter, honourable members:

“Reference is made to the meeting of the Parliamentary Budget Committee on Supplementary Schedule No.1 of financial year 2011/2012 budget held on Wednesday the 15th February. During the meeting, it was noted that the schedule had some typographical errors and, therefore, it was agreed that those errors should be corrected and re-submitted. This is, therefore, to re-submit the attached Supplementary Schedule No.1 for the financial year 2011/2012, correcting the errors that were inadvertently contained in the first submission. Please note that the total supplementary expenditure remains unchanged.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we have no objection to the Minister of Finance going to the committee, but first and foremost, he should have done the correction by submitting the amendments of the supplementary to the House not to the committee. That is why we, Members of Parliament, have the wrong ones. The committee does the work on our behalf so what should have happened is first and foremost to submit it here.

Madam Chairperson, I think this is a wrong procedure and the minister should have come to the House and submitted it here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, our committees are bi-partisan committees and the ruling party is represented, the Opposition parties are represented and the Independents are also represented. I put the question that the total sum of Shs 161,715,629,000 be provided for as Supplementary Recurrent Expenditure Schedule No.1 for Financial Year 2011/2012.

(Question put and agreed to.)

SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2011/2012

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the total sum of Shs 25,888,000,000 be provided for as total supplementary development expenditure Schedule No.1 for financial year 2011/2012. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

4.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of Supply has considered the Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.1 for the Financial Year 2011/2012 Budget and passed it. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

4.31
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, in view of the continuing lamentation and dissatisfaction about how we work, I will be setting up a committee, but I will tell you its composition tomorrow. That way we can set new parameters that satisfy everybody about how we handle supplementary budgets. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE AFFAIRS OF THE COMMISSION OF INQUIRY INTO THE MISMANAGEMENT OF FUNDS UNDER UNIVERSAL PRIMARY EDUCATION (UPE) AND UNIVERSAL SECONDARY EDUCATION (USE)

4.32
THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Dr Sam Lyomoki): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to present to you the report of the Committee on Social Services, on the affairs of the Commission of Inquiry into the mismanagement of funds under Universal Primary Education (UPE) and Universal Secondary Education (USE).

You may recall that on 14 February 2012, the Minister of Education and Sports did present to this House a statement on the Commission of Inquiry and arising out of the minister’s statement, this House did resolve as follows:

1.	That Government winds up the activities of the Commission of Inquiry and withholds further extension of its mandate.

2.	That Government stays additional funding to the Commission.

3.	That the Auditor-General conducts a special audit on the activities of the Commission.

4.	That any unspent money in the Commission account be frozen until investigations are complete; and

5.	That the Social Services Committee of Parliament looks into the affairs of the Commission and reports back to the House in two months.

Madam Speaker, it is on the basis of Resolution 5 that the committee proceeded to consider matters contained in the entire resolution, and now wishes to report. 

Scope of the report

This particular report does not go into the details of the activities and findings of the Commission, but rather limits itself to the process, and the cause for delay in reporting by the Commission. 

Methodology

1.	The committee held meetings with:
a.	The Commission of Inquiry.
b.	The Minister of Education and Sports and her technical team.
c.	The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

2.	The committee studied and analysed the relevant documents including accounts and expenditures by the Commission of Inquiry.

In terms of background, the committee considered the objectives and challenges of UPE, on page 3; the roles of the Ministry of Education and of local authorities; and the achievements so far by the programme. Because of the foregoing challenges and the public outcry against the sector, the President deemed it prudent to establish the Judicial Commission of Inquiry into the mismanagement of funds under UPE and USE in December 2009 under Legal Notice No.15 of 2009. The tenure of the Commission has been extended four times under Legal Notices No.10 of 2010, No.18 of 2010, No.11 of 2011, and No.1 of 2012. These instruments are attached as Appendix 1(a) to 1(c). The current term of the Commission expires on 14 August 2012.

As reported, the members of the commission and its terms of reference are attached to the report. I am now on page 9.

Findings, Observations and Recommendations

Under this part, the committee set the issues to search into as follows:

1.	Whether the delay to conclude the work by the Commission was justifiable.

2.	The status of progress of completion of the Commission’s work and whether the work is redeemable; is the volume of work accomplished so far realistic and what is the best course of action to generate a productive outcome?

On the first issue, you may note that the Commission was not able to complete its work within the six months as was envisaged under Legal Notice No.15 of 2009, resulting into extension of the life of the Commission four times. The committee has established that the failure to complete the work arose from a number of factors, as explained below. 

Release of funds

The Commission was established in December 2009, at a time when the budget for the financial year 2009/2010 was already in operation. The funds for the Commission had not been incorporated within the budget. The Commission could not, therefore, commence work immediately, as the Minister of Finance had to go through the process of securing supplementary expenditure to fund the Commission. Additionally, at the beginning of July 2010, the Commission funds were returned to the Consolidated Fund in accordance with the financial regulations. This resulted into the Commission losing two months till the beginning of September 2010. By the time the funds were secured, schools were preparing for their exams. So, the field activities were again delayed.

Adherence to the procurement rules and regulations 

Before commencement of the activities of the Commission, it became necessary to secure facilities and equipment, including office space, furniture, motor vehicles, technical and field equipment, consultants, and other service providers. These procurements had to follow the PPDA rules, which provide for an elaborate and long process, and require, among others, that the procurement process commences when the funds for the activity in question have been released. It was until April 2010 that the Commission was able to complete the basic procurements, while vehicle hire services was completed by September 2010, well beyond the six months period that had been given to the Commission to carry out the inquiry.

Late release or release of funds when schools are on holiday

You may be aware, the release of funds is in quarters, and does not tally with the school terms. Sometimes funds would be released at a time when schools were due to close, curtailing the Commission’s activities related to visitation of schools. For example, the Commission received Shs 2.2 billion in late October 2010, and Shs 1 billion in November 2011, a period when schools sit examinations. 

Some of the aspects of the inquiry like student and teacher attendance, ghost teachers and pupils’ assessment, could only be better undertaken during the normal school term. The consequence of this was that such activities had to be postponed, leading to loss of time of up to four months per year. If the Commission had employed the alternative of going ahead with field visits even during holidays, then it would have had to lose the very important information or visit places more than once. This option would not have been cost effective as this would definitely have glaringly bloated the Commission’s expenditure. 

Delays in securing the required information 

The commission was not able to secure all the information required in good time, especially information on projects. It also became necessary for the Commission to scrutinise the funding of education activities by the development partners to enable the Commission establish the possibility of multiple accountability of the projects undertaken in schools by the various stakeholders. This expanded the volume of work.

Busy and demanding work schedules of the technical officers

Engineers and statisticians seconded from Government departments (Ministry of Works and Uganda National Bureau of Statistics) had busy and demanding work under their primary offices, rendering them unavailable to the Commission as and when needed to guide the field staff in analysing and interpreting the data in preparation for report writing and public hearings. Along the way, the seconded staff would be changed by the departments, thereby affecting the progress of the Commission’s work.

Loss of time due to technical impediments

There was loss of time due to several unavoidable technical circumstances. For instance, the Commission lost time between the expiry of the respective legal notices and their renewal. 

As a result, the committee concludes that from the balance of possibilities, there were some factors beyond the control of the Commission that made it difficult for the work to be accomplished in good time. 

However, be it as it were, the committee was not convinced why clearly predictable factors like school holidays and issues relating to beginning of the financial year could not have, in the first place, been factored in while determining the initial lifespan and funding of the Commission. To the committee this is a good lesson for the future.

Issue No.2 - The status of progress of completion of the Commission’s work and whether the work is redeemable: Is the volume of work accomplished so far realistic, and what is the best course of action to generate a productive outcome?

The committee was informed that the Commission has gone a long way in accomplishing its task and so far 80 percent of the work is completed. Most of the required data from the field has been collected and awaits analysis and compressing into the final report. The Commission has so far met the various stakeholders across the spectrum of the education sector. (A summary of the work so far done including stakeholders so far met is herewith attached as Appendix 3).

The committee established that the Commission had produced four progress reports and an interim report. The four progress reports were forwarded to His Excellency the President, in April 2010, October 2010, May 2011, and February 2012, respectively. 

The committee received and viewed the revised final roadmap for the pending work and got assurances that the Commission will complete its work and be able to deliver the final report by the expiry of the current mandate, in August 2012. 

In order to generate prudent, objective and rational recommendations on this matter, the committee attempted to answer the question that I have already raised earlier. The outcomes of this analysis are spelt out under the forthcoming observations and recommendations.

Observations

The committee observed the following:

When the Minister of Education and Sports presented a statement to this House, it was reported that the Commission had not submitted any report to the Minister of Education and Sports. Through our interaction with both the minister and the Commission, the committee established that it was true that the minister had not received any interim report. It is important to note that the Commission had, however, presented four progress reports and an interim report to His Excellency the President. Apparently, the statement given by the minister on 14 February 2012 was based only on the information the minister had about the Commission at that time.  

The committee further discovered that one of the factors behind the apparent misunderstanding between the ministry and the Commission was the interpretation of the provisions of the legal instrument establishing the Commission by the concerned parties. The parties concerned were wrangling on issues like what constitutes a progress report and whether submission of an interim report to those being investigated could not, in the first place, jeopardise the probe, among other things. The minister’s position was that when she made the statement to Parliament, her reference was to the absence of an interim report and not of the progress reports. The committee established that His Excellency the President, had actually received the reports, but as the committee noted, it was not a mandatory requirement for the Commission to submit any report to the minister. 

Under the circumstances, the limitation in the information available to the minister could have arisen from the fact that the Commission was not answerable to the ministry. Possibly, the Minister for the Presidency would have been in a better position to update this House on the progress of the inquiry, as opposed to the Minister of Education and Sports. 

The committee noted that this Commission is very special to the people of Uganda and its findings critical for education in this country. From the onset of the work of the Commission, at the time of swearing in, His Excellency the President, made statements. The Principle Judge by then, Justice James Ogoola, clearly made the statement on the benefits of the Commission and consequently, the ministry eagerly awaits the outcome of the report to inform pending reports in the sector. Parliament should accordingly resist everything that seeks to prematurely terminate the work of the Commission. 

The working relationship between the Commission and the ministry is characterised by suspicion and antagonism. On the one hand; some officials in the Ministry of Education feel the Commission is biased with some of its members allegedly having a conflict of interest, while on the other hand, some members of the Commission feel some of the officials in the ministry are uncooperative and kin at blocking and/or derailing the probe in order to protect themselves. This partly explains why the minister was not aware of the progress of the inquiry by the Commission, as evidenced from her statement to this House on the subject matter, and most gravely, the evident antagonism between the two parties. 

On this note, the committee finds the current arrangement of housing commissions of inquiry in the departments under investigations for purposes of funding, as problematic, and creating unnecessary tension and suspicion. It is the view of the committee that in some cases this can negatively impact on the credibility of such probes and even compromise their outcomes. 

The Commission in this particular case was not comfortable to have their funding being under the control of the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the Ministry of Education, who in actual practice was a subject of investigation, given his role as the accounting officer. Whereas the Commission felt that the Permanent Secretary would sometimes deliberately frustrate the smooth flow of funds to the Commission, the PS on the other hand provided evidence to the committee, showing that where possible, he went out of his way to ensure that funds were availed to the Commission, to avoid stalemate in the Commission’s work. 

The ministry further informed the committee that they had had challenges in respect of the parameters within which some of the information required by the Commission should be confined, and further insisted that the delays in the release of funds were due to obvious technical accounting procedures. The committee could not readily establish whether the delays in some disbursements were deliberate or as a result of the normal technical accounting processes within the system. Additionally, the committee received a series of serious accusations and counter-accusations between the ministry and the Commission. For instance, the Vice Chairperson of the Commission was alleged to have been interdicted at one time by the PS and, therefore, maybe she was witch-hunting. Those were the types of allegations.

The committee is of the view that this could be an area for further investigation in future. The committee has, accordingly, noted the various allegations and will inquire into them while considering the final report of the Commission. 
 
The work of the Commission was gigantic as can be observed from the terms of reference. It was further found necessary by the Commission to undertake value-for-money analysis of the various activities in the education sector as opposed to paper accountability. In the wisdom of the Commission, the value-for-money analysis would yield better and sound findings, the basis on which the Commission will be able to give a way forward.

But, Madam Speaker, at the beginning, the Auditor-General had actually noted that the work was big and that the Commission needed to do some analysis so that they can be able to scale down their activities or they could be able to come up with a way which would fit within the timeframe.

The Commission did not heed the advice from the Auditor-General. If they had, they would have produced an inception report, which they should have discussed with the appointing authority at the very beginning of the inquiry. It is in this conception note that the Commission would have essentially unpacked their terms of reference and clearly spelt out the conceptual framework to be used during the inquiry, including the detailed methodology, data collection methods, data sources, sampling methods, indicators, work plan with key deliverables and milestones, responsibility centres for each action and the risks and limitations that could undermine the reliability and validity of the inquiry results.
 
The committee failed to establish why the Commission could not find wisdom in the advice from the Auditor-General at the very beginning of the inquiry. 

The committee noted that whereas the Commission argued that one of the reasons for the delay in completing their work was that during holidays they could not do work, the Commission’s bank statements and expenditure details revealed withdrawals and expenditures respectively, every month. The committee viewed details of the expenditures in the Bank of Uganda statements of account. However, the Commission clarified that whereas field activities, which were the core, had to wait for schools to open, there is no single day when the Commission stopped working, not even when there was no money. Even during holidays when they could not undertake field activities, the Commission according to them continued with the rest of the non-field activities and had to meet the monthly administrative obligations like staff allowances, rent and other overhead costs. 

The committee will at an appropriate time undertake a due diligence assessment to establish the authenticity of that explanation.  

The initial budget of the Commission was Shs 4,381,493,900. This amount was revised, by an additional Shs 2 billion, to Shs 6,381,493,900. Out of the Shs 6,381,493,000 so far released, the Commission has spent Shs 5,404,682,633 and is remaining with unspent balance on the account of Shs 976,811,267, which has since been frozen arising out of the resolution of Parliament.

The Commission informed the committee that it has already accomplished about 80 percent of its work and has indicated that already there are findings of serious mismanagement including outright corruption and misappropriation of gross amounts of money. The committee is convinced that if the Commission work is prematurely terminated, there will be grave negative implications. For instance, the resources already spent so far shall have been wasted or spent in vain; the shortcomings being unearthed by the Commission may not be corrected; any possible culprits exposed by the probe shall have escaped any pending sanctions; the objectives for which the Commission was instituted would have been totally defeated and all possible forces; and people against the objectives of instituting the inquiries will have achieved their objects. 

His Excellency the President had already granted the Commission an extension from 14 February 2012 to 14 August 2012 as seen by Legal Notice No.1 of 2012, and the Commission has about Shs 900 million as already unspent for its operations, but which cannot be disbursed because of the parliamentary resolution. The Commission convinced the committee that they need about two months to complete public hearings and another two months of analysis and report writing and, therefore, they will not ask for another extension nor do they intend to ask for more money.  

However, the committee was concerned that there were indications that the Commission was actually demanding for more funds for the remaining activities far exceeding the available about Shs 900 million currently on the account. We have this letter attached to this report which was given to us from the Ministry of Finance. The committee secured a commitment from the Commission to scale down their activities to fit within the available Shs 976,811,267.  

Recommendations

1. 	In view of the foregoing findings and observations, the committee agrees with the prayer by the Commission to be permitted to conclude the work with the remaining unspent funds. Accordingly, the committee recommends that the Commission be permitted to wind up its work with the Shs 976,811,267 still unspent and, therefore, the accounting officer should unfreeze and disburse this money to them to complete the remaining work by August 2012.

2.	For avoidance of doubt, the committee further recommends that the tenure of the Commission should not be extended beyond 14 August 2012, and that there should not be any further releases other than the unspent funds referred to in the previous recommendation.

3. 	Additionally, because of the several reasons already given earlier, the committee recommends that Government reviews the current arrangement of housing commissions of inquiry within the departments under investigation. It is the considered view of the committee that commissions that are instituted by His Excellency the President should be housed under the Office of the President. Government should urgently move to harmonise the laws and other administrative frameworks to resolve this paradox. 

4. 	Establishment of commissions of inquiry should involve consultations with the relevant departments, especially Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, to ensure smooth working of commissions including their funding.

5. 	There is need for a review of the Commission of Inquiry Act to provide for among others the extent of renewal of the commissions appointed under the Act and the category of people who may be appointed to a commission.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is signed by 14 out of 31 Members, so it is eligible for debate. However, I had hoped that at the minimum, the minister should have apologised to this House and to the Speaker, but I do not see that anywhere –(Interjections)- yes, for misinforming the House.

4.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS)(Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, first and foremost, I want to thank the committee for the important report they have submitted to us and also to apologise to the Speaker and the honourable members for the mismatch and mis-coordination that happened between my ministry and the Commission and as you have heard -

THE SPEAKER: No, I am talking about the minister misleading this House and accusing the Speaker to the President of having halted this Commission of Inquiry. I wanted an apology on that one. (Applause)

MR BAKKABULINDI: Madam Speaker, we do apologise as a ministry for that incident that took place and I apologise to the entire House on behalf of my minister. 

Having apologised –

THE SPEAKER: We have got the apology now. Let us get a few comments and see how we complete.

5.00
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good job done.

One thing which is true is that there was a problem from the very beginning. You know it is very ridiculous for a person being investigated to be the one to house the CID officer and you are the one to facilitate him or her. Really, a commission of inquiry – this is not limited to Ministry of Education. A similar problem occurred with the PAMSU Project, the Justice Kanyeihamba Commission of Inquiry. So, I want to agree with the committee that in order to avoid conflict of interest, this commission should not be housed in the ministries or departments being investigated. 

As if that is not enough, on the issue of drawing terms of reference, I want to fault the commission of inquiry. No wonder the committee has already recommended that there is again need to investigate the commission of inquiry into the education sector because we are already beginning to doubt whether the report which they might come up with does not have some influence peddling and conflicts of interest. 

The issue is, some of the members of the Commission are reported to be annoyed with the people being investigated having worked at the ministry themselves. Where a member of the commission of inquiry had his or her foot stepped on by a peer, then that would be an opportunity for revenge, which I think is not fair in the laws of natural justice. The members of a commission of inquiry ought to be absolutely impartial. So, selection of members also had an issue of fault, in my opinion.

The period of six months which was given – when you measure it against the terms of reference, surely, there was a big mismatch. The extensions were unjustifiable. Unfortunately, they were going infinitely. So, I do not have much to add now, but to propose that let the Commission wind up its work and we look at whatever report they will come up with, but no further extension and no further funding to the Commission. I support the recommendation.

5.03
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much and the committee for this report. I would like on the onset to say there is a good reason to extend the period for this Commission because of some mistakes which were made by the Commission and some inadequacies on the part of Government.

As I support the proposal by the committee, I want to ask the Leader of Government Business, I hope he is awake -(Laughter)- whether you are operating as a Government. What the minister told us the other day showed that you do not, and what is contained in this report in form of testimonies given by the respective witnesses who appeared before the committee seems to be in conflict. Whereas the minister rightly said she had not received any reports, the Presidency and the Commission said the reports were sent to His Excellency the President. Wouldn’t it have been prudent for the Presidency to liaise with the line ministry and give them information about the work of the Commission? You do not seem to be coordinating and I would like to put it to Government that they need to improve in this area.

There are several reasons given by the committee for the delay in the Commission’s work. I would like to refer to reason number one, which in my view seems to be a lame reason; release of funds. I remember sitting here in 2010, around March, and passing a supplementary budget. In that supplementary budget, funding was given to this Commission. I am, therefore, surprised when the committee says in the last sentence of page 9, “Additionally, at the beginning of July, 2010, the Commission funds were returned to the Consolidated Fund in accordance with the financial regulations.” (Member timed out.)

MRS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for a job well done and also make the following observations.

First of all, the initiative as proposed by His Excellency the President, was a prudent move, but I want to suggest that ideas suggested by the President should also be evaluated. This report shows that this was a good idea, which was not well thought out. If you look at the advice given by the Auditor-General, it is my considered view that such advice would even have been available for the President to consider even before the Commission was constituted. 

I do not know what type of work the Presidential advisers and various assistants do because His Excellency proposed and he said this was going to be a very simple thing. But a simple thing as he considered it to be, has taken the country three years and cost us billions of shillings. It is a miracle this work will be finished when His Excellency the President, in the names of Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, is still the President. Otherwise, if the elections had turned out in a different direction in 2011, he would not even have been here to receive it -(Member timed out.)

5.08
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for a job well done. This is a comprehensive report with useful findings and sound recommendations. I would also like to thank His Excellency the President, for putting this commission of enquiry in place. It was really timely and with a noble task to carry on.

I totally agree with the recommendations of the committee, especially the fact that the commission of inquiry should be allowed to continue for all those reasons that are given on page 19, and most especially the fact that if they were not allowed to continue, then we would not be able to correct the wrongs that have been unearthed. It is very important that we correct those mistakes so that we can redeem our school system.

I also endorse the recommendation that the commission of inquiry should not be housed in the institution in which they inquire about. But I would like to correct an error on page 19. Under bullet one, the committee says: “The Shs 900 million cannot be released by the Permanent Secretary because of the resolution of Parliament”. 

We saw information earlier to the effect that the permanent secretary could not release this money because it was from the capitation grant –(Interjections)– thank you, Madam Speaker. This money was from the capitation grant and Ministry of Finance was supposed to refund it. But after the permanent secretary released so much money, when he realised he was left with just a balance of Shs 900 million and the refund was not forthcoming from Ministry of Finance, he then stopped money from flowing. 

So, I do not know whether this has been corrected; Ministry of Finance should release this money so that the Commission can be able to finish its work. 

I happen to know the honourable Justice Muhanguzi who chairs this committee. He is a man of integrity and I know that this Commission has done a great job and he should be applauded. But one error was made. When this Commission was submitting to the President, it should have given copies of the report to the minister –(Member timed out.)

5.12
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the work well done. I have three points. One, I request that the apology of the minister be given by the minister herself when she is in this House. What happened put collusion between the Speaker and Members of Parliament, and the President of this country because of the misinformation by the Minister of Education. So, I request that the apology be made by the minister as an individual.

The other issue is on the release of funds. In my constituency, in Makindye Division, my colleague hon. Kyanjo, represents the West and I represent the East. We have only one school for USE. As I speak now, the funds for this term have not yet been released yet the term is about to end. So, the issue of release of funds should be worked out so that it corresponds with the school term calendar instead of releasing funds basing on the financial quarters. That will assist these schools to run their programmes efficiently.

Lastly, the selection of members to these commissions; when you look at the terms of reference in this report and look at the membership of the Commission - one of the terms was to look at the inspectorate of the Ministry of Education; both at national and at local level –(Member timed out.)

5.15
MR FAISAL KIKULUKUNYU (NRM, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to join my colleagues in commending the good job done by the committee. Going by what happens on the ground in our constituency, no Member would wish to see this report unfinished. 

The state of UPE in the country is not the best; we need an overhaul; right from the way it is managed to allocation of funds. UPE funds are inadequate, they do not come on time and a lot must be done for this sector. Our children go without food; this is a common thing; everybody knows that. We need to revise the methods and see that we get better grades in our schools. If we continue this way, we shall not have a good generation tomorrow.

Some investigations were done before on this matter of the performance of UPE and USE by the Ministry of Education. I want to know, where are the reports that were made earlier? This Commission you are talking about is of yesterday. There were earlier investigations done as early as 2006; where are they? Don’t you think this could be duplication of activities and wastage of national resources? 

We need to find out why the ministry did not release the report on an issue that is so sensitive and is affecting the future of our generation. Something must be done in relation to the reports that were written earlier by the same ministry. The public should know what transpired. 

5.17
MS HARRIET NTABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the recommendation that the Commission should continue as proposed by the Committee on Social Services.

When the programmes of UPE and USE were started, the targets were the rural communities. When the rural communities sent in their treasury and the programme started, everybody was very happy. But when people started despising it as “Bonna bakone -” all those words you heard about, people got concerned. And I appreciate the efforts of the President when he came up with this Commission to look into the reasons why the programme is being abused. 

The challenge was only that the ministry, which was being investigated upon was the one funding the proceedings of the Commission. That was so unfortunate. And I think the President did not know that the funds were coming from that ministry; it was supposed to be funded by the person who instituted it. You cannot be investigating me and I give you money in time to continue investigating me. 

We propose, unless it is too late,  that we find another source of funding because these people are going to sit on the funds and we shall continue having the same problem yet the communities are complaining –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Before I call the minister, the Commissions of Inquiry Act is a very old law. I do not know whether you did not benefit from the recommendations of the committee to make some changes. You do not have to answer now, but I think you have to review that old Act, Minister for Education.

5.20
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Sports) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I also want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the wonderful job they have done. 

The spirit behind instituting this Commission was very prudent. It is going to help us as Ugandans. Even though some of us from the Ministry of Education are stakeholders, we are partly being investigated, but what is important is the outcome so that at the end of the day, we get a fair deal. When I look at these recommendations made by the committee, I wished some of them were foreseen because we would have not gone to the extent we have gone. Some of them are very good ideas and if we had looked at them before instituting the Commission, maybe certain issues would have been avoided.

A point has been raised that a ministry that is being investigated should not be the one funding the inquiry - I want to make this clear that the Ministry of Education was not the one funding, but was a conduit - it was the Ministry of Finance. Maybe as the recommendation was made, in future, the one who has instituted the commission should be the one to fund and I totally agree with that. If you look at how much we have so far spent, Shs 5.404 billion compared to what is remaining to complete the task, I do totally agree with the committee that let the inquiry go ahead to accomplish the mission.

If the Auditor-General had come earlier – because the Auditor-General’s view came during the process when he was auditing the money. If you look at the terms of reference, they are too huge that this Commission could not handle in that specified period. Having seen that and looking at what the Commission was doing and also reading this report, I agree that we should support them and let the ministry concerned release that Shs 976.811 million so that the mission can be accomplished –(Interjections)- information?

THE SPEAKER: No, please wind up.

MR BAKKABULINDI: With that observation, I want to thank you very much for your input and I can say that maybe if there was no mismatch in terms of communication, knowing who is doing what, then some of the things would not have reached this House. You recall very well, that it was a mere statement that resulted into such a big misunderstanding. 

I want to thank you very much for supporting the idea for the Commission continuing with the work and accomplishing its task so that at the end of the day, we can see the gift of UPE and USE coming out clearly. You have heard and have been reading newspapers about ghost teachers and pupils and we are all concerned. I think that is why I have not heard any person saying that we do not need this Commission and let it do its work. The Commission has promised us that it has already reached somewhere and identified some errors. We are eagerly waiting to get the final report. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, we have two other items on the agenda today. 

5.24
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to say one or two things and like everybody, to thank the committee for a job well done. 

However, there is one clarification that I want to make from the House, requesting the minister to come and apologise in person because that is not how Government works. If we do not know, we are all vicariously liable. I am standing here and when I apologise on behalf of Government, then that is it. You cannot ask the President to come here and apologise because it is his Government. I think it is fair and we should accept the apology by the Minister [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “No”] – I think so.

THE SPEAKER: We shall accept one from you as the Leader of Government Business. (Laughter)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: If you ask one from me, I will do it and not from the Opposition of course. [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “Do it.”]

Secondly, I all along did not satisfy myself about who is to blame. The commission of inquiry continues to send reports to State House and yet the same Commission was sitting in the Ministry of Education. The same Commission gets funding from the Ministry of Education and yet the Commission would not even remember to give a blind copy to the Ministry of Education, which I think is a serious omission. 

The permanent secretary must also be concerned about what was happening all this time and he should have asked for the report. Now, when the minister came here and said there was no report, I think this one is arising from these omissions - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are not concerned about the failings in the Ministry. We are concerned about the impression that the minister created that the Speaker of this House halted this Commission –

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: On that one, I am also not talking –

THE SPEAKER: That is what we want you to apologise for –

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I am not talking about that one. I have finished that –

THE SPEAKER: No, we want your apology as the Leader of Government Business.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam –

THE SPEAKER: It was a very serious matter.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I thought I started with that and that is why I talked about that –

THE SPEAKER: That is a junior minister and you are the Leader of Government Business.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I even said that if you wanted an apology from me, then I will do it –

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we want it from you. 

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: But that is to say –(Interjections)- that I have handled that -[MS NAMBOOZE: “Procedure.”]- I am now talking about something that is taking –(Interjections)– that is what I thought and it is different from what we have talked about.

THE SPEAKER: As Leader of Government Business, you should apologise to the Speaker and the country because I was personally accused of halting the commission of inquiry. That is what your minister reported to the President.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I finished that one –(Interjections)– I started with that and in any case -[MS NAMBOOZE: “Procedure.”]- Madam Speaker, protect me from -[HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “Order.”]- Protect me from -[MS NAMBOOZE: “Procedure.”] Let me finish.

THE SPEAKER: Point of order from hon. Ssimbwa.

MR SSIMBWA: I thank you. I brought up this matter because it is a very serious matter. If the personality and Office of the Speaker and the Members of Parliament are put on a collision line with the President, who is the leader of this country, then it is not good. Is it in order for the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister to insinuate that he has made an apology whereas he has not? Is it in order?

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the honourable members said the minister should come and apologise and you have said no. I have now ordered you to apologise to the House. (Applause)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I have no objection or problem in apologising. I have apologised here many times and I will continue to apologise. But what I want to say before I apologise -[HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “No.”]- Let me talk because you see I am also a human being and I must speak my mind -[HONOURABLE MEMBER: “I am going to move that you should not be heard.”]- Madam Speaker, it is in order, and that is why in the philosophy I believe in, since you demand an apology, we have to give it to you because we apologised. I have apologised on behalf of the minister for making that statement against you.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker, and colleagues. We are aware that the work of Parliament entirely depends on the Office of the Speaker. It is not true that the Speaker in the chair wants a personal apology on her part. She wants an apology to the Office of the Speaker and to this august House and to the nation. So, I think it is only fair that the Prime Minister conducts himself in the manner due to the office he holds of Prime Minister, and apologises to the House so that we are in position to conduct our work. Short of that, I think there is a problem. 

LT. GEN (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, you can see that many people had the opportunity to say what they wanted to say either with good intentions or with whatever intentions, but I am sorry on behalf of the government. I apologise -(Applause)- that is all I wanted to say. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the report of the Committee on Social Services. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW SDR 65.9 MILLION (USD 100M) FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP FOR THE NINTH POVERTY REDUCTION SUPPORT CREDIT (PRSC 9)

5.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Robert Kasule Ssebunya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to borrow SDR 65.9 million equivalent to $ 100 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for the Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC 9). A request was presented to the House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and accordingly referred to the committee for consideration in accordance with Article 159 and rule 152(2)b of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report. Maybe I should lay on Table the documents we used, the programme document of the World Bank on the ninth PRC project; the reports on the loans and grants for the financial year 2009/2010; the questions and answers of the Ministry of Finance from the committee members; the presentation of the ninth PRC project by hon. Maria Kiwanuka; and also the report on the status of the external indebtedness of the debt sustainability and measurers. I beg to lay. 

I am not going to read the report verbatim. I will request Members to read through and I will start with the background. The PRC 9 is the second of the three development policy operations to support Uganda’s National Development Plan, and covers the period of 2012/2013, and the proposed PRSC 9 is prepared under the joint budget support framework. The operation will improve efficiency in the four service delivery sectors by addressing common key binding implementation constraints in public finance management, Public Service management and public administration, in tandem with the sector successive reforms within health, education, water and sanitation and transport. 

I will go to the programme’s components and highlight them. Component one on page 6, reforms in expenditure management, public finance management and Public Service management. Therein we have budget credibility, funding at a service delivery level, and those that follow are details of what I have read above. 

Loan terms and conditions; IDA financing has the following terms: the loan amount is SDR – those are Special Drawing Rights - it is the standard used by the World Bank – SDR 65.9 million equivalent to $100 million. Maturity period of 40 years including 10 years of grace; a service charge of 0.75 per annum on this first and outstanding balances; and commitment fees of 0.5 on non-disbursed funds.

We have conditions attached to this loan and they are listed here under. The PRSC 9 is conditional on Government’s commitment to improve quality of service delivery and this disbursement of funds, in addition, is conditional to fulfilling a number of agreed priorities, prior actions and figures. Under this agreement, the borrower shall undertake the following and they are listed under. If anybody has any questions, please read and ask and we shall give you answers. 

I will go straight to the observations and recommendations. That is page 14. It has been observed that the receipt of debts relief of Uganda and Heavy Indebted Poor Countries and MDRI, which is the Multi-Lateral Debt Relief Initiative framework, substantially improved Uganda’s debt sustainability both in the medium and in the long terms. In that respect, Uganda has continued to construct highly concessional loans with interest rates far below the country’s real growth rates. However, debt sustainability and risk analysis suggests that continued concessional borrowing may aggravate the country’s exposure to exchange rate risk due to unstable forex markets. The committee recommends that the government should seriously consider diversifying financing sources to reduce the country’s overreliance on external borrowing. Other financing options such as public-private partnerships and sovereign bond issuance for infrastructure development, which are less vulnerable to exchange rate shocks should be explored. 

The committee has seriously noted that the execution of PRSC operations have not been aligned to the national budget cycle. This has affected proper planning to integrate the PRSC AC policy action points by Government into ministerial programmes, and to easily make re-allocations of resources. The committee recommends that for proper analysis of future series of PRSC by Parliament, negotiations for such financing must be aligned with the budget cycle. Now that we are entering the next budget process, the series of the ten should be brought forward quickly.

The committee observed that the existing Public and Finance Management Legislations lack the provisions relating to the management of the oil revenue. It needs to be strengthened in other areas such as improved budget formulation and execution. I think the Speaker has rightly advised that the supplementary law be reviewed. That is also part of our recommendations.

The committee has also observed that the credibility of the budget has continued to be undermined by the large supplementary expenditure requests, the bulk of which are foreseeable at the time of preparing the budget. This has resulted into persistent reallocations, which disrupt the implementation of agreed work plans and performance targets. This adversely affects the delivery of core services.

The committee recommends that in order to ensure transparency and strict accountability of the oil and gas revenues and prudent public financial management, Government should urgently submit to Parliament, an amendment bill for the Public Finance and Accountability Act that incorporates provisions related to international basic practices on the management of the oil revenue plus the strengthening of other areas.

The committee still recommends that Government should expeditiously submit to Parliament, the guidelines to operationalise the contingency funds to cater for the unforeseen occurrences. Additionally, Parliament should desist from approving supplementary expenditures that do not have a budget line. 

The committee has observed that the local governments still lack managerial skills and capacity to account for public funds, which affects service delivery, especially in the newly created districts and municipalities. 

The committee recommends that Government should come up with incentives for equitable distribution, allocation and retention of qualified manpower to guarantee prudence in the management of funds sent to local governments.

The committee has seriously noted that the role of sector working groups in setting sector priorities, allocation of resources and monitoring of performances, has weakened over time, hence undermining the rationale of the sector wide approach in planning during the budget process.

The committee recommends that the government should come up with alternative means of enhancing allocation efficiency to address the imbalance in resource allocation across and within the sectors. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee has noted Government’s efforts to undertake and implement the strategy, focusing on measures that increase the efficiency and effectiveness of Government operations, and resulting into improved service delivery, particularly to the poor, through improved access to greater value-for-money in Public Service.

The main objective of PRSC 9 is to support Government reforms to improve access to the greater value for the money in Public Service. The operation supports reforms in the expenditure management, public financial management and public service management, with a focus on increased budget productivity, efficiency and effectiveness, good governance, addressing cross-cutting impediments to Public Service delivery performance and improving value-for-money in Public Service delivery with a focus on the four core service delivery sectors of health, education, water and sanitation, and road construction maintenance.

This loan is part of the financial resources for this financial year, 2011/2012, which was passed by Parliament. The committee, therefore, supports and recommends to this House, the approval of the government request of CDR 65.9, which is an equivalent of $100 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group for financing the Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is signed by 17 out of the 32 members of the committee. So, it is eligible for debate, but for only two minutes per Member.

5.45
MR KABAJO KYEWALABYE (NRM, Kiboga County East): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy for producing and presenting this report.  Let me point out that I am in full support of all their recommendations. However, I also would like to point out that much as this loan is meant to, for example, improve on the performance of public servants – on page 8, the committee is talking about the need to address the inequitable distribution of public servants across the country – I am not sure whether this loan will address some of the underlying issues that cause this inequitable distribution of public servants.

Let me give an example. In my constituency, of Kiboga, when I ask why some of the public schools – those in USE and UPE – don’t have teachers, the teachers and their heads themselves usually tell me of the lack of housing in rural areas. This forces teachers to move long distances from their homes to the schools where they teach.

I think that one of the ways of attracting public servants to their jobs would be to provide the required facilities, for example, houses for the teachers, especially in the rural schools. I am not sure whether this loan is intended to address that particular problem.

I have also seen that this same document talks about the improvement of health service delivery. But I would like to point out that this sector also suffers the same problem. Many health workers don’t want to work in some rural areas because of the lack of housing units at the health centres, in addition to lack of safe water and other problems.

Actually, one of the problems we have here is that yes, studies are carried out, but the findings of those studies are not implemented. I hope that some of the recommendations will result into better service delivery, especially in the rural areas that comprise the bigger part of our country. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.48
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): First of all, Madam Speaker, I want to thank the committee for the good report, which they have presented. However, I would like to address myself to recommendation number five, which talks about local governments lacking the capability to account for funds. This to a large extent is very true. However, I notice that the committee is saying that this only applies to the new local governments, which is not true.

What I have observed, is all local governments have one challenge. This is related to the fact that technical staff are rotated within those very areas. Even those who have had cases of say corruption are just rotated around. For instance, the town clerk of Gulu Municipality – and I am talking as a member of the Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament – has had cases of fraud in Kabale, Iganga, Soroti and Lira. So, what are we going to say about such situations?

My emphasis is: As we borrow such monies, can we also try to put up efficient systems that will ensure that all local government staff with tainted images leave space for the better-recruited staff to help us in delivering effective services to the people. I can quote a case in Oyam. The former CAO of Oyam is now in Kaberamaido, but when you look at the backlog of unaccounted for funds in Oyam in his name, you can’t believe it! Go to Pader and you will meet the same situation. The CAO of Pader was one time the CAO of Kitgum, before being moved to Pader, but look at the unaccounted for funds in Kitgum and Pader. It is a lot! 

Mine is to emphasise that can we try to see how to make an efficient public system for better service delivery, but with exceptions, by picking the wrong ones out of the system. I thank you.

5.50
MRS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee of National Economy for the report. I also rise to support the loan so that we pass it. 

We are asking for this loan for training personnel in financial management and efficient service delivery, among others. I don’t think that these public servants really need training. We have been training these people year in and year out. For example, the CAOs, the permanent secretaries, were trained, but they are not implementing what they have learnt. Is it really the training which they need or it is inefficiency within them? 

So, when we pass this money, we would like to see that there is a change in the civil servants who do work; that they come in time so that they deliver services, and when they are there, they do their job. There is no need for training them again and again without any change.  

Madam Speaker, service delivery is not a matter of training. We require facilities. For example, in health service delivery, we find that we do not have enough doctors; we don’t have enough midwifes; we don’t have enough nurses. Instead of spending this money on training, we need to have enough personnel at each station so that they do their work right rather than spend it on training.

Secondly, we need facilities. We need drugs to be in place. So, if we pass this money, we hope that there will be a change in education and health. 

The committee talked about the supplementary budget which they think should be reduced. According to me, I look at the supplementary budget as being part of the process. The three percent is put there for unforeseen circumstances, which we cannot avoid. What is important is that we must ensure that it must not go beyond three percent. Also, it must be used for a rightful service, which our people can benefit from. The supplementary budget will be there, and it was there and it will continue to be there. Thank you very much.

5.53
MS GRACE KWIYUCWINY (NRM, Woman Representative, Zombo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My comment is also on page 8, bullet five, which talks about managerial skills and capacity. Unlike my colleague who has just given her views, I would like to support training or equipping of the people in the district. 

Take a situation where the CAO is acting, the DEO is acting, the director health services is acting, everybody is acting. That means the person you have put there to act does not qualify to be there. Therefore, you need to strengthen this person in order for him to manage the responsibilities for which you have now given him authority to do.

Secondly, when we are requesting for this money now – this is April and the financial year is ending in June. I am wondering, is it for this financial year or it is a fund which is going to cut across many years. Because if it is being requested to finance activities for this financial year, I am worried that we are too late and, therefore, the things we are asking this money for are still not going to be done. 

My third and last point is on incentives for equitable distribution. I see some of these districts are in hard-to-reach areas and one of the incentives for equitable distribution could be infrastructure like teachers’ houses or staff houses. I would like to appeal that when this money comes - because I don’t see it working for infrastructure - it should be used in collaboration with other funds which are supporting development of infrastructure. I thank you. 

5.55
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report. While I generally support the report and the loan, I just want to put some few questions forward. 

I don’t know whether some of these loans are requested by us, as a country, or they are pushed on us by donors, because when you look at some of the activities to be supported, I have a feeling they are not the ones which will directly result into the outcomes. If you look at health, education, financial management, strengthening the internal audit capacity of the internal audit department of the Ministry of Finance; you look at the health sector; what you need are health workers being there in our health facilities and motivating them and not to put software activities that will not improve the health sector at all. (Applause) 

Look at transport; the activities to be supported include the launch of the axle load control campaign. Do you need to borrow money to launch a campaign in the ministry?

I would advise that much as we pass this loan request, the ministry should still sit down and restructure the activities so that we support activities, which will help us attain the necessary outcomes. Otherwise, this will become like many of the past loans, which have not performed. 

Madam Speaker, in the last Parliament, there was a loan on Public Service reform of up to 70 million, which we reduced to 23 million. When we discussed with the Minister of Finance in the corridors, he told us the World Bank had forced him to sign the loan request. 

I am raising this for the minister to take note and where possible to make adjustments within the activities being supported so that we don’t support activities which are not useful. Lastly, –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Commissioner, half a minute. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Lastly, this Parliament has passed very many loan requests. I would want to put it to the Leader of Government Business that you must regularly update this Parliament on the performance of past loans because year in and year out, we sit here to approve loans, but how are they performing? We want to task you to regularly update Parliament on how these loans are performing because most of them are not performing to our expectations. I thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you may recall that when we were amending the rules, we had proposed that we have a committee to monitor performance of these loans, but you rejected it. 
 
5.58
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to those who have contributed. I have a contribution and an appeal to the Ministry of Finance. 

On page 14, the committee recommends that for proper analysis of future series of PRSC by Parliament, negotiation for such financing must be aligned with the budget cycle.

This is a very important observation because you can imagine that this loan is one of the supports for the 30 percent donor funded budget; the money goes directly to the Treasury. This is April, there is May, and the financial year will be closed in June. All the activities which are budgeted for might get crippled and if you had planned for this money for those activities, it could have been utilised at the beginning of the financial year so that when you are planning for a budget which is 70 percent from domestic revenue, and 30 percent from donor funding, all the activities could have been dealt with in that financial year. But because we are now going to pass it, you will find out that some activities will not be implemented. 

The result is that Public Service delivery will be crippled and we will not perform, and that affects budget performance. We won’t perform, which directly affects the performance of Public Service delivery and budget performance as enshrined in the NRM Manifesto.  You can imagine the year has ended and we are still looking for that 30 percent, which we are passing today, but there are activities that need to be implemented. I think it is very important as proposed that a group should review this loan plus the other loans that are coming from donor funding, and internalise them properly so that they fit within the activities of the budget framework. So, by the time the financial year ends, all the activities should have been implemented.  The public is very mindful of Public Service delivery, which we should bear in mind. Thank you very much. 

6.00
MS JANEPHER EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am equally disturbed that the financial year is coming to an end – I happen to sit on the Local Government Accounts Committee, but whenever we go to the field and try to look for value-for-money, we are told that money gets there late and Finance withdraws the money after 30th June. So, what is the trick behind this, because if the money is passed now and it goes to the local governments, it may not do what it is supposed to do, and Finance will withdraw it? So, what is the essence of appropriating money that is going to be withdrawn? 

According to the procurement rules, even if it is construction of a school, it has to go through procurement, which has a standard time of scrutiny, and yet we are remaining with only two months to the end of the financial year, unless the Ministry of Finance wants to tell us that we are passing this money, but it has already been used or is already committed in the respective local governments.
 
Secondly, when I look at such a thing, in future, such money to be passed here should not be so general. If you tell us that it is going to help in either health or education, be specific and indicate which districts, because this is money that we pass and we may not be able to make a good follow up  due to lack of specifics. Such a document from the chairperson of the committee should show the name of the health centre to be constructed in a specified district like Buvuma, which will help us prioritise and be able to make a follow up and know the districts that have not yet been catered for. I beg to submit 

6.03
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have observed that a very big number of Ugandans have spiritual anaesthesia. What do I mean? They no longer mind about things that affect this country because if you want money today when the financial year is ending in June/July, honestly, what are we doing!
 
When you are in the Ministry of Health and see Dr Bitekyerezo speaking here in this Parliament, you should not tell me that you would like to train and yet we know that the problems in the Ministry of Health are simple things like recruitment of and remuneration of health workers in terms of thoroughly availing what to use in the wards and where the nurses sleep. A nurse in Kiruhura, where I was, earns Shs 270,000 per month, which is making them leave this country for greener pastures, and somebody is talking about financial management! Our problem in the Ministry of Health is not financial management; it is lack of health workers- lack of money paid to health workers, and practically, the drugs are not there. 

Recently, I rose here in Parliament and told you people that TB drugs are not there. I saw the Minister of Health here; I hope I will not be called a rebel again. But I was trying to bring it to the notice of everybody who was sleeping that this country - in terms of health, if we leave people to die and fall sick, performance is going to be low; economists know this. So, why are you planning for this money towards the end so that you can eat it? Why do you have spiritual anaesthesia when people are dying in the country! (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I was of the view that we stay over this thing and put it in the next budget - I am being honest. (Applause)  What is the function of the planning unit in the Ministry of Finance? Why do you plan at the end? What have you been doing? You have been sleeping! (Laughter)

 THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just to augment what hon. Bitekyerezo has said, yesterday I was in Kamuli District Hospital handing over an ambulance, and I took a tour of the facilities. I found broken doors and other equipment, but on asking why they don’t fix them, they said, “You know, PPDA rules...the contracts process, etcetera,” but these are things that matter to the people. I am not influencing you, but only telling you what I saw. 

6.06
MS EMMA BOONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For a person to ask for a loan, there must be priorities that you want to perform. When I look at this loan, I wonder whether we as leaders of this nation call these our priorities as many of us are saying. For example, right now as we talk, the problem with the drugs is the system through which they are being distributed. For six months, you hear it is demand from up pushed down and the then six months later, you hear the system has changed and it is down pushing upwards. You wonder where we consulted in all this. So, when you get a loan and say you are going to improve the system, whom do they consult as ministries? Do they believe that what they know is the alpha and omega of it all? Otherwise, when you take a loan without proper planning, as you try to force your ideas down on the people and down on the money, then it is the country that lacks. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, you proposed that there should be a committee to monitor the performance of loans.  We have not yet put it in place, but we need the ministry to be given a feed back for every loan that we pass in this Parliament. Otherwise, for us to pass loans every year and never know what they do – are we satisfied with the quality of what these loans do? Are we satisfied that the objectives of the loans are achieved at the end of the loan that is acquired by Government? So, it is important that we evaluate every loan and before we pass it, we need details. We did this when we were looking at SHIP I and SHIP II; we knew every hospital; we knew every health centre III, but now this is very vague; this is just a blanket loan and we do not even know how we are going to benefit as a country. 

6.08
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the idea of borrowing, but only wish to support the borrowing in as long as these funds are going to the health sector. Why am I saying that? I have had the benefit to visit Jinja Hospital and the reason they give as to why some patients die is that doctors and nurses have no accommodation at the hospital. So, they are at times in Lugazi, Iganga and Bugembe and so, by the time they are called, they have no transport to come back to the referral hospital to save lives.  So, this means that if this money goes into development funding of accommodation for the doctors and nurses, that will be a positive idea.
 
Two, for example, in Jinja Hospital, they have no dental machines and the dentists’ work is to pluck out people’s teeth because they have no machines. This means that if this money is borrowed honestly to fund the health sector, it will help us improve the lives of our people. 

When you talk about the road sector, for example, which was being alluded to, I have travelled from Jinja to Kampala and there are four agencies which manage roads in this country, namely: UNRA, Road Fund, Ministry of Works, but all these agencies cannot even explain to us that for every litre of fuel you consume, there is a cost for road maintenance. All we see are patch-ups and doing some impromptu budgeting, which actually does not work for the people in the road sector.

I want to believe that the problem in the road sector is not supervision, but the quality of work which is being done, because contracts are awarded to competent people, but the type of work which is being done actually goes to the Minister in charge of Works and Transport. The roads are being seen; they use the same roads, but we buy bigger vehicles with bigger tyres to pass through the potholes and forget the price paid by the people who are being killed -(Member timed out_)

6.11
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, while I support this borrowing, when I look into the infrastructural development in the country, say education, health and roads, we have a lot of problems. Yes, it is said that recommendation number five talked about local governments’ incapacitation; that they do not have the capacity. Yes, especially, for the elected leaders; after every five years we need to do a lot more. The monitoring should not only focus on the central part. We need to have the institution of local government able to monitor corruption in local governments and this is not about the staff who are either acting or are not qualified. You find that it is the qualified staff who have the most corrupt tendencies.

For example, there is the town clerk of Gulu Municipality. I do not think that that man is not qualified. He is very qualified and yet very corrupt, and corruption has a very big network. If we do not look for ways of cutting or trying to open the networks of corrupt people by trying to build and strengthen institutions, we are not going to make any headway. We can borrow, yet our institutions like health and education remain wanting. The roads are really bad, especially now that the rains have come.

If you move to especially central roads, they are very bad and it is a shame! Even in Gulu, we have very bad roads. You promised to bring the graders, where are they? They are not there -(Member timed out.)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, this request of the loan is part of the budget support and I think this money is already appropriated by this Parliament. Yes, because this budget support is not a specific project. We are not borrowing for a specific project, but this is for the budget support, which is put in the pool and the Parliament has already appropriated that.

So, in this case, and the way I am hearing the debate, it is as if we are borrowing for a certain specific project and that is how my sister is attacking me about the roads and what have you. So, I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, in the way we are moving.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister and Members, I think what the Members are asking are the objectives you have put here to support. Are they the priorities? For instance, listen: “Undertaking a decentralisation study that will take stock of the current local government financing strategy.” Is that a priority?

“Provide support in development and implementation of a system to consolidate and analyse quarterly local government spending.” Is that a priority? Members are asking.

“Improve efforts to control arrears”. What arrears? You give Kamuli Hospital Ugshs 132 million, what arrears are you talking about?

“Strengthen compliance with CFM laws and regulations.” Members are asking, is this actually the priority in service delivery, in the health or education sectors? They would have been happy if you said, we are building houses for teachers; we are building houses for the health workers. That is what the Members want to hear. That is what I think.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, we have had this type of loan from the first and this is now the ninth loan in a series. We have passed this loan - Parliament has been passing this loan and we have always had these concerns. So, this is one of the peculiar loans that is not easily seen by the naked eye because it is not an infrastructure loan. It is part of the financing that you have already appropriated as Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: But hon. Sebunya, what Members are asking is, are these the priorities whether it is the ninth or the tenth? Are these the priorities of the health sector and the education sector? What is our priority? That is what they are asking.

MR SEBUNYA: I also agree with that concern, Madam Speaker. This is work in progress. There has been a concerted effort by the Ministry of Finance to at least have control of all other sector departments that are under Finance and where they put their money. This money is to either bridge the gaps or enhance the spending, bridge the leakages that are there in the - (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The concern I have is in regard to the way we are proceeding in regard to this budget process. During the Budget Speech, we were told by both the Minister of Finance and the President of this country that Government was going to cut down its expenditure on capacity building and workshops. You said that.

Government also said you will not be buying vehicles. Now, is it procedurally correct for the same Government to come here before we even end the financial year, to suggest to us an entire workshop loan? This is a workshop loan, Madam Speaker.

Can you imagine that the proposal by the minister - if you read further into the details of commitment, they include, for instance, that this loan is going to help Public Service find a modality of attaching. You know the word ‘attach’ means get this paper and fix it on this one. “... to attach performance agreements to letters of appointment.” 

Can you imagine we are going to approve a loan to attach one paper onto another? Can you imagine that after saying that they are not going to pursue capacity building, on page 13 they are saying they are going to approve and implement a new teacher allocation formula? When we even don’t have the teachers, you want a loan to sit in a workshop and develop a formula and yet we pay salaries?

Madam Speaker, is it procedurally right for Government to negate on its earlier commitment, one that they would not be funding capacity building and workshops this financial year and come here to ask for a workshop loan?

THE SPEAKER: Really, I am having difficulty. Let me hear from hon. Amongi and then we hear from the chair of the committee.

6.20
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Madam Speaker, like my colleagues have stated, when I look at page 6 and you talk of reforms on budget credibility – it says, “Support Government effort to improve budget predictability.” And yet what I see from the Budget, it is not the problem of predictability or lack of it; it is about the resource envelope. And most times, most ministries budget accurately, but they will be told, “Because of the small envelope, reduce your budget.” So, if you tell me you want a loan to “enhance budget credibility” I do not see how it – as a person who sits on the Social Services Committee, we toured the National Medical Stores as women parliamentarians and they showed us lots of medicine. However, their problem was how to deliver it to the grassroots. If you were asking me to approve a loan that would ensure that those drugs reach health centres II, III, IV and district hospitals, I would listen to you. You are talking about funding service delivery at local government level, where you are saying that the decentralisation study will take stock of current local government financing, quarterly local government spending - the issue is late release – 

THE SPEAKER: Are you taking information?

MS AMONGI: Just a moment. As we sit now, most local governments complain about late release from the central government. They are not talking about what you are saying here, that you want to study them; you want quarterly local government spending reporting. What do you expect them to report when you release money late? 

MR WAMAKUYU: Madam Speaker, the information I wish to give my colleague is from page 9 paragraph 7.2. There is that component on, “support health to deliver drugs to health units”. I think your worry is addressed there. 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Wamakuyu, what she is asking is, do we need to borrow money in order to design a strategy for taking medicine to the hospitals? I think that is what she is asking. (Laughter)

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. From the debate, it is very clear that this loan will not serve the priorities of this country. As a way forward, I would propose that this House sets either a task force or a committee to study this loan and realign it to the priorities of this country. For example, when you say you are borrowing money to monitor absenteeism in health centres and schools, to me you are not serious. You need to visit Mulago and see where our nurses live. You need to know why teachers absentee themselves; they do not have houses at school. Their salaries are so little that they have to be absent to supplement them. Let a committee or a task force be instituted because during the Budget process, this is what happened when we were considering the loan to improve maternal health – most of the money had been allocated to workshops, capacity building and so on, but when we intervened, something came out. Let us do the same thing to this loan because we should not be taken for granted. Thank you. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to clarify to this House that this loan cannot be read independent of the other PRSC loans which this Government has benefited from. This loan was the successor to the PEAP; after the World Bank and donor agencies saw that we were performing well in the other poverty alleviation project (PEAP), they decided that every financial year, they will be supporting Government budgets in areas that will alleviate poverty. And these areas are well-laid out; these are the areas Government has captured in its priorities. These include education, health, water and sanitation, agriculture and transport, among others. 
When you read this loan alongside others, and we assess the sectoral achievements from PRSC 1 to PRSC 8, and this is PRSC 9, you will realise that in areas such as education, for example, if we go to one area, say enrolment growth rate, at the start of the loan in 2003, we were at about four percent; in 2004, we rose by two percent; in 2009 we went to 14 percent; and in 2009/2010, we were at 9.7 percent. That is one area alone of enrolment growth rate. 

Looking at the area of primary education net enrolment rate, our target according to the medium development goals, is 100 percent, but because of this chain of funding, we have moved from the baseline of 86 percent, and in 2003, we moved to 87.7 percent; in 2004, we went to 90 percent; in 2008/2009, we moved to 95 percent; in 2010, we moved to 96 percent; and 2010/2011, we are targeting 100 percent. The same thing applies to all other areas. If I explain why this loan is –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, it must be on record that, as a Parliament, we are very interested in the development of this country. And we only want monies to be allocated to priority areas. When the minister comes to talk about education without telling us what this money did in education to push the enrolment up, we will not understand. Is he, therefore, in order to attempt to create an impression which is not helpful to the House, in very general terms? He is even misleading this House by saying this money from PRSC is the one that has upped enrolment and not the direct investment in capitation grants; and not the investments where we need money for lunch for the children; where we need classrooms. Is he in order to refuse to be specific and instead attempt to hoodwink the House into believing him and yet he is not helping the House?

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I totally agree with the intention of this money. However, I am perturbed by the rationale of delaying to bring this issue to Parliament as soon as we appropriated the budget for this financial year and they bring it when it is only two months to the end of the financial year. I do not support hon. Yaguma that we should - maybe I ask a question: If we pass this loan, will it go beyond this financial year and we continue using this money in the next financial year? 

Two, if it is already appropriated, what delayed Government to bring it in time so that it ensures proper service delivery, because now it will not do the work? 

THE SPEAKER: Actually, honourable minister, I am sorry, but I am not satisfied with the explanation. Listen to this: “Functionality of rural water facilities and water for production is low, and maintenance of facilities through the community-based maintenance system is insufficient.” 

Let me tell you; in Busoga, people are asking for water and not how to maintain boreholes, which is what you are doing here. They actually want their boreholes. They want the water. Please, what we are saying is that this loan is not addressing the priorities of the people of Uganda! (Applause)

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, I know that honourable members are raising these pertinent issues, but if you give me time to explain, it will be understood. First of all - (Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have rightly guided this House as always that this loan is not going to address the priorities of this country. I have been critically looking at the issues presented on health, which falls under the mandate of the committee I chair, where they say there is no availability of drugs and also qualified staff. But when it comes to the way to handle this it is just, of course,  “huffing”. We used that word - trying to justify but they are not the real issues to be handled. And then the honourable member is continuing to say that we already appropriated. So, it is like we are coming here to just rubber stamp. And even if you say that this money will be used for the next budget, we had a similar experience when we were handling the budget of the social services committee this financial year. You will pass this loan and then when it comes to the budget process, they will say, “You already passed this and you cannot change certain things because already the loan has been passed here in Parliament.” 

Is it, therefore, in order for the minister to continue abusing the integrity of this House by continuing to insist that this loan is a right loan when actually there is no honourable Member of Parliament here who can attest to that? We can confidently say on behalf of our committee that this will not even assist. The parameters are huge and they have nothing to do with the issues at stake. 

So, is it in order for the honourable minister to continue undermining the guidance you have given to this House? And is it in order for the minister to continue the process when we Members of Parliament want to send back this request so that it can be studied? Is it in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think you have failed to read the House. Members are saying your priorities here are not the priorities of the people of Uganda at this time. (Applause) They want water, they want roads, they want staff houses, and they want tangible things. Not capacity building.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, therefore, that is why I want to explain that this loan is part of the funding programmed for this financial year in all these sectors you have talked about and that it is in the general pool of the budget that we passed as Parliament. Of course, we had our revenue up to 70 percent and then we looked around for donors such as this loan to make it 100 percent funding. This funding that we are talking about is already part of the financial year. It is not earmarked for any specific activity. The funds will be put in a general pool and will be used, and as a matter of fact, part of it has already been earmarked to finance quarter four of the budget. 

So, Madam Speaker, if we do not pass this money which we have already earmarked towards road construction, towards education, towards health services, towards staff salaries, it will be very unfortunate for this country that we shall not be able to balance our budget. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the report is clear. It is not touching salaries, it is not touching allowances. It is about capacity building. That is our problem. 

6.36
THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/ DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Lt Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to propose two things: One is that let us approve the loan -(Interjections)- Wait. I said two things. Let us not be emotional. Let us approve the loan because the minister says the money is in a pool. After approval, let a quick committee be made to go to Finance and agree -[HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “No.”]– Please go to Finance to rearrange and submit the requirements as per the thinking here, to be included -(Interjections)- of course, you are speaking what people think. You cannot bring everybody from there. This is how I understand it. 

This loan, as it has been said, is already part of the budget. And I agree with all these arguments that people’s thinking must be taken into account and what is lacking on the ground must be considered when we commit this country with this more money.

So, I propose, let us approve subject to further discussion with the ministry on how to use this money. 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No!

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Otherwise, what do you want? Surely, what do you want? By the way, you are not the only ones borrowing. This is wider thinking now. It is not only Uganda borrowing from IDA. Everybody borrows. So, why do you deny yourselves? Borrow and then discuss what you want to be done with this money. Do not deny yourself to borrow. You first of all logically open your mind. Logically borrow and then discuss. Madam Speaker, I submit.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the vice-chairman of the committee.

6.39
MR FRED MBAGADHI (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. While I appreciate the concerns that are being raised by the honourable colleagues, I thought I needed to make this clarification. Like the minister stated, this kind of loan is a peculiar one. It is not tagged to a specific activity like other loans. Take, for instance, we have been having so many loans pegged to specific projects. This is not a loan that is tagged to a specific project.

Secondly, the honourable minister has stated it clearly to this House that these amounts that are being borrowed have already been appropriated in the national budget. That means this funding is part of the 30 percent deficit that we are supposed to source from the donors or elsewhere. So, basically, I would request this House that since we are funding our national budget by only 70 percent, I think we should really consider it prudent that we pass this loan.

What I really wanted to make clear to this House is that, apart from the concerns that are being raised, definitely all these other factors like health and education have their own priorities that have already been set out in the national budget. I really feel that it will not be good for us to push off this loan yet we are supposed to ensure that our national budget of 2011/2012 is met to its full capacity. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I do not want to speak for the minister, but this Government so far is facing shortfalls in revenue. I also want to put it clearly that, you, Madam Speaker, said that this money is not going to affect salaries. This loan will affect salaries, including Parliament. Government at the beginning anticipates shortfalls in revenue or the amount of revenue that you will get in a year.

Once it is budgeted for in these sectors and we do not achieve it and like one of them, this loan, the US$ 100 million to come into the Treasury, we shall have problems in the fourth quarter. We understand that today many ministries have not gotten their development budget fulfilled. Most ministries have not got their monies as they are supposed to have got in the third quarter, so the fourth quarter is unfunded.

Once we stop this loan or make this journey longer, we shall come back here and then pass the same loan. I beg that we pass this loan and then with other controls, in future say, “Let us pass this loan” and then inquire later because the time is already is gone. We are remaining with two months only to the end of the financial year. So, once you make decisions, please let us be informed of the impact we shall have on the total budget.

6.43
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with Members that this loan is part of the 30 percent of the budget that is provided by donors. Once we get this money, there is no way even Parliament is going to trace a single coin from this particular loan to say it is the one that constructed the road or constructed a school or paid salaries etc.

I think there is a problem with the structuring of this report. This money is not going for these activities, which are identified in this report. It is budget support and indeed, even in the brief by the minister, she did indicate what is put as components - I can read for you because this was given to all of us. She did say that the PRSC 9 which we are trying to pass now will go towards reforming the following policy clusters, not components. One, is what is indicated as component 1 in 7.1 - supporting reforms in public expenditure management, public financial management and Public Service management that improve service delivery to our people. They are clusters, but they are not components where this money is specifically going.

I would also like to read this, Madam Speaker, to honourable members that we are going to monitor the general performance and priorities of Government, but not necessarily or specifically this loan. Before the donors give, they must be satisfied. It is here and it was given to us. This is page 6 of the brief by the minister. “Presentation on the Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit by the Minister of Finance”. It was done on 12 March 2012 to this House.
 
Page 6; the donors are also concerned. “From the donors stand point, there are two main pre-conditions for shifting aid from the project modality to budget support”. If we are using the project modality, that is when you would say, “Ikoba Girls School is sponsored by IDA, World Bank loan. You promised to build a laboratory, but you have not”. That is project support. But once it comes in the pool, even when I get a laboratory at Ikoba Secondary School, I cannot completely attribute it to this only. There may be even other money. The minister even went ahead on page 14 to say that - let me read three because Members are very concerned. “Procedures for budget reporting, accounting and auditing must be strong enough to give budget support donors confidence that budget resources are actually spent on the items for which they have been budgeted for and are not misused”.
  
Now, 14 says, “However, the main difficulty for any budget support donor is that once funds have been contributed to a common pool, there is no way of distinguishing whether or not its own funds have supported particular expenditures within the government budget, which it might not itself approve of, and which might be difficult to explain politically”. 

So, this money, once it comes, it loses colour, the source and where it goes; you will never pinpoint that it has gone for ABCD, but once ABCD succeeds in terms of priorities, we assume this. 

So, we are going to use this money on the priorities by Government, which were approved by this House as we were approving the budget. So, I really want to support that we pass this loan and we continue as Parliament to monitor the performance of Government in all sectors. I want to assume all the sectors, especially priority sectors, will have a share of this support. I thank you.

6.49 
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my senior colleague, hon. Kabakumba, for giving us the authentic information from that write up. The information in this report may seem generic, but the specific activities where this money is going is what the ministries gauge as their priorities for this financial year. So, all the committees of Parliament that have gone through the budget of the various ministries and approved their activities have approved activities which are going to be used for this money. 

There are concerns that the money is not going to priority areas because these seem to be soft areas like capacity building. I appeal to the honourable members that even the soft areas matter. The other day we were in the National Medical Stores and found the stalls full of drugs. In fact, even TB drugs which you complained about the other day were there. Even on radio yesterday, they were saying they are going to tell their suppliers not to supply anymore because the stores are full. They have no capacity. The reason is that they do not have requests from the districts. Why? This is because of lack of capacity from the districts. 

So, when Government says we are going to build capacity, we should support this. We need to build capacity, and for the honourable member who said we said there would be no workshops; we said the workshops would be reduced. We reduced the money. I sit on the Budget Committee. We reduced the money for workshops in the current budget, but we did not say we will not have workshops at all. This is because capacity building is still necessary and there are some Government departments, which essentially do their work through workshops.

I will end with the area of accountability which hon. Kabakumba highlighted. Let me receive information -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members; from what you are saying, I think the title of this loan is a misnomer: Ninth Poverty Reduction Sector Credit. It is a misnomer. Which poverty are you reducing by what you are saying?

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, just on the name and poverty reduction; the way this name was conceived is from the previous project. It started as a different project, but went on growing to PEAP, then grew into now – so, the name has nothing much to do with what the money is going to do. That is a fact and –

THE SPEAKER: The motion on my Order Paper is, “Poverty Reduction Support Credit.” If what you are doing is different, then it is different from what I brought on the Order Paper. 

MR SEBUNYA: The name is right, but what the money does is holistic in nature. It does not say people in Kaberamaido will do away with poverty; it is about systems in Government and how to help Government streamline its activities. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. When we are in this House, the whole country is looking at us. People who sent us to this Parliament are watching us even now. If we start concocting names and say that this loan is meant for reduction of poverty, but inside you mean something else, then you are becoming a liar. I am being honest with you. Why are you changing words; you come here and you take us for granted? You want us to approve something we do not understand and tomorrow you look at us as – that is why some people call us rumbling in Parliament! Be sincere, what is this money for? Embrace it and put here a heading which is synonymous with what we are doing. Let us not play monkey tricks here. I thank you.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing on a procedural matter. We have got information from hon. Kabakumba, which is out of touch with what we are discussing. From the paper which was presented by the committee; the committee is talking about something else, the hon. Kabakumba is talking about something else. According to hon. Kabakumba, the money we are talking about is budget support. So, money is given and you do not even touch it. According to this presentation, this money is earmarked for certain areas. That means we need to harmonise. If we just come here, present something else then hon. Kabakumba and her reason looks reasonable; and then we pass it, what are we passing? I suggest that we stay over this matter, you constitute a committee to harmonise the various views from what hon. Kabakumba has said –(Interjection)- from what has been presented, and then the committee gives us the right way forward. Otherwise, if we proceed this way, what we are talking about will be unclear. 

So, I want to move a motion that we conclude this debate, you come up with a select committee which can handle this matter and report to this House in two weeks.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abwooli you are burning.

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to give order, but I will give it as information because the record must be corrected. Hon. Lyomoki is insinuating that I have come up with my own ideas to try and convince or confuse Parliament. 

I am aware that sometimes, we are given a lot of papers and once in a while one can skip a very important document. It is very clear that hon. Lyomoki did not read this document and they are the same. I know and believe that this document is what the Committee on National Economy, among others, used to come up with this report.

So, the Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit and this brief was on the presentation on the Ninth Poverty Reduction Support Credit from the Ministry of Finance, and even the report is from the  Committee on National Economy - I have not come up with any new information; I was only reading both, putting them together. 

I want to plead that this Poverty Reduction Support Credit is a name or a code because when it started in 1997, it was PEAP (Poverty Eradication Action Plan). Along the way, it changed to Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper in 2000. Now, they are telling us it is Poverty Reduction Support Credit; same thing, changed names.

Madam Speaker, I have not invented anything I have only given very useful information to this Parliament so that we pass the loan from an informed point of view.

THE SPEAKER: What you said is what the minister wrote. We shall comment on it later.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In Kenya, when the country is borrowing, their system is that there is no need for parliament to consider the loan request. In Uganda when we are borrowing, the law requires that Parliament considers the loan request. The reason is, Parliament must be satisfied with what the money is going to do. 

It is true that the financing mechanism in Uganda has been reviewed. The donors support the government through budget support or project support, but within budget support, there are two aspects. There is where donors put money in the basket and it is up to Government to determine the priorities. Also, there is where donors put money but they tag that money to specific components as we see in this document. 

I am saying this with experience because I used to work with international organisations. It means that when this loan is being evaluated in the mid-term; they will look at these specific components which are put here; this capacity building element and software activities. 

Madam Speaker, there is a precedent in this House. When the loan request on the Public Service Reform was brought in the Eight Parliament, I think the total amount of money was US$ 70 million, but we felt a number of activities to be supported were not worth being supported through a loan. We sat and scaled down the activities to US$ 23.

The loan on maternal health also had a similar case. We felt most of the activities to be supported were workshops, developing guidelines – areas which we thought do not contribute significantly. We sat down in a small committee and we aligned the activities with those we thought would bring down maternal mortality in this country.

Therefore, since the Constitution requires that Parliament should approve any loan, I think our voice must be reflected as Members of Parliament (Applause). It is not just a question of saying, it is 30 percent, therefore we pass it. There is a reason why it has come to this Parliament. 

I, therefore, agree with hon. Lyomoki that in principal, Members are saying that they are not opposed to getting this loan. But we must borrow to support activities which will result in reduction of poverty. So, I think it is harmless for us to constitute a small team which will work with the committee and try to re-align some of these proposed interventions and we pass the loan after looking at them. Short of that, there is no reason why this debate would take place.

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I would like to formally withdraw the paper for further consultations; we shall come back. Thank you. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of Government Business. But we also need to constitute a committee to review it from this side; then we can have a meeting point – including the title. You know, “Poverty Reduction” -(Laughter)- This is what is on the Order Paper and the Basoga thing we are borrowing money to reduce their poverty. (Laughter)

LT GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, I do not mind. But I think all this will be subject to the discussion in that committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much Prime Minister. We shall also constitute a small team and we shall advise the House tomorrow. We should be satisfied that we are borrowing money for purposes for which we agree. 

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, just something small. I am made to understand that the signing of this loan shall be made by the World Bank on Friday –(Interjections)– I beg Parliament to expeditiously handle this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, one of the things we have been complaining about is the stampeding of Parliament. Members have been asking, if it was budget support, why didn’t you bring it in September, or in October or in November or in December? Then you come today and say they are signing on Friday? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I used to respect my brother there; the chairman. In fact, currently, World Bank has meetings which will end on Monday. They are discussing these war affected countries. They started on Monday and will end on Monday. So, there are no meetings to deal with loans on Friday as he has lied. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work. We have done quite a bit. House adjourned to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow. 

(House rose at 7.04 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 18 April 2012 at 2.00 p.m.)
